{"id": "32817", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32817", "title": "Vladimir Putin", "text": "President of Russia (2000\u20132008; since 2012)\nVladimir Vladimirovich Putin (born 7 October 1952) is a Russian politician and former intelligence officer who has served as President of Russia since 2012, having previously served from 2000 to 2008. Putin also served as Prime Minister of Russia from 1999 to 2000 and again from 2008 to 2012. He has been described as the \"de facto\" leader of Russia since 2000.\nPutin worked as a KGB foreign intelligence officer for 16 years, rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel. He resigned in 1991 to begin a political career in Saint Petersburg. In 1996, he moved to Moscow to join the administration of President Boris Yeltsin. He briefly served as the director of the Federal Security Service (FSB) and then as secretary of the Security Council of Russia before being appointed prime minister in August 1999. Following Yeltsin's resignation, Putin became acting president and, less than four months later in May 2000, was elected to his first term as president. He was reelected in 2004. Due to constitutional limitations on two consecutive presidential terms, Putin served as prime minister again from 2008 to 2012 under Dmitry Medvedev. He returned to the presidency in 2012, following an election marked by allegations of fraud and protests, and was reelected in 2018.\nDuring Putin's initial presidential tenure, the Russian economy grew on average by seven percent per year as a result of economic reforms and a fivefold increase in the price of oil and gas. Additionally, Putin led Russia in a conflict against Chechen separatists, re-establishing federal control over the region. While serving as prime minister under Medvedev, he oversaw the Russian invasion and occupation of Georgia, alongside enacting military and police reforms. In his third presidential term, Russia occupied and annexed Crimea as well as supported a war in eastern Ukraine through several military incursions, resulting in international sanctions, which, together with a drop in oil prices on the international markets, led to the financial crisis in Russia. Additionally, he ordered a military intervention in Syria to support his ally, president of Syria Bashar al-Assad, during the Syrian civil war. In February 2022, during his fourth presidential term, Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, which prompted international condemnation and led to expanded sanctions. In September 2022, he announced a partial mobilization and forcibly annexed four Ukrainian oblasts into Russia. In March 2023, the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Putin for war crimes related to his alleged criminal responsibility for illegal child abductions during the war. In April 2021, after a referendum, he signed constitutional amendments into law that included one allowing him to run for reelection twice more, potentially extending his presidency to 2036. In March 2024, he was reelected to another term.\nUnder Putin's rule, the Russian political system has been transformed into an authoritarian dictatorship with a personality cult. His rule has been marked by endemic corruption and widespread human rights violations, including the imprisonment and suppression of political opponents, intimidation and censorship of independent media in Russia, and a lack of free and fair elections. Russia has consistently received very low scores on Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index, \"The Economist Democracy Index\", Freedom House's \"Freedom in the World\" index, and the Reporters Without Borders' World Press Freedom Index.\nEarly life and education.\nPutin was born on 7 October 1952 in Leningrad, Soviet Union (now Saint Petersburg, Russia), the youngest of three children of Vladimir Spiridonovich Putin and Maria Ivanovna Putina (n\u00e9e\u00a0Shelomova). His grandfather, Spiridon Putin, was a personal cook to Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin. Putin's birth was preceded by the deaths of two brothers: Albert, born in the 1930s, died in infancy, and Viktor, born in 1940, died of diphtheria and starvation in 1942 during the Siege of Leningrad by Nazi Germany's forces in World War II.\nPutin's mother was a factory worker, and his father was a conscript in the Soviet Navy, serving in the submarine fleet in the early 1930s. During the early stage of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, his father served in the destruction battalion of the NKVD. Later, he was transferred to the regular army and was severely wounded in 1942. Putin's maternal grandmother was killed by the German occupiers of the Tver region in 1941, and his maternal uncles disappeared on the Eastern Front during World War II.\nEducation.\nOn 1 September 1960, Putin started at School No. 193 at Baskov Lane, near his home. He was one of a few in his class of about 45 pupils who were not yet members of the Young Pioneer (\"Komsomol\") organization. At the age of 12, he began to practice sambo and judo. In his free time, he enjoyed reading the works of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Lenin. Putin attended Saint Petersburg High School 281 with a German language immersion program. He is fluent in German and has given speeches and interviews in that language.\nPutin studied law at the Leningrad State University named after Andrei Zhdanov (now Saint Petersburg State University) in 1970 and graduated in 1975. His thesis was on \"The Most Favored Nation Trading Principle in International Law.\" While there, he was required to join the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU); he remained a member until it ceased to exist in 1991. Putin also met Anatoly Sobchak, an assistant professor who taught business law, who later became the co-author of the Russian constitution. Putin was influential in Sobchak's career in Saint Petersburg, and Sobchak was influential in Putin's career in Moscow.\nIn 1997, Putin received a degree in economics (\"Candidate of Economic Sciences\") at the Saint Petersburg Mining University for a thesis on energy dependencies and their instrumentalisation in foreign policy. His supervisor was Vladimir Litvinenko, who in 2000 and again in 2004 managed his presidential election campaigns in St Petersburg. Igor Danchenko and Clifford Gaddy consider Putin to be a plagiarist according to Western standards. One book from which he copied entire paragraphs is the Russian-language edition of King and Cleland's \"Strategic Planning and Policy\" (1978). Balzer wrote on the Putin thesis and Russian energy policy and concludes along with Olcott that \"The primacy of the Russian state in the country's energy sector is non-negotiable\", and cites the insistence on majority Russian ownership of any joint-venture, particularly since BASF signed the Gazprom Nord Stream-Yuzhno-Russkoye deal in 2004 with a 49\u201351 structure, as opposed to the older 50\u201350 split of BP's TNK-BP project.\nIntelligence career.\nIn 1975, Putin joined the KGB and trained at the 401st KGB School in Okhta, Leningrad. After training, he worked in the Second Chief Directorate (counterintelligence) before he was transferred to the First Chief Directorate, where he monitored foreigners and consular officials in Leningrad. In September 1984, Putin was sent to Moscow for further training at the Yuri Andropov Red Banner Institute.\nFrom 1985 to 1990, he served in Dresden, East Germany, using a cover identity as a translator. While posted in Dresden, Putin served as one of the KGB's liaison officers to the Stasi secret police and was reportedly promoted to lieutenant colonel. According to the official Kremlin presidential site, the East German communist regime commended Putin with a bronze medal for \"faithful service to the National People's Army.\" Putin has publicly conveyed delight over his activities in Dresden, once recounting his confrontations with East Germany's anti-communist protestors of 1989 who attempted to occupy the city's Stasi buildings.\n\"Putin and his colleagues were reduced mainly to collecting press clippings, thus contributing to the mountains of useless information produced by the KGB\", Russian-American Masha Gessen wrote in their 2012 biography of Putin. His work was also downplayed by former Stasi spy chief Markus Wolf and Putin's former KGB colleague Vladimir Usoltsev. Journalist Catherine Belton wrote in 2020 that this downplaying was actually a cover for Putin's involvement in KGB coordination and support for the terrorist Red Army Faction, whose members frequently hid in East Germany with the support of the Stasi. Dresden was preferred as a \"marginal\" town with only a small presence of Western intelligence services. According to an anonymous source who claimed to be a former RAF member, at one of these meetings in Dresden, the militants presented Putin with a list of weapons that were later delivered to the RAF in West Germany. Klaus Zuchold, who claimed to be recruited by Putin, said that Putin handled a neo-Nazi, Rainer Sonntag, and attempted to recruit the author of a study on poisons. Putin reportedly met Germans to be recruited for wireless communications affairs, together with an interpreter. He was involved in wireless communications technologies in South-East Asia due to trips of German engineers, recruited by him, there and to the West. However, a 2023 investigation by \"Der Spiegel\" reported that the anonymous source had never been an RAF member and is \"considered a notorious fabulist\" with \"several previous convictions, including for making false statements.\"\nAccording to Putin's official biography, during the fall of the Berlin Wall that began on 9 November 1989, he saved the files of the Soviet Cultural Center (House of Friendship) and of the KGB villa in Dresden for the official authorities of the would-be united Germany to prevent demonstrators, including KGB and Stasi agents, from obtaining and destroying them. He then supposedly burnt only the KGB files, in a few hours, but saved the archives of the Soviet Cultural Center for the German authorities. Nothing is written about the selection criteria during this burning; for example, regarding Stasi files or files of other agencies of the German Democratic Republic or of the USSR. He explained that many documents were left in Germany only because the furnace burst; however, many documents of the KGB villa were sent to Moscow.\nAfter the collapse of the Communist East German government, Putin was to resign from active KGB service because of suspicions aroused regarding his loyalty during demonstrations in Dresden and earlier, although the KGB and the Soviet Army still operated in eastern Germany. He returned to Leningrad in early 1990 as a member of the \"active reserves\", where he worked for about three months with the International Affairs section of Leningrad State University, reporting to Vice-Rector Yuriy Molchanov, while working on his doctoral dissertation.\nThere, he looked for new KGB recruits, watched the student body, and renewed his friendship with his former professor, Anatoly Sobchak, who was soon afterward elected the Mayor of Leningrad. Putin said that he resigned with the rank of lieutenant colonel on 20 August 1991, on the second day of the 1991 Soviet coup d'\u00e9tat attempt against Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev. Putin stated: \"As soon as the coup began, I immediately decided which side I was on\", although he said that the choice was hard because he had spent the best part of his life with \"the organs\".\nPolitical career.\nPutin's political rise began in the Saint Petersburg administration (1990\u20131996), where in May 1990, he was appointed as an advisor on international affairs to Mayor Anatoly Sobchak. Shortly thereafter, in June 1991, he became the head of the Committee for External Relations of the Saint Petersburg Mayor's Office, overseeing the promotion of international ties, foreign investment, and the registration of business ventures. Though his tenure was marred by investigations from the city legislative council concerning discrepancies in asset valuation and the export of metals, Putin retained his position until 1996. During the mid-1990s, he expanded his responsibilities in Saint Petersburg, serving as first deputy head of the city administration and leading the local branch of the pro-government political party Our Home Is Russia, as well as participating in advisory roles with regional newspapers.\nTransitioning to the national scene in 1996, Putin was called to Moscow following the electoral defeat of Sobchak, where he assumed the role of Deputy Chief of the Presidential Property Management Department. In this capacity, he was responsible for managing the transfer of former Soviet assets to the Russian Federation. His career in Moscow advanced rapidly with his appointment in 1997 as deputy chief of the Presidential Staff and later as chief of the Main Control Directorate of the same department. A pivotal moment came in 1998 when President Boris Yeltsin appointed him director of the FSB, Russia's primary intelligence and security agency. In this role, Putin concentrated on reorganising and strengthening the agency after years of perceived decline, a period that would prove formative for his later approach to governance.\nIn August 1999, Putin's profile increased substantially when he was named one of the three First Deputy Prime Ministers, and later the acting Prime Minister following the dismissal of Sergei Stepashin's cabinet. Endorsed by Yeltsin as his preferred successor, Putin quickly capitalized on his law-and-order reputation and rose in popularity, winning the presidential election in March 2000 and being inaugurated on 7 May 2000. Throughout his subsequent terms, alternately serving as president and Prime Minister, Putin has overseen extensive reforms aimed at consolidating state power, restructuring federal relations, and curbing the influence of oligarchs. His tenure has been punctuated by significant foreign policy actions, including the controversial annexation of Crimea in 2014, military interventions in Syria, and ongoing involvement in the Russo-Ukrainian War.\n2024\u2013present: Fifth presidential term.\nPutin won the 2024 Russian presidential election with 88% of the vote. International observers did not consider the election to be free or fair, with Putin having increased political repressions after launching his full-scale war with Ukraine in 2022. The elections were also held in the Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine. There were reports of irregularities, including ballot stuffing and coercion, with statistical analysis suggesting unprecedented levels of fraud in the 2024 elections. In March 2024, the Crocus City Hall attack took place, causing the deaths of 145 people and injuring 551 more. It was the deadliest terrorist attack on Russian soil since the Beslan school siege in 2004.\nIn May 2024, Putin was inaugurated as president of Russia for the fifth time. According to analysts, replacing Sergei Shoigu with Andrey Belousov as defense minister signals that Putin wanted to transform the economy into a war economy and is \"preparing for many more years of war\". Four Russian sources told Reuters that Putin was ready to end the war in Ukraine with a negotiated ceasefire that would recognize Russia's war gains and freeze the war on the then front lines, as Putin wanted to avoid unpopular steps such as further mobilization and increased war spending.\nIn September 2024, Putin warned the West that if attacked with conventional weapons Russia would consider a nuclear retaliation, in an apparent deviation from the no first use doctrine. Putin went on to threaten nuclear powers that if they supported another country's attack on Russia, then they would be considered participants in such an aggression. Russia and the United States are the world's biggest nuclear powers, holding 88% of the world's nuclear weapons. Putin has made implicit nuclear threats since the outbreak of war against Ukraine. Experts say Putin's announcement was aimed at dissuading the US, UK and France from allowing Ukraine to use Western-supplied long-range missiles such as the Storm Shadow and ATACMS in strikes against Russia.\nIn May 2025, Putin approved Alexander Novak's coal industry bailout plan.\nOn 15 May 2025, Russian and Ukrainian delegations held direct talks in Istanbul for the first time since early 2022. As a condition for peace, Putin called on Ukraine to abandon four partially occupied Ukrainian regions that Russia has annexed but not conquered: a territorial concession that Ukraine has repeatedly rejected. He also listed other demands that critics say would lead to the end of Ukraine as a sovereign and independent state. Putin rejected calls for an unconditional ceasefire and escalated attacks on Ukraine.\nOn 22 June 2025, Putin condemned Trump's strikes on Iranian nuclear sites as an \"unprovoked act of aggression\", although at the same time he authorized Russian strikes against Ukraine. As of July 2025, Russian casualties in the war with Ukraine were estimated at 1 million.\nIn October 2025, Putin said that the United States government's sanctions against Russia's largest oil companies, Rosneft and Lukoil, would not force him to end the war in Ukraine. In exchange for agreeing to a peace deal, Putin demanded that Ukraine cede territory in the Donbas to Russia.\nDomestic policies.\nPutin's domestic policies, particularly early in his first presidency, were aimed at creating a vertical power structure. On 13 May 2000, he issued a decree organizing the 89 federal subjects of Russia into seven administrative federal districts and appointed a presidential envoy responsible for each of those districts (whose official title is Plenipotentiary Representative).\nAccording to Stephen White, under the presidency of Putin, Russia made it clear that it had no intention of establishing a \"second edition\" of the American or British political system, but rather a system that was closer to Russia's own traditions and circumstances. Some commentators have described Putin's administration as a \"sovereign democracy\". According to the proponents of that description (primarily Vladislav Surkov), the government's actions and policies ought above all to enjoy popular support within Russia itself and not be directed or influenced from outside the country.\nThe practice of the system is characterized by Swedish economist Anders \u00c5slund as manual management, commenting: \"After Putin resumed the presidency in 2012, his rule is best described as 'manual management' as the Russians like to put it. Putin does whatever he wants, with little consideration for the consequences, with one important caveat. During the Russian financial crash of August 1998, Putin learned that financial crises are politically destabilizing and must be avoided at all costs. Therefore, he cares about financial stability\"\nThe period after 2012 saw mass protests against the falsification of elections, censorship, and the toughening of free assembly laws. In July 2000, according to a law proposed by Putin and approved by the Federal Assembly of Russia, Putin gained the right to dismiss the heads of the 89 federal subjects. In 2004, the direct election of those heads (usually called \"governors\") by popular vote was replaced with a system whereby they would be nominated by the president and approved or disapproved by regional legislatures.\nThis was seen by Putin as a necessary move to stop separatist tendencies and get rid of those governors who were connected with organized crime. This and other government actions effected under Putin's presidency have been criticized by many independent Russian media outlets and Western commentators as anti-democratic.\nDuring his first term in office, Putin opposed some of the Yeltsin-era business oligarchs, as well as his political opponents, resulting in the exile or imprisonment of such people as Boris Berezovsky, Vladimir Gusinsky, and Mikhail Khodorkovsky; other oligarchs such as Roman Abramovich and Arkady Rotenberg are friends and allies with Putin. Putin succeeded in codifying land law and tax law and promulgated new codes on labour, administrative, criminal, commercial, and civil procedural law. Under Medvedev's presidency, Putin's government implemented some key reforms in the area of state security, the Russian police reform and the Russian military reform.\nIn 1999, Putin described communism as \"a blind alley, far away from the mainstream of civilization\". By 1999, Zyuganov was the evident frontrunner for the first round of the pending 2000 presidential election. However, by the autumn of 1999, Vladimir Putin had overtaken Zyuganov as leading candidate in the polls. During Putin's rule, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation has changed from radical, civil war-threatening to a component of the \u201csystemic opposition\u201d with criticism rarely more than rhetorical.\nEconomic, industrial, and energy policies.\nSergey Guriyev, when talking about Putin's economic policy, divided it into four distinct periods: the \"reform\" years of his first term (1999\u20132003); the \"statist\" years of his second term (2004\u2014the first half of 2008); the world economic crisis and recovery (the second half of 2008\u20132013); and the Russo-Ukrainian War, Russia's growing isolation from the global economy, and stagnation (2014\u2013present).\nIn 2000, Putin launched the \"Programme for the Socio-Economic Development of the Russian Federation for the Period 2000\u20132010\", but it was abandoned in 2008 when it was 30% complete. Fueled by the 2000s commodities boom including record-high oil prices, under the Putin administration from 2000 to 2016, an increase in income in USD terms was 4.5 times. During Putin's first eight years in office, industry grew substantially, as did production, construction, real incomes, credit, and the middle class. A fund for oil revenue allowed Russia to repay the Soviet Union's debts by 2005. Russia joined the World Trade Organization in August 2012.\nIn 2006, Putin launched an industry consolidation programme to bring the main aircraft-producing companies under a single umbrella organization, the United Aircraft Corporation (UAC). In September 2020, the UAC general director announced that the UAC will receive the largest-ever post-Soviet government support package for the aircraft industry in order to pay and renegotiate the debt.\nIn 2014, Putin signed a deal to supply China with 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Power of Siberia, which Putin has called the \"world's biggest construction project\", was launched in 2019 and is expected to continue for 30 years at an ultimate cost to China of $400bn. The ongoing financial crisis began in the second half of 2014 when the Russian ruble collapsed due to a decline in the price of oil and international sanctions against Russia. These events in turn led to loss of investor confidence and capital flight, although it has also been argued that the sanctions had little to no effect on Russia's economy. In 2014, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project named Putin their Person of the Year for furthering corruption and organized crime.\nAccording to \"Meduza\", Putin has since 2007 predicted on several occasions that Russia will become one of the world's five largest economies. In 2013, he said Russia was one of the five biggest economies in terms of gross domestic product but still lagged behind other countries on indicators such as labour productivity. By the end of 2023, Putin planned to spend almost 40% of public expenditures on defense and security.\nEnvironmental policy.\nIn 2004, Putin signed the Kyoto Protocol treaty designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, Russia did not face mandatory cuts, because the Kyoto Protocol limits emissions to a percentage increase or decrease from 1990 levels and Russia's greenhouse-gas emissions fell well below the 1990 baseline due to a drop in economic output after the breakup of the Soviet Union, excluding emissions from land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF).\nIn 2019 Russia joined the Paris Agreement. Russia's goal is to reach net zero by 2060, but its energy strategy to 2035 is mostly about burning more fossil fuels. Reporting military emissions is voluntary and, as of 2024, no data is available since before the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.\nPutin described climate change as a concerning fact with big consequences for Russia. He is not sure if it man made or not, but said that Russia is trying and will try to reduce man-made emissions with forests and \"low-emission energy\"; by this term, he intends Natural gas, Nuclear energy, and Hydroenergy in Russia. He said that rich countries should provide finance and technology to those with less money for lower emissions. Some describe his policy as \"mimicry of climate policy\" and say he turned environmentalism into tool of political influence.\nReligious policy.\nPutin regularly attends the most important services of the Russian Orthodox Church on the main holy days and has established a good relationship with Patriarchs of the Russian Church, the late Alexy II of Moscow and the current Kirill of Moscow. As president, Putin took an active personal part in promoting the Act of Canonical Communion with the Moscow Patriarchate, signed 17 May 2007, which restored relations between the Moscow-based Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia after the 80-year schism.\nUnder Putin, the Hasidic Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia became increasingly influential within the Jewish community, partly due to the influence of Federation-supporting businessmen mediated through their alliances with Putin, notably Lev Leviev and Roman Abramovich. According to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, Putin is popular amongst the Russian Jewish community, who see him as a force for stability. Russia's chief rabbi, Berel Lazar, said Putin \"paid great attention to the needs of our community and related to us with a deep respect\". In 2016, Ronald S. Lauder, the president of the World Jewish Congress, also praised Putin for making Russia \"a country where Jews are welcome\".\nHuman rights organizations and religious freedom advocates have criticized the state of religious freedom in Russia. In 2016, Putin oversaw the passage of legislation that prohibited missionary activity in Russia. Nonviolent religious minority groups have been repressed under anti-extremism laws, especially Jehovah's Witnesses. One of the 2020 amendments to the Constitution of Russia directly refers to belief in God.\nMilitary development.\nThe resumption of long-distance flights of Russia's strategic bombers was followed by the announcement by Russian defense minister Anatoliy Serdyukov during his meeting with Putin on 5 December 2007, that 11 ships, including the aircraft carrier \"Kuznetsov\", would take part in the first major navy sortie into the Mediterranean since Soviet times.\nKey elements of the reform included reducing the armed forces to a strength of one million, reducing the number of officers, centralizing officer training from 65 military schools into 10 systemic military training centers, creating a professional NCO corps, reducing the size of the central command, introducing more civilian logistics and auxiliary staff, elimination of cadre-strength formations, reorganizing the reserves, reorganizing the army into a brigade system, and reorganizing air forces into an airbase system instead of regiments.\nAccording to the Kremlin, Putin embarked on a build-up of Russia's nuclear capabilities because of U.S. president George W. Bush's unilateral decision to withdraw from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. To counter what Putin sees as the United States' goal of undermining Russia's strategic nuclear deterrent, Moscow has embarked on a program to develop new weapons capable of defeating any new American ballistic missile defense or interception system. Some analysts believe that this nuclear strategy under Putin has brought Russia into violation of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.\nAccordingly, U.S. President Donald Trump announced the U.S. would no longer consider itself bound by the treaty's provisions, raising nuclear tensions between the two powers. This prompted Putin to state that Russia would not launch first in a nuclear conflict but that \"an aggressor should know that vengeance is inevitable, that he will be annihilated, and we would be the victims of the aggression. We will go to heaven as martyrs\".\nPutin has also sought to increase Russian territorial claims in the Arctic and its military presence there. In August 2007, Russian expedition Arktika 2007, part of research related to the 2001 Russian territorial extension claim, planted a flag on the seabed at the North Pole. Both Russian submarines and troops deployed in the Arctic have been increasing.\nHuman rights policy.\nNew York City\u2013based NGO Human Rights Watch, in a report titled \"Laws of Attrition\", authored by Hugh Williamson, the British director of HRW's Europe &amp; Central Asia Division, has claimed that since May 2012, when Putin was reelected as president, Russia has enacted many restrictive laws, started inspections of non-governmental organizations, harassed, intimidated and imprisoned political activists, and started to restrict critics. The new laws include the \"foreign agents\" law, which is widely regarded as overbroad by including Russian human rights organizations that receive some international grant funding, the treason law, and the assembly law, which penalizes many expressions of dissent. Human rights activists have criticized Russia for censoring speech of LGBT activists due to \"the gay propaganda law\" and increasing violence against LGBT+ people due to the law.\nIn 2020, Putin signed a law on labelling individuals and organizations receiving funding from abroad as \"foreign agents\". The law is an expansion of \"foreign agent\" legislation adopted in 2012.\nAs of June 2020, per the Memorial Human Rights Center, there were 380 political prisoners in Russia, including 63 individuals prosecuted, directly or indirectly, for political activities (including Alexey Navalny) and 245 prosecuted for their involvement with one of the Muslim organizations that are banned in Russia. 78 individuals on the list, i.e., more than 20% of the total, are residents of Crimea. As of December 2022, more than 4,000 people were prosecuted for criticizing the war in Ukraine under Russia's war censorship laws.\nThe media.\nScott Gehlbach, a professor of Political Science at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, has claimed that since 1999, Putin has systematically punished journalists who challenge his official point of view. Maria Lipman, an American writing in \"Foreign Affairs\" claims, \"The crackdown that followed Putin's return to the Kremlin in 2012 extended to the liberal media, which had until then been allowed to operate fairly independently\". The Internet has attracted Putin's attention because his critics have tried to use it to challenge his control of information. Marian K. Leighton, who worked for the CIA as a Soviet analyst in the 1980s, says, \"Having muzzled Russia's print and broadcast media, Putin focused his energies on the Internet.\"\nRobert W. Orttung and Christopher Walker reported that \"Reporters Without Borders, for instance, ranked Russia 148 in its 2013 list of 179 countries in terms of freedom of the press. It particularly criticized Russia for the crackdown on the political opposition and the failure of the authorities to vigorously pursue and bring to justice criminals who have murdered journalists. Freedom House ranks Russian media as \"not free\", indicating that basic safeguards and guarantees for journalists and media enterprises are absent. About two-thirds of Russians use television as their primary source of daily news, while around 85% of Russians get most of their information from Russian state media.\nIn the early 2000s, Putin and his circle began promoting the idea in Russian media that they are the modern-day version of the 17th-century Romanov tsars who ended Russia's \"Time of Troubles\", meaning they claim to be the peacemakers and stabilizers after the fall of the Soviet Union. Since the 2022 Ukraine invasion, Putin has only once granted an interview to a Western journalist, namely Tucker Carlson in February 2024.\nPromoting conservatism.\nPutin has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural, and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has attacked globalism and neoliberalism and is identified by scholars with Russian conservatism. Putin has promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by the conservative right-wing journalist Alexander Prokhanov, stresses (i) Russian nationalism, (ii) the restoration of Russia's historical greatness, and (iii) systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies. Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official, has been one of the key economic consultants during Putin's presidency.\nIn cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head of the Church, endorsed his election in 2012 stating Putin's terms were like \"a miracle of God\". Steven Myers reports, \"The church, once heavily repressed, had emerged from the Soviet collapse as one of the most respected institutions... Now Kiril led the faithful directly into an alliance with the state\".\nMark Woods, a Baptist Union of Great Britain minister and contributing editor to \"Christian Today\", provides specific examples of how the Church has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Some Russian Orthodox believers consider Putin a corrupt and brutal strongman or even a tyrant. Others do not admire him but appreciate that he aggravates their political opponents. Still others appreciate that Putin defends some although not all Orthodox teachings, whether or not he believes in them himself.\nOn abortion, Putin stated: \"In the modern world, the decision is up to the woman herself\". This put him at odds with the Russian Orthodox Church. In 2020, he supported efforts to reduce the number of abortions instead of prohibiting it. On 28 November 2023, during a speech to the World Russian People's Council, Putin urged Russian women to have \"seven, eight, or even more children\" and said \"large families must become the norm, a way of life for all of Russia's people\".\nPutin supported the 2020 Russian constitutional referendum, which passed and defined marriage as a relationship between one man and one woman in the Constitution of Russia.\nInternational sporting events.\nIn 2007, Putin led a successful effort on behalf of Sochi for the 2014 Winter Olympics and the 2014 Winter Paralympics, the first Winter Olympic Games to ever be hosted by Russia. In 2008, the city of Kazan won the bid for the 2013 Summer Universiade; on 2 December 2010, Russia won the right to host the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup and 2018 FIFA World Cup, also for the first time in Russian history. In 2013, Putin stated that gay athletes would not face any discrimination at the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics.\nForeign policy.\nGenerally, Putin's tenure experienced tensions with the West, as well as stronger relations with China.499 Anna Borshchevskaya, in her 2022 book, summarizes Putin's main foreign policy objectives as originating in his 30 December 1999 document, which appeared on the government's website, \"Russia at the Turn of the Millennium\". She presents Putin as orienting himself to the plan that \"Russia is a country with unique values in danger of losing its unity\u00a0\u2013 which... is a historic Russian fear. This again points to the fundamental issue of Russia's identity issues\u00a0\u2013 and how the state had manipulated these to drive anti-Western security narratives to erode the US-led global order... Moreover, a look at Russia's distribution of forces over the years under Putin has been heavily weighted towards the south (Syria, Ukraine, Middle East), another indicator of the Kremlin's threat perceptions\".\nLeonid Bershidsky analyzed Putin's interview with the \"Financial Times\" and concluded, \"Putin is an imperialist of the old Soviet school, rather than a nationalist or a racist, and he has cooperated with, and promoted, people who are known to be gay\". Putin spoke favorably of artificial intelligence regarding foreign policy, \"Artificial intelligence is the future, not only for Russia, but for all humankind. It comes with colossal opportunities, but also threats that are difficult to predict. Whoever becomes the leader in this sphere will become the ruler of the world\".\nAsia-Pacific.\nIn 2012, Putin wrote an article in Indian newspaper \"The Hindu\", saying: \"The Declaration on Strategic Partnership between India and Russia signed in October 2000 became a truly historic step\". India remains the largest customer of Russian military equipment, and the two countries share a historically strong strategic and diplomatic relationship. In October 2022, Putin described India and China as \"close allies and partners\". Under Putin, Russia has maintained positive relations with the Asian states of SCO and BRICS, which include China, India, Pakistan, and post-Soviet states of Central Asia.\nPutin and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe frequently met each other to discuss the Japan\u2013Russia territorial disputes. Putin also voiced his willingness to construct a rail bridge between the two countries. Despite numerous meetings, no agreement was signed before Abe's resignation in 2020. Putin also made the first Russian or Soviet leader to visit North Korea, meeting Kim Jong Il in July 2000, shortly after a visit to South Korea.\nPutin made three visits to Mongolia and has enjoyed good relations with its neighbor. Putin and his Mongolian counterpart signed a permanent treaty on friendship between the two states in September 2019, further enhancing trade and cultural exchanges. Putin became the first Russian or Soviet leader to visit Indonesia in half a century in 2007, resulting in the signing of an arms deal. In another visit, Putin commented on long-standing ties and friendship between Russia and Indonesia. Russia has also boosted relations with Vietnam after 2011, and with Afghanistan in the 2010s, giving military and economic aid. The relations between Russia and the Philippines received a boost in 2016 as Putin forged closer bilateral ties with his Filipino counterpart, Rodrigo Duterte. Putin has good relations with Malaysia and its then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Putin criticized violence in Myanmar against the Rohingya minorities in 2017. Following the 2021 Myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat, Russia has pledged to boost ties with the Myanmar military regime.\nIn September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia, the first Russian leader to do so in over 50 years. In the same month, Putin also attended the APEC meeting held in Sydney, Australia, where he met with Prime Minister John Howard and signed a uranium trade deal for Australia to sell uranium to Russia. This was the first visit by a Russian president to Australia. Putin again visited Australia for 2014 G20 Brisbane summit. The Abbott government denounced Putin's use of military force in Ukraine in 2014 as \"bullying\" and \"utterly unacceptable\". Amid calls to ban Putin from attending the 2014 G20 Summit, Prime Minister Tony Abbott said he would \"shirtfront\" (challenge) the Russian leader over the shooting down of MH17 by Russian-backed rebels, which had killed 38 Australians. Putin denied responsibility for the killings.\nChina.\nIn the 21st century, Sino-Russian relations have significantly strengthened bilaterally and economically\u2014the Treaty of Friendship, and the construction of the ESPO oil pipeline and the Power of Siberia gas pipeline formed a \"special relationship\" between the two great powers. Putin and Chinese leader Hu Jintao held their first meeting in December 2002. The two leaders met regularly, meeting face to face five or six times a year. Russian Prime Minister Dimitry Medvedev and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao also met regularly, with Wen quipping in 2007 that \"We didn\u2019t even use prepared speeches.\"497 China backed Russia in the Second Chechen War and regards to Russia's concerns of NATO expansion, while Russia backed China regarding the issues of Taiwan, Tibet and Xinjiang. The two countries also increasingly cooperated in the United Nations Security Council.499\nOn the eve of a 2013 state visit to Moscow by Chinese leader Xi Jinping, Putin remarked that the two nations were forging a special relationship. Xi visited the Operational Command Headquarters of the Russian Armed Forces, the first time a foreign leader visited the building.506\u2013507 Ties have continued to deepen after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, with Russia increasingly becoming dependent on China while it is under large-scale international sanctions.\nPost-Soviet states.\nUnder Putin, the Kremlin has consistently stated that Russia has a sphere of influence and \"privileged interests\" over other post-Soviet states, which are referred to as the \"near abroad\" in Russia. It has also been stated that the post-Soviet states are strategically vital to Russian interests. Some Russia experts have compared this concept to the Monroe Doctrine.\nA series of so-called colour revolutions in the post-Soviet states, namely the Rose Revolution in Georgia in 2003, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan in 2005, led to frictions in the relations of those countries with Russia. In December 2004, Putin criticized the Rose and Orange revolutions, saying: \"If you have permanent revolutions, you risk plunging the post-Soviet space into endless conflict.\"\nPutin allegedly declared at a NATO-Russia summit in 2008 that if Ukraine joined NATO, Russia could contend to annex the Ukrainian East and Crimea. At the summit, he told U.S. President George W. Bush that \"Ukraine is not even a state!\", while the following year, Putin referred to Ukraine as \"Little Russia\". Following the Revolution of Dignity in March 2014, the Russian Federation annexed Crimea. According to Putin, this was done because \"Crimea has always been and remains an inseparable part of Russia.\"\nAfter the Russian annexation of Crimea, he said that Ukraine includes \"regions of Russia's historic south\" and \"was created on a whim by the Bolsheviks\". He went on to declare that the February 2014 ousting of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych had been orchestrated by the West as an attempt to weaken Russia. \"Our Western partners have crossed a line. They behaved rudely, irresponsibly and unprofessionally\", he said, adding that the people who had come to power in Ukraine were \"nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes and anti-Semites\".\nIn a July 2014 speech during a Russian-supported armed insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, Putin stated he would use Russia's \"entire arsenal of available means\" up to \"operations under international humanitarian law and the right of self-defense\" to protect Russian speakers outside Russia. With the attainment of autocephaly by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in December 2018 and subsequent schism of the Russian Orthodox Church from Constantinople, a number of experts came to the conclusion that Putin's policy of forceful engagement in post-Soviet republics significantly backfired on him, leading to a situation where he \"annexed Crimea, but lost Ukraine\", and provoked a much more cautious approach to Russia among other post-Soviet countries.\nIn late August 2014, Putin stated: \"People who have their own views on history and the history of our country may argue with me, but it seems to me that the Russian and Ukrainian peoples are practically one people.\" After making a similar statement, in late December 2015, he stated: \"the Ukrainian culture, as well as Ukrainian literature, surely has a source of its own\". In July 2021, he published a lengthy article \"On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians\" revisiting these themes, and saying the formation of a Ukrainian state hostile to Moscow was \"comparable in its consequences to the use of weapons of mass destruction against us\"\u2014it was made mandatory reading for military-political training in the Russian Armed Forces.\nIn August 2008, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili attempted to restore control over the breakaway South Ossetia. However, the Georgian military was soon defeated in the resulting 2008 South Ossetia War after regular Russian forces entered South Ossetia and then other parts of Georgia, also opening a second front in the other Georgian breakaway province of Abkhazia with Abkhazian forces.\nDespite existing or past tensions between Russia and most of the post-Soviet states, Putin has followed the policy of Eurasian integration. Putin endorsed the idea of a Eurasian Union in 2011; the concept was proposed by the president of Kazakhstan in 1994. On 18 November 2011, the presidents of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia signed an agreement setting a target of establishing the Eurasian Union by 2015. The Eurasian Union was established on 1 January 2015.\nUnder Putin, Russia's relations have improved significantly with Uzbekistan, the second-largest post-Soviet republic after Ukraine. This was demonstrated in Putin's visit to Tashkent in May 2000, after lukewarm relations under Yeltsin and Islam Karimov, who had long distanced itself from Moscow. In another meeting in 2014, Russia agreed to write off Uzbek debt. A theme of a greater Soviet region, including the former USSR and many of its neighbors or imperial-era states\u2014rather than just post-Soviet Russia\u2014has been consistent in Putin's May Day speeches.\nOn 22 December 2022, Putin addressed the Security Council in a speech where he did not use the term \"Special Military Operation\" but instead called the fighting in Ukraine a \"war\". Anti-Putin activists have called for Putin to be prosecuted for breaking a law passed to stop people from calling the Special Military Operation a war. This law carries a penalty of up to 15 years in jail. On 25 December, he openly declared in a TV interview that the goal of the invasion is \"to unite the Russian people\".\nDuring the 2024 Year-End Review, President Putin was asked if there were regrets from the \"Special Military Operation\". President Putin said that he regretted not launching it at the same time as the annexation of Crimea and with more \"preparation\". Saying \"This decision, which was made at the beginning of 2022, should have been made earlier. That's the first thing. Secondly, we should have started preparing, including for the SMO. The events in Crimea were spontaneous. The events of 2022 also began without preparation. But why did we start? Because it was impossible to stand still and endure any longer\".\nUnited States, the West, and NATO.\nUnder Putin, Russia's relationships with NATO and the U.S. have passed through several stages. When he first became president, relations were cautious, but after the 9/11 attacks, Putin quickly supported the U.S. in the war on terror, and the opportunity for partnership appeared. According to Stephen F. Cohen, the U.S. \"repaid by further expansion of NATO to Russia's borders and by unilateral withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty\", but others pointed out the applications from new countries willing to join NATO was driven primarily by Russian's behavior in Chechnya, Transnistria, Abkhazia, Yanayev putsch as well as calls to restore USSR in its previous borders by prominent Russian politicians.\nFrom 2003, when Russia strongly opposed the U.S. when it waged the Iraq War, Putin became ever more distant from the West, and relations steadily deteriorated. According to a Russian scholar Stephen F. Cohen, the narrative of the mainstream U.S. media, following that of the White House, became anti-Putin. In an interview with Michael St\u00fcrmer, Putin said there were three questions which most concerned Russia and Eastern Europe: namely, the status of Kosovo, the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe and American plans to build missile defence sites in Poland and the Czech Republic, and suggested that all three were linked. His view was that concessions by the West on one of the questions might be met with concessions from Russia on another.\nIn 2003, relations between Russia and the United Kingdom deteriorated when the United Kingdom granted political asylum to Putin's former patron, oligarch Boris Berezovsky. This deterioration was intensified by allegations that the British were spying and making secret payments to pro-democracy and human rights groups. The end of 2006 brought more strained relations in the wake of the death by polonium poisoning in London of former KGB and FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko, who became an MI6 agent in 2003. In 2007, the crisis in relations continued with the expulsion of four Russian envoys over Russia's refusal to extradite former KGB bodyguard Andrei Lugovoi to face charges in the murder. Mirroring the British actions, Russia expelled UK diplomats and took other retaliatory steps. In 2015, the British Government launched a public inquiry into Litvinenko's death, presided over by Robert Owen, a former British High Court judge. The Owen report, published on 21 January 2016, stated, \"The FSB operation to kill Mr. Litvinenko was probably approved by Mr Patrushev and also by President Putin\". The report outlined some possible motives for the murder, including Litvinenko's public statements and books about the alleged involvement of the FSB in mass murder, and what was \"undoubtedly a personal dimension to the antagonism\" between Putin and Litvinenko.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne single center of power. One single center of force. One single center of decision-making. This is the world of one master, one sovereign. ... Primarily, the United States has overstepped its national borders, and in every area.\n \u2014 Putin criticizing the United States in his Munich Speech, 2007\nIn a January 2007 interview, Putin said Russia was in favor of a democratic multipolar world and strengthening the systems of international law. In February 2007, Putin criticized what he called the United States' monopolistic dominance in global relations, and \"almost uncontained hyper use of force in international relations\". He said the result of it is that \"no one feels safe! Because no one can feel that international law is like a stone wall that will protect them. Of course such a policy stimulates an arms race.\" This came to be known as the Munich Speech, and NATO secretary Jaap de Hoop Scheffer called the speech \"disappointing and not helpful\".\nThe months following Putin's Munich Speech were marked by tension and a surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic. Both Russian and American officials, however, denied the idea of a new Cold War. Putin publicly opposed plans for the U.S. missile shield in Europe and presented President George W. Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 which was declined. Russia suspended its participation in the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty on 11 December 2007.\nPutin opposed Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, warning that it would destabilize the whole system of international relations. He described the recognition of Kosovo's independence by several major world powers as \"a terrible precedent, which will de facto blow apart the whole system of international relations, developed not over decades, but over centuries\", and that \"they have not thought through the results of what they are doing. At the end of the day it is a two-ended stick and the second end will come back and hit them in the face\". In March 2014, Putin used Kosovo's declaration of independence as a justification for recognizing the independence of Crimea, citing the so-called \"Kosovo independence precedent\".\nAfter the 9/11 attacks on the U.S. in 2001, Putin had good relations with the American President George W. Bush, and many Western European leaders. His \"cooler\" and \"more business-like\" relationship with German chancellor, Angela Merkel is often attributed to Merkel's upbringing in the former DDR, where Putin was stationed as a KGB agent. He had a very friendly and warm relationship with Prime Minister of Italy Silvio Berlusconi; the two leaders often described their relationship as a close friendship, continuing to organize bilateral meetings even after Berlusconi's resignation in November 2011. When Berlusconi died in 2023, Putin described him as an \"extraordinary man\" and a \"true friend\".\nThe NATO-led military intervention in Libya in 2011 prompted a widespread wave of criticism from several world leaders, including Putin, who said that the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 is \"defective and flawed\", adding: \"It allows everything. It resembles medieval calls for crusades\".\nIn late 2013, Russian-American relations deteriorated further when the United States canceled a summit for the first time since 1960 after Putin gave asylum to the American Edward Snowden, who had leaked massive amounts of classified information from the NSA. In 2014, Russia was suspended from the G8 group as a result of its annexation of Crimea. Putin gave a speech highly critical of the United States, accusing them of destabilizing world order and trying to \"reshape the world\" to its own benefit. In June 2015, Putin said that Russia has no intention of attacking NATO.\nOn 9 November 2016, Putin congratulated Donald Trump on becoming the 45th president of the United States. In December 2016, US intelligence officials (headed by James Clapper) quoted by CBS News stated that Putin approved the email hacking and cyber attacks during the U.S. election, against the Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton. A spokesman for Putin denied the reports. Putin has repeatedly accused Hillary Clinton, who served as U.S. secretary of state from 2009 to 2013, of interfering in Russia's internal affairs, and in December 2016, Clinton accused Putin of having a personal grudge against her. Putin has stated that U.S.\u2013Russian relations, already at the lowest level since the end of the Cold War, have continued to deteriorate after Trump took office in January 2017.\nOn 4 March 2018, former double agent Sergei Skripal was poisoned with a Novichok nerve agent in Salisbury. Ten days later, the British government formally accused the Russian state of attempted murder, a charge which Russia denied. After the UK expelled 23 Russian diplomats (an action which would later be responded to with a Russian expulsion of 23 British diplomats), British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson said on 16 March that it was \"overwhelmingly likely\" Putin had personally ordered the poisoning of Skripal. Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov called the allegation \"shocking and unpardonable diplomatic misconduct\".\nOn 18 June 2020, \"The National Interest\" published a nine-thousand-word essay by Putin, titled \"The Real Lessons of the 75th Anniversary of World War II\". In the essay, Putin criticizes the Western historical view of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact as the start of World War II, stating that the Munich Agreement was the beginning.\nOn 21 February 2023, Putin suspended Russia's participation in the New START nuclear arms reduction treaty with the United States. On 25 March, President Putin announced the stationing of tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus. Russia would maintain control of the weapons. President Putin told Russian TV: \"There is nothing unusual here either. Firstly, the United States has been doing this for decades. They have long deployed their tactical nuclear weapons on the territory of their allied countries.\"\nIn August 2024, Putin pardoned American journalist Evan Gershkovich, opposition figures Vladimir Kara-Murza, Ilya Yashin, and others in a prisoner swap with Western countries. The 2024 Ankara prisoner exchange was the most extensive between Russia and United States since the end of the Cold War, involving the release of 26 people.\nLatin America.\nPutin and his successor, Medvedev, enjoyed warm relations with Hugo Ch\u00e1vez of Venezuela. Much of this has been through the sale of military equipment; since 2005, Venezuela has purchased more than $4\u00a0billion worth of arms from Russia. In September 2008, Russia sent Tupolev Tu-160 bombers to Venezuela to carry out training flights. In November 2008, both countries held a joint naval exercise in the Caribbean. Earlier in 2000, Putin had re-established stronger ties with Fidel Castro's Cuba.\n\"You express the best masculine qualities\", Putin told Jair Bolsonaro in 2020. \"You look for solutions in all matters, always putting above all the interests of your people, your country, leaving out your own personal issues\". Political scientist Oliver Stuenkel noted, \"Among Brazil's right-wing populists, Putin is seen as someone who is anti-woke, and that is seen as something that is definitely appealing to Bolsonaro. He is a strongman, and that is very inspiring to Bolsonaro. He would like to be someone who concentrates as much power\".\nMiddle East and Africa.\nOn 16 October 2007, Putin visited Iran to participate in the Second Caspian Summit in Tehran, where he met with Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. This was the first visit of a Soviet or Russian leader to Iran since Joseph Stalin's participation in the Tehran Conference in 1943, and marked a significant event in Iran\u2013Russia relations. At a press conference after the summit Putin said that \"all our (Caspian) states have the right to develop their peaceful nuclear programmes without any restrictions\". Putin was quoted as describing Iran as a \"partner\", although he expressed concerns over the Iranian nuclear programme.\nIn April 2008, Putin became the first Russian president to visit Libya. Putin condemned the 2011 foreign military intervention in Libya, referring to the UN resolution as \"defective and flawed\", and added, \"It allows everything. It resembles medieval calls for crusades\". Upon the death of Muammar Gaddafi, Putin called it as \"planned murder\" by the US, saying: \"They showed to the whole world how he (Gaddafi) was killed\", and \"There was blood all over. Is that what they call a democracy?\"\nFrom 2000 to 2010, Russia sold around $1.5\u00a0billion worth of arms to Syria, making Damascus Russia's seventh-largest client. During the Syrian civil war, Russia threatened to veto any sanctions against the Syrian government, and continued to supply arms to its regime. Putin opposed any foreign intervention in the Syrian civil war. In June 2012, in Paris, he rejected the statement of French president Fran\u00e7ois Hollande who called on Bashar al-Assad to step down. Putin echoed Assad's argument that anti-regime \"militants\" were responsible for much of the bloodshed. He also talked about previous NATO interventions and their results, and asked, \"What is happening in Libya, in Iraq? Did they become safer? Where are they heading? Nobody has an answer\".\nOn 11 September 2013, \"The New York Times\" published an op-ed by Putin urging caution against US intervention in Syria and criticizing American exceptionalism. Putin subsequently helped to arrange for the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons. In 2015, he took a stronger pro-Assad stance and mobilized military support for the regime. Some analysts have summarized Putin as being allied with Shias and Alawites in the Middle East. Putin ordered Russian intervention to support his ally, Assad, to undermine the U.S.-led international order. As a result, Russia increased its influence in the Eastern Mediterranean by strengthening its control over the Tartus Naval Base and becoming an operator of the Khmeimim Air Base.\nIn 2017, Putin dispatched Russian PMCs to back the Touad\u00e9ra regime in the Central African Republic Civil War, gaining a permanent military presence in return. The first Russia-Africa Summit was held in October 2019 in Sochi, Russia, co-hosted by Putin and Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. The meeting was attended by 43 heads of state and government from African countries.\nIn October 2019, Putin visited the United Arab Emirates, where six agreements were struck with Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed. One of them included shared investments between Russian sovereign wealth fund and the Emirati investment fund Mubadala. The two nations signed deals worth over $1.3bn in the energy, health, and advanced technology sectors. On 22 October 2021, Putin highlighted the \"unique bond\" between Russia and Israel during a meeting with Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett.\nPublic image.\nPolls and rankings.\nIn a June 2007 public opinion survey, Putin's approval rating was 81%, the second-highest of any leader in the world that year. In January 2013, at the time of the 2011\u20132013 Russian protests, Putin's rating fell to 62%, the lowest since 2000. In a context of increased diplomatic isolation and international sanctions on Russian officials prompted by the Russo-Ukrainian war, Putin's approval rating reached 87% in August 2014. In June 2015, Putin's approval rating climbed to 89%, an all-time high. Observers saw Putin's high approval ratings in 2010s as a consequence of improvements in living standards, and Russia's reassertion on the world scene during his presidency. The director of the Levada Center stated in 2015 that drawing conclusions from Russian poll results or comparing them to polls in democratic states was irrelevant, as there is no real political competition in Russia, where, unlike in democratic states, Russian voters are not offered any credible alternatives and public opinion is primarily formed by state-controlled media, which promotes those in power and discredits alternative candidates.\nPutin's performance in reining in corruption is unpopular among Russians. \"Newsweek\" reported in 2017 that a poll \"indicated that 67% held Putin personally responsible for high-level corruption\". Corruption is a significant problem in Russia. In October 2018, two-thirds of Russians surveyed agreed that \"Putin bears full responsibility for the problems of the country\", which has been attributed to a decline in a popular belief in \"good tsar and bad boyars\", a traditional attitude towards justifying failures at the top of the ruling hierarchy in Russia. In January 2019, the percentage of Russians trusting Putin hit a then-historic low\u201433%. In May 2020, amid the COVID crisis, Putin's approval rating was 68%, when respondents were presented a list of names (closed question), and 27% when respondents were expected to name politicians they trust (open question). This has been attributed to continued post-Crimea economic stagnation but also an apathetic response to the pandemic crisis in Russia.\nFollowing the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, state-controlled TV, where most Russians get their news, presented the invasion as a \"special military operation\" and liberation mission, in line with the government's narrative. The Russian censorship apparatus \"Roskomnadzor\" ordered the country's media to employ information only from state sources or face fines and blocks. The Russian media was banned from using the words \"war\", \"invasion\" or \"aggression\" to describe the invasion, with media outlets being blocked as a result. In March 2022, 97% of Ukrainians said they had an unfavorable view of Putin, and 98% of Ukrainians\u2014including 82% of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine\u2014said they did not believe any part of Ukraine was rightfully part of Russia.\nIn late February 2022, a survey conducted by the independent research group Russian Field found that 59% of respondents supported the \"special military operation\" in Ukraine. In late February and mid-March 2022 two polls surveyed Russians' sentiments about the \"special military operation\" in Ukraine. The results were obtained by Radio Liberty. 71% of Russians polled said that they supported the \"special military operation\" in Ukraine. A poll published on 30 March in Russia saw Putin's approval rating jump, from 71% in February, to 83%. However, experts warned that the figures may not accurately reflect the public mood, as the public tends to rally around leaders during war and some may be hiding their true opinions, especially with the Russian 2022 war censorship laws prohibiting dissemination of \"fake information\" about the military. Many respondents do not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences. When researchers commissioned a survey on Russians' attitudes to the war, 29,400 out of 31,000 refused to answer. The Levada Center's director stated that early feelings of \"shock and confusion\" were being replaced with the belief that Russia was being besieged and that Russians must rally around their leader. The Kremlin's analysis concluded that public support for the war was broad but not deep, and that most Russians would accept anything Putin labeled a victory. In September 2023, the head of the VTsIOM state pollster Valery Fyodorov said in an interview that only 10\u201315% of Russians actively supported the war, and that \"most Russians are not demanding the conquest of Kyiv or Odesa\".\nCult of personality.\nPutin has cultivated a cult of personality for himself with an outdoorsy, athletic, tough guy public image, demonstrating his physical prowess and taking part in unusual or dangerous acts, such as extreme sports and interaction with wild animals, part of a public relations approach that, according to \"Wired\", \"deliberately cultivates the macho, take-charge superhero image\". In 2007, the tabloid \"Komsomolskaya Pravda\" published a huge photograph of a shirtless Putin vacationing in the Siberian mountains under the headline \"Be Like Putin\". Tatiana Mikhailova opines that virility is an aspect of the image of the \"Father of the Nation\", which Putin wants to create. She refers to, as an example of the success of this image building attempt, a 2006 incident in which Putin lifted the shirt of a boy to kiss his stomach without permission \u2013 which did not cause much reaction in Russia even though, according to Mikhailova, it was unprecedented and transgressive by Russian standards and would have caused outrage in any other country (media reports note that there was widespread reaction in Russia and abroad though).\nNumerous Kremlinologists have accused Putin of seeking to create a cult of personality around himself, an accusation that the Kremlin has denied. Some of Putin's activities have been criticised for being staged; outside of Russia, his macho image has been the subject of parody. Putin's height has been estimated by Kremlin insiders to be between tall but is usually given at .\nThere are many songs about Putin, and Putin's name and image are widely used in advertisements and product branding. Among the Putin-branded products are Putinka vodka, the PuTin brand of canned food, the \"Gorbusha Putina\" caviar, and a collection of T-shirts with his image.\nPublic recognition in the West.\nIn 2007, he was the \"Time\" Person of the Year. In 2015, he was No. 1 on the \"Time's\" Most Influential People List. \"Forbes\" ranked him the World's Most Powerful Individual every year from 2013 to 2016. He was ranked the second most powerful individual by \"Forbes\" in 2018.\nIn Germany, the word \"Putinversteher\" (female form \"Putinversteherin\") is a neologism and a political buzzword (\"Putin\" + \"verstehen\"), which literally translates \"Putin understander\", i.e., \"one who understands Putin\". It is a pejorative reference to politicians and pundits who express empathy to Putin and may also be translated as \"Putin-empathizer\".\nPutinisms.\nPutin has produced many aphorisms and catch-phrases known as putinisms. Many of them were first made during his annual Q&amp;A conferences, where Putin answered questions from journalists and other people in the studio, as well as from Russians throughout the country, who either phoned in or spoke from studios and outdoor sites across Russia. Putin is known for his often tough and sharp language, often alluding to Russian jokes and folk sayings. Putin sometimes uses Russian criminal jargon (known as \"fenya\" in Russian), albeit not always correctly.\nAssessments.\nAssessments of Putin's character as a leader have evolved during his long presidency. His shifting of Russia towards autocracy and weakening of the system of representative government advocated by Boris Yeltsin has met with criticism. Russian dissidents and western leaders now frequently characterise him as a \"dictator\". Others have offered favourable assessments of his impact on Russia.\nOtto von Habsburg, the last crown prince of Austria-Hungary and former Member of the European Parliament, was an early critic of Putin. In a newspaper interview in 2002 and in two speeches in 2003 and 2005, he warned of Putin as an \"international threat\", that he was \"cruel and oppressive\", and a \"stone cold technocrat\".\nPutin was described in 2015 as a \"dictator\" by political opponent Garry Kasparov, and as the \"Tsar of corruption\" in 2016 by opposition activist and blogger Alexei Navalny. He was described as a \"bully\" and \"arrogant\" by former U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton, and as \"self-centered\" by the Dalai Lama. In 2015, opposition politician Boris Nemtsov said that Putin was turning Russia into a \"raw materials colony\" of China.\nFormer U.S. secretary of state Henry Kissinger wrote in 2014 that the West has demonized Putin. Egon Krenz, former leader of East Germany, said the Cold War never ended, adding: \"After weak presidents like Gorbachev and Yeltsin, it is a great fortune for Russia that it has Putin\".\nMany Russians credit Putin for reviving Russia's fortunes. Former Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev, while acknowledging the flawed democratic procedures and restrictions on media freedom during the Putin presidency, said that Putin had pulled Russia out of chaos at the end of the Yeltsin years, and that Russians \"must remember that Putin saved Russia from the beginning of a collapse\". Chechen Republic head and Putin supporter, Ramzan Kadyrov, stated prior to 2011 that Putin saved both the Chechen people and Russia.\nRussia has suffered democratic backsliding during Putin's tenure. Freedom House has listed Russia as being \"not free\" since 2005. Experts do not generally consider Russia to be a democracy, citing purges and jailing of political opponents, curtailed press freedom, and the lack of free and fair elections. In 2004, Freedom House warned that Russia's \"retreat from freedom marks a low point not registered since 1989, when the country was part of the Soviet Union\".\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit has rated Russia as \"authoritarian\" since 2011, whereas it had previously been considered a \"hybrid regime\" (with \"some form of democratic government\" in place). According to political scientist Larry Diamond, writing in 2015, \"no serious scholar would consider Russia today a democracy\".\nFollowing the jailing of the anti-corruption blogger and activist Alexei Navalny in 2018, \"Forbes\" wrote: \"Putin's actions are those of a dictator... As a leader with failing public support, he can only remain in power by using force and repression that gets worse by the day\". In November 2021, \"The Economist\" also noted that Putin had \"shifted from autocracy to dictatorship\".\nIn February 2015, former U.S. ambassador to Germany John Kornblum wrote in \"The Wall Street Journal\" that:\nIn her 2017 book \"Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism\", Kristen Ghodsee argued that the triumphalist attitudes of Western powers at the end of the Cold War, and the fixation with linking all leftist and socialist political ideals with the horrors of Stalinism, allowed neoliberalism to fill the void, undermined democratic institutions and reforms, left a trail of economic misery, unemployment, hopelessness and rising inequality throughout the former Eastern Bloc. This includes Russia, helping fuel the rise of Putin's extremist right-wing nationalism.\nAfter the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.\nFollowing mounting civilian casualties during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, U.S. president Joe Biden called Putin a war criminal and \"murderous dictator\". In the 2022 State of the Union Address, Biden said that Putin had \"badly miscalculated\". The Ukrainian envoy to the United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya likened Putin to Adolf Hitler. Latvian prime minister Krisjanis Karins also likened the Russian leader to Hitler, saying he was \"a deluded autocrat creating misery for millions\" and that \"Putin is fighting against democracy (...) If he can attack Ukraine, theoretically it could be any other European country\".\nLithuania's foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, stated, \"The battle for Ukraine is a battle for Europe. If Putin is not stopped there, he will go further.\" French President Emmanuel Macron said Putin was \"deluding himself\". French foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian denounced him as \"a cynic and a dictator\". Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called Putin \"a lying, murderous dictator\". UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson also labelled Putin a \"dictator\" who had authorised \"a tidal wave of violence against a fellow Slavic people\". Several authors and academics, such as Michael Hirsh, described Putin as a \"messianic\" Russian nationalist and Eurasianist.\nIn March 2025, Franklin Foer of \"The Atlantic\" said that the 21st century was the \"Age of Vladimir Putin\". Foer wrote that:\nElectoral history.\nVladimir Putin has been nominated and elected as President of Russia all five times since 2000, typically under an independent banner. In the most recent 2024 Russian presidential election, Putin achieved 88% of the popular vote. There were reports of irregularities at this election, including ballot stuffing and coercion. Russian authorities claimed that in occupied areas of Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions, Putin won 88.12% and 92.83% of votes. In Chechnya, Putin won 98.99% of the vote.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nOn 28 July 1983, Putin married Lyudmila Shkrebneva, and they lived together in East Germany from 1985 to 1990. They have two daughters, Maria Putina, born on 28 April 1985 in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg), and Yekaterina Putina, born on 31 August 1986 in Dresden, East Germany (now Germany).\nAn investigation by \"Proekt\" published in November 2020 alleged that Putin has another daughter, Elizaveta, also known as Luiza Rozova, (born in March 2003), with Svetlana Krivonogikh. Elizaveta studied in Paris under the name Elizaveta Olegovna Rudnova. In April 2008, the \"Moskovsky Korrespondent\" reported that Putin had divorced Lyudmila and was engaged to marry Olympic gold medalist Alina Kabaeva, a former rhythmic gymnast and Russian politician. The story was denied, and the newspaper was shut down shortly thereafter. Putin and Lyudmila continued to make public appearances together as spouses, while the status of his relationship with Kabaeva became a topic of speculation.\nOn 6 June 2013, Putin and Lyudmila announced that their marriage was over; on 1 April 2014, the Kremlin confirmed that the divorce had been finalised. Kabaeva reportedly gave birth to a daughter by Putin in 2015; this report was denied. Kabaeva reportedly gave birth to twin sons by Putin in 2019. However, in 2022, Swiss media, citing the couple's Swiss gynecologist, wrote that on both occasions Kabaeva gave birth to a boy.\nPutin has two grandsons, born in 2012 and 2017, through Maria. He reportedly also has a granddaughter, born in 2017, through Katerina. His cousin, Igor Putin, was a director at Moscow-based Master Bank and was accused in a number of money-laundering scandals.\nWealth.\nOfficial figures released during the legislative election of 2007 put Putin's wealth at approximately 3.7\u00a0million rubles (US$280,000) in bank accounts, a private apartment in Saint Petersburg, and miscellaneous other assets. Putin's reported 2006 income totaled 2\u00a0million rubles (approximately $152,000). In 2012, Putin reported an income of 3.6\u00a0million rubles ($270,000). Putin has been photographed wearing several expensive wristwatches, collectively valued at $700,000, nearly six times his annual salary. Putin has been known on occasion to give watches valued at thousands of dollars as gifts, for example a watch identified as a Blancpain to a Siberian boy he met while on vacation in 2009, and another similar watch to a factory worker the same year.\nAccording to Russian opposition politicians and journalists, Putin secretly possesses a multi-billion-dollar fortune via successive ownership of stakes in several Russian companies. According to one editorial in \"The Washington Post\", \"Putin might not technically own these 43 aircraft, but, as the sole political power in Russia, he can act like they're his\". An RIA Novosti journalist argued that \"[Western] intelligence agencies ... could not find anything\". These contradictory claims were analyzed by Polygraph.info, which looked at several reports by Western (Anders \u00c5slund estimate of $100\u2013160\u00a0billion) and Russian (Stanislav Belkovsky estimated of $40\u00a0billion) analysts, CIA (estimate of $40\u00a0billion in 2007) as well as counterarguments of Russian media. Polygraph concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is uncertainty on the precise sum of Putin's wealth, and the assessment by the Director of U.S. National Intelligence apparently is not yet complete. However, with the pile of evidence and documents in the Panama Papers and in the hands of independent investigators such as those cited by Dawisha, Polygraph.info finds that Danilov's claim that Western intelligence agencies have not been able to find evidence of Putin's wealth to be misleading\u2014\u200a\nIn April 2016, 11\u00a0million documents belonging to Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca were leaked to the German newspaper \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\" and the Washington-based International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. The name of Putin does not appear in any of the records, and Putin denied his involvement with the company. However, various media have reported on three of Putin's associates on the list. According to the Panama Papers leak, close trusted associates of Putin own offshore companies worth US$2\u00a0billion in total. \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\" regards the possibility of Putin's family profiting from this money as plausible.\nAccording to the paper, the US$2\u00a0 billion had been \"secretly shuffled through banks and shadow companies linked to Putin's associates\", such as construction billionaires Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, and Bank Rossiya, previously identified by the U.S. State Department as being treated by Putin as his personal bank account, had been central in facilitating this. It concludes that \"Putin has shown he is willing to take aggressive steps to maintain secrecy and protect [such] communal assets\".\nA significant proportion of the money trail leads to Putin's best friend Sergei Roldugin. Although a musician, and in his own words, not a businessman, it appears he has accumulated assets valued at $100m, and possibly more. It has been suggested he was picked for the role because of his low profile. There have been speculations that Putin, in fact, owns the funds, and Roldugin just acted as a proxy. Garry Kasparov said that \"[Putin] controls enough money, probably more than any other individual in the history of human race\".\nResidences.\nOfficial government residences.\nAs president and prime minister, Putin has lived in numerous official residences throughout the country. These residences include: the Moscow Kremlin, Novo-Ogaryovo in Moscow Oblast, Gorki-9 near Moscow, Bocharov Ruchey in Sochi, Dolgiye Borody (residence) in Novgorod Oblast, and Riviera in Sochi. In August 2012, critics of Putin listed the ownership of 20 villas and palaces, nine of which were built during Putin's 12 years in power.\nPersonal residences.\nSoon after Putin returned from his KGB service in Dresden, East Germany, he built a dacha in Solovyovka on the eastern shore of Lake Komsomolskoye on the Karelian Isthmus in Priozersky District of Leningrad Oblast, near St. Petersburg. After the dacha burned down in 1996, Putin built a new one identical to the original and was joined by a group of seven friends who built dachas nearby. In 1996, the group formally registered their fraternity as a co-operative society, calling it Ozero (\"Lake\") and turning it into a gated community.\nA massive Italianate-style mansion costing an alleged US$1\u00a0billion and dubbed \"Putin's Palace\" is under construction near the Black Sea village of Praskoveevka. In 2012, Sergei Kolesnikov, a former business associate of Putin's, told the BBC's \"Newsnight\" programme that he had been ordered by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin to oversee the building of the palace. He also said that the mansion, built on government land and sporting three helipads, plus a private road paid for from state funds and guarded by officials wearing uniforms of the official Kremlin guard service, have been built for Putin's private use.\nOn 19 January 2021, two days after Alexei Navalny was detained by Russian authorities upon his return to Russia, a video investigation by him and the Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK) was published, accusing Putin of using fraudulently obtained funds to build the estate for himself in what he called \"the world's biggest bribe\". In the investigation, Navalny said that the estate is 39 times the size of Monaco and costs over 100 billion rubles ($1.35 billion) to construct. It also showed aerial footage of the estate via a drone and a detailed floorplan of the palace that Navalny said was given by a contractor, which he compared to photographs from inside the palace that were leaked onto the Internet in 2011. He also detailed an elaborate corruption scheme allegedly involving Putin's inner circle that allowed Putin to hide billions of dollars to build the estate. Since the prelude to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Putin prefers to travel in an armored train to flying.\nPets.\nPutin has received five dogs from various national leaders: Konni, Buffy, Yume, Verni and Pasha. Konni died in 2014. When Putin first became president, the family had two poodles, Tosya and Rodeo. They reportedly stayed with his ex-wife Lyudmila after their divorce.\nReligion.\nPutin is Russian Orthodox. His mother was a devout Christian who attended the Russian Orthodox Church; his father was an atheist. Although his mother kept no icons at home, she attended church regularly, despite government persecution of her faith at that time. His mother secretly baptized him as a baby, and she regularly took him to services.\nAccording to Putin, his religious awakening began after a serious car crash involving his wife in 1993, and a life-threatening fire that burned down their dacha in August 1996. Shortly before an official visit to Israel, Putin's mother gave him his baptismal cross, telling him to get it blessed. Putin has stated, \"I did as she said and then put the cross around my neck. I have never taken it off since\".\nWhen asked in 2007 whether he believes in God, he replied, \"There are things I believe, which should not in my position, at least, be shared with the public at large for everybody's consumption because that would look like self-advertising or a political striptease\". Putin's rumoured confessor is Russian Orthodox bishop Tikhon Shevkunov. The sincerity of his Christianity has been rejected by his former advisor Sergei Pugachev.\nSports.\nPutin watches football and supports FC Zenit Saint Petersburg. He also displays an interest in ice hockey and bandy, and played in a star-studded hockey game on his 63rd birthday.\nPutin has been practicing judo since he was 11, before switching to sambo at the age of fourteen. He won competitions in both sports in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg). He was awarded eighth dan of the black belt in 2012, becoming the first Russian to achieve the status. He was rewarded an eighth-degree karate black belt in 2014.\nHe co-authored a book titled \"Learn Judo with Vladimir Putin\" in Russian (2000), and \"Judo: History, Theory, Practice\" in English (2004). Benjamin Wittes, a black belt in taekwondo and aikido and editor of \"Lawfare\", has disputed Putin's martial arts skills, stating that there is no video evidence of Putin displaying any real noteworthy judo skills.\nIn March 2022, Putin was removed from all positions in the International Judo Federation (IJF) due to the Russo-Ukrainian war.\nHealth.\nIn July 2022, the director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, William Burns, stated they had no evidence to suggest Putin was unstable or in bad health. The statement was made because of increasing unconfirmed media speculation about Putin's health. Burns had previously been U.S. ambassador to Russia, and had personally observed Putin for over two decades, including a personal meeting in November 2021. A Kremlin spokesperson also dismissed rumours of Putin's bad health.\nThe Russian political magazine \"Sobesednik\" () alleged in 2018 that Putin had a sensory room installed in his private residence in the Novgorod Oblast. The White House, as well as Western generals, politicians, and political analysts, have questioned Putin's mental health after two years of isolation during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn April 2022, tabloid newspaper \"The Sun\" reported that based on video footage Putin may have Parkinson's disease. This speculation, which has not been supported by medical professionals, has spread in part due to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which many saw as an irrational act. The Kremlin rejected the possibility of Parkinson's along with outside medical professionals, who stress that it is impossible to diagnose the condition based on video clips alone.\nAwards and honours.\nAt least fifteen countries have awarded Vladimir Putin civilian honors since 2001. Putin has been awarded honorary doctorates and other awards from organizations across the world, but some of these were revoked in 2022 in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32818", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32818", "title": "Variable", "text": "Variable may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32819", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32819", "title": "Velar consonant", "text": "Place of articulation\nVelar consonants are consonants articulated with the back part of the tongue (the dorsum) against the soft palate, the back part of the roof of the mouth (also known as the \"velum\").\nSince the velar region of the roof of the mouth is relatively extensive and the movements of the dorsum\nare not very precise, velars easily undergo assimilation, shifting their articulation back or to the front\ndepending on the quality of adjacent vowels. They often become automatically \"fronted\", that is partly or completely palatal before a following front vowel, and \"retracted\", that is partly or completely uvular before back vowels.\nPalatalised velars (like English in \"keen\" or \"cube\") are sometimes referred to as palatovelars. Many languages also have labialized velars, such as , in which the articulation is accompanied by rounding of the lips. There are also labial\u2013velar consonants, which are doubly articulated at the velum and at the lips, such as . This distinction disappears with the approximant consonant since labialization involves adding of a labial approximant articulation to a sound, and this ambiguous situation is often called labiovelar.\nA velar trill or tap is not possible according to the International Phonetics Association: see the shaded boxes on the table of pulmonic consonants. In the velar position, the tongue has an extremely restricted ability to carry out the type of motion associated with trills or taps, and the body of the tongue has no freedom to move quickly enough to produce a velar trill or flap.\nExamples.\nSome velar consonants identified by the International Phonetic Alphabet are:\nLack of velars.\nThe only languages recorded to lack velars (and any dorsal consonant at all) may be Xavante, standard Tahitian (though /tVt/ is pronounced [kVt], a pattern also found in the Niihau dialect of Hawaiian), and arguably several Skou languages (Wutung, the Dumo dialect of Vanimo, and Bobe), which have a coda that has been analyzed as the realization of nasal vowels. In Pirah\u00e3, men may lack the only velar consonant.\nOther languages lack simple velars. An areal feature of the indigenous languages of the Americas of the coastal regions of the Pacific Northwest is that historical *k was palatalized. When such sounds remained stops, they were transcribed \u27e8\u27e9 in Americanist phonetic notation, presumably corresponding to IPA \u27e8\u27e9, but in others, such as the Saanich dialect of Coastal Salish, Salish-Spokane-Kalispel, and Chemakum, *k went further and affricated to . Likewise, historical *k\u2019 has become and historical *x has become ; there was no *g or *\u014b. In the Northwest Caucasian languages, historical * has also become palatalized, becoming in Ubykh and in most Circassian varieties. In both regions the languages retain a labialized velar series (e.g. in the North Caucasus) as well as uvular consonants. In the languages of those families that retain plain velars, both the plain and labialized velars are \"pre-velar\", perhaps to make them more distinct from the uvulars which may be \"post-velar\". Prevelar consonants are susceptible to palatalization. A similar system, contrasting with and leaving marginal at best, is reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European.\nApart from the voiceless plosive , no other velar consonant is particularly common, even the and that occur in English. There can be no phoneme in a language that lacks voiced stops, like Mandarin Chinese, but it is sporadically missing elsewhere. Of the languages surveyed in the \"World Atlas of Language Structures\", about 10% of languages that otherwise have are missing .\nPirah\u00e3 has both a and a phonetically. However, the does not behave as other consonants, and the argument has been made that it is phonemically , leaving Pirah\u00e3 with only as an underlyingly velar consonant.\nHawaiian does not distinguish from ; \u27e8k\u27e9 tends toward at the beginning of utterances, before , and is variable elsewhere, especially in the dialect of Ni\u02bbihau and Kaua\u02bbi. Since Hawaiian has no , and \u27e8w\u27e9 varies between and , it is not clearly meaningful to say that Hawaiian has phonemic velar consonants.\nSeveral Khoisan languages have limited numbers or distributions of pulmonic velar consonants. (Their click consonants are articulated in the uvular or possibly velar region, but that occlusion is part of the airstream mechanism rather than the place of articulation of the consonant.) Khoekhoe, for example, does not allow velars in medial or final position, but in Ju\u01c0\u02bchoan velars are rare even in initial position.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Velodorsal consonants.\nNormal velar consonants are \"dorso-velar\": The dorsum (body) of the tongue rises to contact the velum (soft palate) of the roof of the mouth. In disordered speech there are also \"velo-dorsal\" stops, with the opposite articulation: The velum lowers to contact the tongue, which remains static. In the extensions to the IPA for disordered speech, these are transcribed by reversing the IPA letter for a velar consonant, e.g. \u27e8\u27e9 for a voiceless velodorsal stop, \u27e8\u27e9 for voiced, and \u27e8\u27e9 for a nasal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32821", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32821", "title": "V-1 flying bomb", "text": "German World War II cruise missile\nThe V-1 flying bomb () was an early cruise missile. Its official Reich Aviation Ministry (RLM) name was Fieseler Fi 103 and its suggestive name was ' (hellhound). It was also known to the Allies as the buzz bomb or doodlebug and ' (maybug).\nThe V-1 was the first of the (V-weapons) deployed for the terror bombing of London. It was developed at Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center in 1942 by the , and during initial development was known by the codename \"Cherry Stone\". Due to its limited range, the thousands of V-1 missiles launched into England were fired from launch sites along the French (Pas-de-Calais) and Dutch coasts or by modified Heinkel He 111 aircraft.\nThe Wehrmacht first launched the V-1s against London on 13 June 1944, one week after (and prompted by) Operation Overlord, the Allied landings in France. At times more than one hundred V-1s a day were fired at south-east England, 9,521 in total, decreasing in number as sites were overrun until October 1944, when the last V-1 site in range of Britain was overrun by Allied forces. After this, the Germans directed V-1s at the port of Antwerp and at other targets in Belgium, launching another 2,448 V-1s. The attacks stopped only a month before the war in Europe ended, when the last launch site in the Low Countries was overrun on 29 March 1945.\nAs part of Operation Crossbow, operations against the V-1, the British air defences consisted of anti-aircraft guns, barrage balloons and fighter aircraft, to intercept the bombs before they reached their targets, while the launch sites and underground storage depots became targets for Allied attacks including strategic bombing.\nIn 1944 a number of tests of this weapon were apparently conducted in Tornio, Finland. On one occasion, several Finnish soldiers saw a German plane launch what they described as a bomb shaped like a small, winged aircraft. The flight and impact of another prototype was seen by Finnish frontline soldiers; they noted that its engine stopped suddenly, causing the V-1 to descend sharply, and explode on impact, leaving a crater wide. These V-1s became known to Finnish soldiers as \"flying torpedoes\".\nDesign and development.\nIn 1935 Paul Schmidt and Professor Georg Hans Madelung submitted a design to the \"Luftwaffe\" for a flying bomb. It was an innovative design that used a pulse-jet engine, while previous work dating back to 1915 by Sperry Gyroscope relied on propellers. While employed by the company, Fritz Gosslau developed a remote-controlled target drone, the FZG 43 (\"Flakzielger\u00e4t-43\"). In October 1939 Argus proposed \"Fernfeuer\", a remote-controlled aircraft carrying a payload of one ton, that could return to base after releasing its bomb. Argus worked in co-operation with C. Lorenz AG and Arado Flugzeugwerke to develop the project. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" declined to award them a development contract. In 1940, Schmidt and Argus began cooperating, integrating Schmidt's shutter system with Argus' atomized fuel injection. Tests began in January 1941, and the first flight made on 30 April 1941 with a Gotha Go 145. On 27 February 1942 Gosslau and Robert Lusser sketched out the design of an aircraft with the pulse-jet above the tail, the basis for the future V-1.\nLusser produced a preliminary design in April 1942, P35 Erfurt, which used gyroscopes. When submitted to the \"Luftwaffe\" on 5 June 1942, the specifications included a range of , a speed of , and capable of delivering a warhead. Project Fieseler Fi\u00a0103 was approved on 19 June, and assigned code name \"Kirschkern\" and cover name \"Flakzielger\u00e4t\" 76 (FZG-76). Flight tests were conducted at the \"Luftwaffe\"'s coastal test centre at Karlshagen, Peenem\u00fcnde-West.\nErhard Milch, State Secretary in the Reich Ministry of Aviation and Inspector General of the Air force, awarded Argus the contract for the engine, Fieseler the airframe, and Askania the guidance system. By 30 August Fieseler had completed the first fuselage, and the first flight of the Fi\u00a0103 V7 took place on 10 December 1942, when it was airdropped by a Fw 200. Then on Christmas Eve, the V-1 flew , for about a minute, after a ground launch. On 26 May 1943 Germany decided to put both the V-1 and the V-2 into production. In July 1943 the V-1 flew and impacted within a kilometre (1,100\u00a0yards) of its target.\nThe V-1 was named by \"Das Reich\" journalist Hans Schwarz Van Berkl in June 1944 with Hitler's approval.\nDescription.\nThe V-1 was designed under the codename (cherry stone) by Lusser and Gosslau, with a fuselage constructed mainly of welded sheet steel and wings built of plywood. The simple, Argus-built pulsejet engine pulsed 50 times per second, and the characteristic buzzing sound gave rise to the colloquial names \"buzz bomb\" or \"doodlebug\" (a common name for a wide variety of flying insects). It was known briefly in Germany (on Hitler's orders) as (May bug literally \"May\" + \"chafer\") and (crow).\nPower plant.\nThe Argus pulsejet's major components included the nacelle, fuel jets, flap valve grid, mixing chamber venturi, tail pipe, and spark plug. Compressed air rather than a fuel pump forced gasoline from the fuel tank through the fuel jets which consisted of three banks of three atomizers. These nine atomizing nozzles were in front of the air inlet valve system where it mixed with air before entering the chamber. A throttle valve, connected to altitude and ram pressure instruments, controlled fuel flow. Schmidt's spring-controlled flap valve system provided an efficient straight path for incoming air. The flaps momentarily closed after each explosion, the resultant gas compressed in the venturi chamber, and its tapered portion accelerated the exhaust gases creating thrust. The operation proceeded at a rate of 42 cycles per second.\nBeginning in January 1941, the V-1's pulsejet engine was also tested on a variety of craft, including automobiles and an experimental attack boat known as the Tornado, in which a boat loaded with a warhead was steered towards a target ship either by remote control or by a pilot who would leap out of the back at the last moment. The Tornado was assembled from surplus seaplane hulls connected in catamaran fashion. Ultimately insufficient Argus 014 pulse-jets were available as all production was allocated to the V-1 missile program. The engine made its first flight aboard a Gotha Go 145 on 30 April 1941.\nGuidance system.\nThe V-1 guidance system used a simple autopilot developed by in Berlin to regulate altitude and airspeed. A pair of gyroscopes controlled yaw and pitch, while azimuth was maintained by a magnetic compass. Altitude was maintained by a barometric device. Two spherical tanks contained compressed air at , that drove the gyros, operated the pneumatic servomotors controlling the rudder and elevator, and pressurized the fuel system.\nThe magnetic compass was located near the front of the V-1, within a wooden sphere. Shortly before launch, the V-1 was suspended inside the Compass Swinging Building (Richthaus). There the compass was corrected for magnetic variance and magnetic deviation. The RLM at first planned to use a radio control system with the V-1 for precision attacks, but the government decided instead to use the missile against London. Some flying bombs were equipped with a basic radio transmitter operating in the range of 340\u2013450\u00a0kHz. Once over the channel, the radio would be switched on by the vane counter, and a aerial deployed. A coded Morse signal, unique to each V-1 site, transmitted the route, and impact zone calculated once the radio stopped transmitting.\nAn odometer driven by a vane anemometer on the nose determined when the target area had been reached, accurate enough for area bombing. Before launch, it was set to count backwards from a value that would reach zero upon arrival at the target in the prevailing wind conditions. As the missile flew, the airflow turned the propeller, and every 30 rotations of the propeller counted down one number on the odometer. This odometer triggered the arming of the warhead after about . When the count reached zero, two detonating bolts were fired. Two spoilers on the elevator were released, the linkage between the elevator and servo was jammed, and a guillotine device cut off the control hoses to the rudder servo, setting the rudder in neutral. These actions put the V-1 into a steep dive. While this was originally intended to be a power dive, in practice the dive caused the fuel flow to cease, which stopped the engine. The sudden silence after the buzzing alerted people under the flight path to the impending impact.\nInitially, V-1s landed within a circle in diameter, but by the end of the war, accuracy had been improved to about , which was comparable to the V-2 rocket.\nWarhead.\nThe warhead consisted of of Amatol, 52A+ high-grade, blast-effective explosive with three fuses. An electrical fuse could be triggered by nose or belly impact. Another fuse was a slow-acting mechanical fuse allowing deeper penetration into the ground, regardless of the altitude. The third fuse was a delayed action fuse, set to go off two hours after launch.\nThe purpose of the third fuse was to avoid the risk of this secret weapon being examined by the British. Its time delay was too short to be a useful booby trap but was instead meant to destroy the weapon if a soft landing had not triggered the impact fuses. These fusing systems were very reliable, and almost no dud V-1s were recovered.\nWalter catapult.\nGround-launched V-1s were propelled up an inclined launch ramp by an apparatus known as \"\" (\"steam generator\"), in which steam was generated when hydrogen peroxide (\"T-Stoff\") was mixed with sodium permanganate (\"Z-Stoff\").\nDesigned by Hellmuth Walter KG, the \"WR 2.3\" \"Schlitzrohrschleuder\" consisted of a small gas generator trailer, where the T-Stoff and Z-Stoff combined, generating high-pressure steam that was fed into a tube within the launch rail box. A piston in the tube, connected underneath the missile, was propelled forward by the steam. It is a common misconception that the steam launch was to allow the engine to start running but the real reason was that the Argus had insufficient power to propel the V1 to a speed above its extremely high stall speed. The launch rail was long, consisting of eight modular sections, each long, and a muzzle brake. Production of the Walter catapult began in January 1944.\nThe Walter catapult accelerated the V-1 to a launch speed of , well above the needed minimum operational speed of . The V-1 reached the British coast at , but continued to accelerate to by the time it reached London, as its of fuel burned off.\nOn 18 June 1943 Hermann G\u00f6ring decided on launching the V-1, using the Walter catapult, in large launch bunkers, called \"Wasserwerk\" (the German word for \"water works\"), and lighter installations, called the \"Stellungsystem\". The Wasserwerk bunker measured long, wide, and high. Four were initially to be built: Wasserwerk Desvres, Wasserwerk St. Pol, Wasserwerk Valognes, and Wasserwerk Cherbourg. Stellungsystem-I was to be operated by Flak Regiment 155(W), with 4 launch battalions, each having 4 launchers, and located in the Pas-de-Calais region. Stellungsystem-II, with 32 sites, was to act as a reserve unit. Stellungsystem-I and II had nine batteries manned by February 1944. Stellungsystem-III, operated by FR 255(W), was to be organized in the spring of 1944, and located between Rouen and Caen. The Stellungsystem locations included distinctive catapult walls pointed towards London, several J-shaped stowage buildings referred to as \"ski\" buildings as on aerial reconnaissance photographs the buildings looked like a ski on its side, and a compass correction building which was constructed without ferrous metal. In the spring of 1944, Oberst Schmalschl\u00e4ger had developed a more simplified launching site, called \"Einsatzstellungen\" (meaning ca. \"deployed emplacement\"). Less conspicuous, 80 launch sites and 16 support sites were located from Calais to Normandy. Each site took only two weeks to construct, using 40 men, and the Walter catapult only took 7\u20138 days to erect, when the time was ready to make it operational.\nOnce near the launch ramp, the wing spar and wings were attached and the missile was slid off the loading trolley, \"Zubringerwagen\", onto the launch ramp. The ramp catapult was powered by the \"Dampferzeuger\" trolley. The pulse-jet engine was started by the \"Anlassger\u00e4t\", which provided compressed air for the engine intake, and initial electrical supply for the engine spark plug, and autopilot. The Bosch spark plug was only needed to start the engine, while residual flame ignited further mixtures of gasoline and air, and the engine would be at full power after 7 seconds. The catapult would then accelerate the bomb above its stall speed of , ensuring sufficient ram air.\nOperation Eisb\u00e4r.\nMass production of the FZG-76 did not start until the spring of 1944, and FR 155(W) was not equipped until late May 1944. Operation Eisb\u00e4r, the missile attacks on London, commenced on 12 June. However, the four launch battalions could only operate from the Pas-de-Calais area, amounting to only 72 launchers. They had been supplied with missiles, Walter catapults, fuel, and other associated equipment since D-Day. None of the nine missiles launched on the 12th reached England, while only four did so on the 13th. The next attempt to start the attack occurred on the night of 15/16 June, when 144 missiles reached England, of which 73 struck London, while 53 struck Portsmouth and Southampton.\nDamage was widespread and Eisenhower ordered attacks on the V-1 sites as a priority. Operation Cobra forced a retreat from the French launch sites in August, with the last battalion leaving on 29 August. Operation Donnerschlag began from Germany on 21 October 1944.\nOperation and effectiveness.\nThe first complete V-1 airframe was delivered on 30 August 1942, and after the first complete As.109-014 was delivered in September, the first glide test flight was on 28 October 1942 at Peenem\u00fcnde, from under a Focke-Wulf Fw 200. The first powered trial was on 10 December, launched from beneath an He 111.\nThe LXV \"Armeekorps z.b.V.\" (\"65th Army Corps for special deployment) formed during the last days of November 1943 in France commanded by \"General der Artillerie z.V.\" Erich Heinemann was responsible for the operational use of V-1.\nThe conventional launch sites could theoretically launch about 15 V-1s per day, but this rate was difficult to achieve on a consistent basis; the maximum rate achieved was 18. Overall, only about 25% of the V-1s hit their targets, the majority being lost due to a combination of defensive measures, mechanical unreliability, or guidance errors. At least six V-1s are known to have landed erroneously in Sweden. With the capture or destruction of the launch facilities used to attack England, the V-1s were employed in attacks against strategic points in Belgium, primarily the port of Antwerp.\nLaunches against Britain were met by a variety of countermeasures, including barrage balloons and aircraft such as the Hawker Tempest and newly introduced jet Gloster Meteor. These measures were so successful that by August 1944 about 80% of V-1s were being destroyed The Meteors suffered from frequent cannon failures, and accounted for only 13 V-1s destroyed. In all, about 1,000 V-1s were destroyed by aircraft.\nThe intended operational altitude was originally set at , but repeated failures of a barometric fuel-pressure regulator led to the operational height being halved in May 1944, bringing V-1s into range of the 40\u00a0mm Bofors light anti-aircraft guns commonly used by Allied AA units.\nThe trial versions of the V-1 were air-launched. Most operational V-1s were launched from static sites on land, but from July 1944 to January 1945, the launched approximately 1,176 from modified Heinkel He 111 H-22s of the 's \"Kampfgeschwader 3\" (3rd Bomber Wing, the so-called \"Blitz Wing\") flying over the North Sea. Apart from the obvious motive of permitting the bombardment campaign to continue after static ground sites on the French coast were lost, air launching gave the the opportunity to outflank the increasingly effective ground and air defences put up by the British against the missile. To minimise the associated risks (primarily radar detection), the aircrews developed a tactic called \"lo-hi-lo\": the He 111s would, upon leaving their airbases and crossing the coast, descend to an exceptionally low altitude. When the launch point was neared, the bombers would swiftly ascend, fire their V-1s, and then rapidly descend again to the previous \"wave-top\" level for the return flight. Research after the war estimated a 40% failure rate of air-launched V-1s, and the He 111s used in this role were vulnerable to night-fighter attack, as the launch lit up the area around the aircraft for several seconds. The combat potential of air-launched V-1s dwindled during 1944 at about the same rate as that of the ground-launched missiles, as the British gradually took the measure of the weapon and developed increasingly effective defence tactics.\nExperimental, piloted, and long-range variants.\nPiloted variant.\nLate in the war, several air-launched piloted V-1s, known as , were built, but these were never used in combat. Hanna Reitsch made some flights in the modified V-1 Fieseler when she was asked to find out why test pilots were unable to land it and had died as a result. She discovered, after simulated landing attempts at high altitude, where there was air space to recover, that the craft had an extremely high stall speed, and the previous pilots with little high-speed experience had attempted their approaches much too slowly. Her recommendation of much higher landing speeds was then introduced in training new volunteer pilots. It was for this that she was awarded the Iron Cross First Class The s were air-launched rather than fired from a catapult ramp.\nIt had the appearance of a standard V1 with the addition of cockpit, ailerons, landing skids and flight instruments. The pilot would have been airlifted by either Heinkel He 111 or a Focke-Wulf Fw 200. After release, the pilot would start the pulse jet engine, select a target, set the controls then bail out. The chance of survival were considered very small, yet many pilots volunteered. Possibly 175 of these piloted V1s were converted at Darmesbury after initial development by Deutsche Forschungsanstalt f\u00fcr Segelflug (DFS/German Research Institute for Sailplane Flight) at Ainring.\nWhen Hitler banned the use of the piloted V1, most converted models were scrapped. However, a few were captured by the Allied Technical Air Intelligence crews in Germany. At least one was sent to England, and two, possibly three, were sent to the US for inspection.\nThree different versions of the piloted FZG-76 were produced. The Reichenburg I was a one or two-seat unpowered glider intended for use as a training glider for pilot training. Reichenburg II was a single-seat FZG-76 fitted with a pulse jet power plant. A skid was fitted for dead stick landing to gain valuable flying experience. Reichenburg III was to be the operational piloted version of the V1, fitted with the amatol warhead in the nose. The front windscreen had thick bulletproof glass for pilot protection. The V1 pilot's kit consisted of a parachute, helmet and life vest. A small case contained two small flares in a waterproof container.\nAir launch by Ar 234.\nThere were plans, not put into practice, to use the Arado Ar 234 jet bomber to launch V-1s either by towing them aloft or by launching them from a \"piggy back\" position (in the manner of the , but in reverse) atop the aircraft. In the latter configuration, a pilot-controlled, hydraulically operated dorsal trapeze mechanism would elevate the missile on the trapeze's launch cradle about clear of the 234's upper fuselage. This was necessary to avoid damaging the mother craft's fuselage and tail surfaces when the pulsejet ignited, as well as to ensure a \"clean\" airflow for the Argus motor's intake. A somewhat less ambitious project undertaken was the adaptation of the missile as a \"flying fuel tank\" for the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter, which was initially test-towed behind an He 177A Greif bomber. The pulsejet, internal systems and warhead of the missile were removed, leaving only the wings and basic fuselage, now containing a single large fuel tank. A small cylindrical module, similar in shape to a finless dart, was placed atop the vertical stabiliser at the rear of the tank, acting as a centre of gravity balance and attachment point for a variety of equipment sets. A rigid towbar with a pitch pivot at the forward end connected the flying tank to the Me 262. The operational procedure for this unusual configuration saw the tank resting on a wheeled trolley for take-off. The trolley was dropped once the combination was airborne, and explosive bolts separated the towbar from the fighter upon exhaustion of the tank's fuel supply. A number of test flights were conducted in 1944 with this set-up, but inflight \"porpoising\" of the tank, with the instability transferred to the fighter, meant that the system was too unreliable to be used. An identical utilisation of the V-1 flying tank for the Ar 234 bomber was also investigated, with the same conclusions reached. Some of the \"flying fuel tanks\" used in trials utilised a cumbersome fixed and spatted undercarriage arrangement, which (along with being pointless) merely increased the drag and stability problems already inherent in the design.\nF-1 version.\nOne variant of the basic Fi\u00a0103 design did see operational use. The progressive loss of French launch sites as 1944 proceeded and the area of territory under German control shrank meant that soon the V-1 would lack the range to hit targets in England. Air launching was one alternative utilised, but the most obvious solution was to extend the missile's range. Thus, the F-1 version developed. The weapon's fuel tank was increased in size, with a corresponding reduction in the capacity of the warhead. Additionally, the nose cones and wings of the F-1 models were made of wood, affording a considerable weight saving. With these modifications, the V-1 could be fired at London and nearby urban centres from prospective ground sites in the Netherlands. Frantic efforts were made to construct a sufficient number of F-1s in order to allow a large-scale bombardment campaign to coincide with the Ardennes Offensive, but numerous factors (bombing of the factories producing the missiles, shortages of steel and rail transport, the chaotic tactical situation Germany was facing at this point in the war, etc.) delayed the delivery of these long-range V-1s until February/March 1945. Beginning on 2 March 1945, slightly more than three weeks before the V-1 campaign finally ended, several hundred F-1s were launched at Britain from Dutch sites under Operation \"Zeppelin\". Frustrated by increasing Allied dominance in the air, Germany also employed V-1s to attack the RAF's forward airfields, such as Volkel, in the Netherlands.\nFZG-76 version.\nThere was also a turbojet-propelled upgraded variant proposed, meant to use the Porsche 109-005 low-cost turbojet engine with about thrust.\nSuccess of operations.\nAlmost 30,000 V-1s were made; by March 1944 they were each produced in 350 hours (including 120 for the autopilot), at a cost of just 4% of a V-2, which delivered a comparable payload. Approximately 10,000 were fired at England; 2,419 reached London, killing about 6,184 people and injuring 17,981. The greatest density of hits was received by Croydon, on the south-east fringe of London. Antwerp, Belgium was hit by 2,448 V-1s from October 1944 to March 1945.\nIntelligence reports.\nThe codename \"\u00a076\"\u2014\"Flak target apparatus\" helped to hide the nature of the device, and some time passed before references to FZG\u00a076 were linked to the V-83 pilotless aircraft (an experimental V-1) that had crashed on Bornholm in the Baltic and to reports from agents of a flying bomb capable of being used against London. Importantly, the Luxembourgish Resistance, as well as the Polish Home Army intelligence contributed information on V-1 construction and a place of development (Peenem\u00fcnde). Initially, British experts were sceptical of the V-1 because they had considered only solid-fuel rockets, which could not attain the stated range of . However, they later considered other types of engine, and by the time German scientists had achieved the necessary accuracy to deploy the V-1 as a weapon, British intelligence had a very accurate assessment of it.\nCountermeasures in England.\nAnti-aircraft guns.\nThe British defence against German long-range weapons was known by the codename Operation Crossbow with Operation Diver covering countermeasures to the V-1. Anti-aircraft guns of the Royal Artillery and RAF Regiment redeployed in several movements: first in mid-June 1944 from positions on the North Downs to the south coast of England, then a cordon closing the Thames Estuary to attacks from the east. In September 1944 a new linear defence line was formed on the coast of East Anglia, and finally in December there was a further layout along the Lincolnshire\u2013Yorkshire coast. The deployments were prompted by changes to the approach tracks of the V-1 as launch sites were overrun by the Allies' advance.\nOn the first night of sustained bombardment, the anti-aircraft crews around Croydon were jubilant\u2014suddenly they were downing unprecedented numbers of German bombers; most of their targets burst into flames and fell when their engines cut out. There was great disappointment when the truth was announced. Anti-aircraft gunners soon found that such small fast-moving targets were, in fact, very difficult to hit. The cruising altitude of the V-1, between , meant that anti-aircraft guns could not traverse fast enough to hit the missile.\nThe standard British QF 3.7-inch mobile gun could not cope with the altitude and speed of the V-1. However, the static version of the QF 3.7-inch, designed for a permanent concrete platform, had a faster traverse. The cost and delay of installing new permanent platforms for the guns was found to be unnecessary as a temporary platform devised by the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers and made from railway sleepers and rails was found to be adequate for the static guns, making them considerably easier to re-deploy as the V-1 threat changed.\nThe development of the proximity fuze and of centimetric, 3\u00a0gigahertz frequency gun-laying radars based on the cavity magnetron helped to counter the V-1's high speed and small size. In 1944, Bell Labs started delivery of an anti-aircraft predictor fire-control system based on an analogue computer, just in time for the Allied invasion of Europe.\nThese electronic aids arrived in quantity from June 1944, just as the guns reached their firing positions on the coast. Seventeen per cent of all flying bombs entering the coastal \"gun belt\" were destroyed by guns in their first week on the coast. This rose to 60 per cent by 23 August and 74 per cent in the last week of the month, when on one day 82 per cent were shot down. The rate improved from thousands of shells for every one V-1 destroyed to 100 for each. This mostly ended the V-1 threat. As General Frederick Pile put it in an April 5, 1946 article in the London \"Times\": \"It was the proximity fuse which made possible the 100 per cent successes that A.A. Command was obtaining regularly in the early months of last year...American scientists...gave us the final answer to the flying bomb.\"\nBarrage balloons.\nEventually about 2,000 barrage balloons were deployed, in the hope that V-1s would be destroyed when they struck the balloons' tethering cables. The leading edges of the V-1's wings were fitted with Kuto cable cutters, and fewer than 300 V-1s are known to have been brought down by barrage balloons.\nInterceptors.\nThe Defence Committee expressed some doubt as to the ability of the Royal Observer Corps to adequately deal with the new threat, but the ROC's Commandant Air Commodore Finlay Crerar assured the committee that the ROC could again rise to the occasion and prove its alertness and flexibility. He oversaw plans for handling the new threat, codenamed by the RAF and ROC as \"Operation Totter\", which included a proposal whereby ROC posts would fire Snowflake illuminating rocket flares in order to alert RAF fighters to the presence of a V-1.\nObservers at the coast post of Dymchurch identified the very first of these weapons and within seconds of their report the anti-aircraft defences were in action. This new weapon gave the ROC much additional work both at posts and operations rooms. Eventually RAF controllers actually took their radio equipment to the two closest ROC operations rooms at Horsham and Maidstone, and vectored fighters direct from the ROC's plotting tables. The critics who had said that the Corps would be unable to handle the fast-flying jet aircraft were answered when these aircraft on their first operation were actually controlled entirely by using ROC information both on the coast and at inland.\nThe average speed of V-1s was and their average altitude was to . Fighter aircraft required excellent low altitude performance to intercept them and enough firepower to ensure that they were destroyed in the air (ideally, also from a sufficient distance, to avoid being damaged by the strong blast) rather than the V-1 crashing to earth and detonating. Most aircraft were too slow to catch a V-1 unless they had a height advantage, allowing them to gain speed by diving on their target.\nWhen V-1 attacks began in mid-June 1944, the only aircraft with the low-altitude speed to be effective against it was the Hawker Tempest. Fewer than 30 Tempests were available. They were assigned to No. 150 Wing RAF. Early attempts to intercept and destroy V-1s often failed, but improved techniques soon emerged. These included using the airflow over an interceptor's wing to raise one wing of the V-1, by sliding the wingtip to within of the lower surface of the V-1's wing. If properly executed, this manoeuvre would tip the V-1's wing up, over-riding the gyro and sending the V-1 into an out-of-control dive. At least sixteen V-1s were destroyed this way (the first by a P-51 piloted by Major R. E. Turner of 356th Fighter Squadron on 18 June).\nThe Tempest fleet was built up to over 100 aircraft by September, and during the short summer nights the Tempests shared defensive duty with twin-engined de Havilland Mosquitos. Specially modified Republic P-47M Thunderbolts were also pressed into service against the V-1s; they had boosted engines () and had half their .50 calibre (12.7\u00a0mm) machine guns and half their fuel tanks, all external fittings and all their armour plate removed to reduce weight. In addition, North American P-51 Mustangs and Griffon-engined Supermarine Spitfire Mk XIVs were tuned to make them fast enough. At night airborne radar was not needed, as the V-1 engine could be heard from away or more and the exhaust plume was visible from a long distance. Wing Commander Roland Beamont had the 20\u00a0mm cannon on his Tempest adjusted to converge at ahead. This was so successful that all other aircraft in 150 Wing were thus modified.\nThe anti-V-1 sorties by fighters were known as \"Diver patrols\" (after \"Diver\", the codename used by the Royal Observer Corps for V-1 sightings). Attacking a V-1 was dangerous: machine guns had little effect on the V-1's sheet steel structure, and if a cannon shell detonated the warhead, the explosion could destroy the attacker.\nIn daylight, V-1 chases were chaotic and often unsuccessful until a special defence zone was declared between London and the coast, in which only the fastest fighters were permitted. The first interception of a V-1 was by F/L J. G. Musgrave with a No. 605 Squadron RAF Mosquito night fighter on the night of 14/15 June 1944. As daylight grew stronger after the night attack, a Spitfire was seen to follow closely behind a V-1 over Chislehurst and Lewisham. Between June and 5 September 1944, a handful of 150 Wing Tempests shot down 638 flying bombs, with No. 3 Squadron RAF alone claiming 305. One Tempest pilot, Squadron Leader Joseph Berry (501 Squadron), shot down 59 V-1s, the Belgian ace Squadron Leader Remy Van Lierde (164 Squadron) destroyed 44 (with a further nine shared), W/C Roland Beamont destroyed 31, and F/Lt Arthur Umbers (No. 3 squadron) destroyed 28. A Dutch pilot in 322 Squadron, Jan Leendert Plesman, son of KLM president Albert Plesman, managed to destroy 12 in 1944, flying a Spitfire.\nThe next most successful interceptors were the Mosquito (623 victories), Spitfire XIV (303), and Mustang (232). All other types combined added 158. Even though it was not fully operational, the jet-powered Gloster Meteor was rushed into service with No. 616 Squadron RAF to fight the V-1s. It had ample speed but its cannons were prone to jamming, and it shot down only 13 V-1s.\nIn late 1944 a radar-equipped Vickers Wellington bomber was modified for use by the RAF's Fighter Interception Unit as an airborne early warning and control aircraft. Flying at an altitude of over the North Sea at night, it directed Mosquito and Beaufighters charged with intercepting He 111s from Dutch airbases that sought to launch V-1s from the air.\nDisposal.\nThe first bomb disposal officer to defuse an unexploded V-1 was John Pilkington Hudson in 1944. \nIn 2024 a remotely operated vehicle was sent into the Bay of L\u00fcbeck, off the northern coast of Germany, where large quantities of munitions were dumped during demilitarization after World War II. It recorded images of nine different V-1 missiles on the seabed \u201cin various stages of degradation,\u201d according to the resulting study, published in 2025. The study reported that thriving epifaunal communities were growing on the dumped munitions.\nDeception.\nTo adjust and correct settings in the V-1 guidance system, the Germans needed to know where the V-1s were impacting. Therefore, German intelligence was requested to obtain this impact data from their agents in Britain. However, all German agents in Britain had been turned and were acting as double agents under British control.\nOn 16 June 1944 British double agent \"Garbo\" (Juan Pujol) was requested by his German controllers to give information on the sites and times of V-1 impacts, with similar requests made to the other German agents in Britain, \"Brutus\" (Roman Czerniawski) and \"Tate\" (Wulf Schmidt). If the Germans had been supplied these data, they would have been able to adjust their aim and correct any shortfall. However, the double agents would have been endangered because there was no plausible reason why they could not supply accurate data; the impacts would be common knowledge amongst Londoners and very likely reported in the press, which the Germans had ready access to through the neutral nations. As John Cecil Masterman, chairman of the Twenty Committee, commented, \"If, for example, St Paul's Cathedral were hit, it was useless and harmful to report that the bomb had descended upon a cinema in Islington, since the truth would inevitably get through to Germany ...\"\nWhile the British decided how to react, Pujol played for time. On 18 June it was decided that the double agents would report the damage caused by V-1s fairly accurately and minimise the effect they had on civilian morale. It was also decided that Pujol should avoid giving the times of impacts and should mostly report on those which occurred in the northwest of London, to give the impression to the Germans that they were overshooting the target area.\nWhile Pujol downplayed the extent of V-1 damage, trouble came from \"Ostro\", an agent in Lisbon who pretended to have agents reporting from London. He told the Germans that London had been devastated and had been mostly evacuated as a result of enormous casualties. The Germans could not perform aerial reconnaissance of London and believed his damage reports in preference to Pujol's. They thought that the Allies would make every effort to destroy the V-1 launch sites in France. They also accepted \"Ostro\"'s impact reports. Due to Ultra, however, the Allies read his messages and adjusted for them.\nA certain number of the V-1s fired had been fitted with radio transmitters, which had clearly demonstrated a tendency for the V-1 to fall short. Max Wachtel, commander of Flak Regiment 155 (W), which was responsible for the V-1 offensive, compared the data gathered by the transmitters with the reports obtained through the double agents. He concluded, when faced with the discrepancy between the two sets of data, that there must be a fault with the radio transmitters, as he had been assured that the agents were completely reliable. It was later calculated that if Wachtel had disregarded the agents' reports and relied on the radio data, he would have made the correct adjustments to the V-1's guidance, and casualties might have increased by 50 per cent or more.\nThe policy of diverting V-1 impacts away from central London was initially controversial. The War Cabinet refused to authorise a measure that would increase casualties in any area, even if it reduced casualties elsewhere by greater amounts. It was thought that Churchill would reverse this decision later (he was then away at a conference); but the delay in starting the reports to Germans might be fatal to the deception. So Sir Findlater Stewart of Home Defence Executive took responsibility for starting the deception programme immediately, and his action was approved by Churchill when he returned.\nEffect.\nThe use of land-launched V-1s against Great Britain ended on 1 September after which the campaign continued using air-launched missiles. In total, 10,492 V-1s were launched against Britain, with a nominal aiming point of Tower Bridge. 7,500 incoming missiles were observed by the British defenders of which 1,847 were downed by fighters, 1,878 were destroyed by anti aircraft fire and 232 struck barrage balloons. 2,419 V-1s reached the London civil defence region, inflicting 6,184 fatalities and 17,981 serious injuries. On the 28 March the last V-1 reached London.\nAssessment.\nUnlike the V-2, the V-1 was a cost-effective weapon for the Germans as it forced the Allies to spend heavily on defensive measures and divert bombers from other targets. More than 25% of Combined Bomber Offensive's bombs in July and August 1944 were used against V-weapon sites, often ineffectively. In early December 1944, American General Clayton Bissell wrote a paper that strongly demonstrated the cost-effectiveness for the Germans of the V-1 when compared with conventional bombers. The following is a table he produced:\nThe statistics of this report, however, have been the subject of some dispute. The V-1 missiles launched from bombers were often prone to exploding prematurely, occasionally resulting in the loss of the aircraft to which they were attached. The Luftwaffe lost 77 aircraft in 1,200 of these sorties.\nWright Field technical personnel reverse-engineered the V-1 from the remains of one that had failed to detonate in Britain and the Republic-Ford JB-2 was being delivered by early 1945. After the end of the war in Europe it was in consideration for use against Japan. General Hap Arnold of the United States Army Air Forces was concerned that this weapon would make his long-range bombers less important, since they were much cheaper and could be built of steel and wood, in 2,000 man-hours and approximate cost of US$600 (in 1943).\nBelgian attacks.\nThe attacks on Antwerp and Brussels began in October 1944, with the last V-1 launched against Antwerp on 30 March 1945. The shorter range improved the accuracy of the V-1 which was deviation per of flight, the flight level was also reduced to around . The Port of Antwerp was one of the biggest in the world and was the main entrepot for Alled supplies further progression of Allied armies into Germany.\nCountermeasures at Antwerp.\nBoth British (80th Anti-Aircraft Brigade) and US Army anti-aircraft batteries (30th AAA Group) were sent to Antwerp together with a searchlight regiment. The zone of command under the 21st Army Group was called \"Antwerp-X\" and given the object of protecting an area with a radius of covering the city and dock area. Initially attacks came from the south-east, accordingly a screen of observers and searchlights was deployed along the attack azimuth, behind which were three rows of batteries with additional searchlights.\nUS units deployed SCR-584 radar units controlling four 90 mm guns per battery using an M9 director to electrically control the battery guns. British gun batteries were each equipped with eight QF 3.7-inch AA gun (94 mm) and two radar units, preferably the US SCR-584 with M9 director as it was more accurate than the British system. The radar was effective from , the M9 director predicted the target location position based on course, height and speed which combined with the gun, shell and fuse characteristics predicted an impact position, adjusted each gun and fired the shell.\nIn November attacks began from the north-east and additional batteries were deployed along the new azimuths, including the 184th AAA Battalion (United States) brought from Paris. Additional radar units and observers were deployed up to from Antwerp to give early warning of V-1 bombs approaching. The introduction of the VT fuse in January 1945 improved the effectiveness of the guns and reduced ammunition consumption. From October 1944 to March 1945, 4,883 V-1s were detected. Of these, only 4.5 percent fell into the designated protected area.\nJapanese developments.\nIn 1943 an Argus pulsejet engine was sent to Japan by German submarine. The Aeronautical Institute of Tokyo Imperial University and the Kawanishi Aircraft Company conducted a joint study of the feasibility of mounting a similar engine on a piloted plane. The resulting design was named (\"plum blossom\") but bore no more than a superficial resemblance to the Fi 103. never left the design stage, but technical drawings and notes suggest that, an air-launched version with the engine under the fuselage, a ground-launched version that could take off without a ramp and a submarine launched version with the engine moved forwards were considered.\nPost-war.\nFrance.\nAfter reverse-engineering captured V-1s in 1946, the French began producing copies for use as target drones, starting in 1951. These were called the ARSAERO CT 10 and were smaller than the V-1. The CT 10 could be ground-launched using solid rocket boosters or air-launched from a LeO 45 bomber. More than 400 were produced, some of which were exported to the UK, Sweden, and Italy.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union captured V-1s when they overran the Blizna test range in Poland, as well as from the Mittelwerk. The 10Kh was their copy of the V-1, later called Izdeliye 10. Initial tests began in March 1945 at a test range in Tashkent, with further launches from ground sites and from aircraft of improved versions continuing into the late 1940s. The inaccuracy of the guidance system when compared with new methods such as beam-riding and TV guidance saw development end in the early 1950s.\nThe Soviets also worked on a piloted attack aircraft based on the Argus pulsejet engine of the V-1, which began as a German project, the Junkers EF 126 , in the latter stages of the war. The Soviet development of the ended in 1946 after a crash that killed the test pilot.\nUnited States.\nThe United States reverse-engineered the V-1 in 1944 from salvaged parts recovered in England during June. By 8 September, the first of thirteen complete prototype Republic-Ford JB-2, was assembled at Republic Aviation. The United States JB-2 was different from the German V-1 in only the smallest of dimensions, with only the forward pulsejet support pylon visibly differing in shape from the original German pilotless ordnance design. The wingspan was only wider and the length was extended less than . The difference gave the JB-2 of wing area versus for the V-1.\nA navalised version, designated KGW-1, was developed to be launched from LSTs as well as escort carriers (CVEs) and long-range 4-engine reconnaissance aircraft. Waterproof carriers for the KGW-1 were developed for launches of the missile from surfaced submarines. Both the USAAF JB-2 and Navy KGW-1 were put into production and were planned to be used in the Allied invasion of Japan (Operation Downfall). However, the surrender of Japan obviated the need for its use. After the end of the war, the JB-2/KGW-1 played a significant role in the development of more advanced surface-to-surface tactical missile systems such as the MGM-1 Matador and SSM-N-8 Regulus.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32823", "revid": "38733767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32823", "title": "Very-large-scale integration", "text": "Creating an integrated circuit by combining many transistors into a single chip\nVery-large-scale integration (VLSI) is the process of creating an integrated circuit (IC) by combining millions or billions of MOS transistors onto a single chip. VLSI began in the 1970s when MOS integrated circuit (metal oxide semiconductor) chips were developed and then widely adopted, enabling complex semiconductor and telecommunications technologies. Microprocessors and memory chips are VLSI devices.\nBefore the introduction of VLSI technology, most ICs had a limited set of functions they could perform. An electronic circuit might consist of a CPU, ROM, RAM and other glue logic. VLSI enables IC designers to add all of these into one chip.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe history of the transistor dates to the 1920s when several inventors attempted devices that were intended to control current in solid-state diodes and convert them into triodes. Success came after World War II, when the use of silicon and germanium crystals as radar detectors led to improvements in fabrication and theory. Scientists who had worked on radar returned to solid-state device development. With the invention of the first transistor at Bell Labs in 1947, the field of electronics shifted from vacuum tubes to solid-state devices.\nWith the small transistor at their hands, electrical engineers of the 1950s saw the possibilities of constructing far more advanced circuits. However, as the complexity of circuits grew, problems arose. One problem was the size of the circuit. A complex circuit like a computer was dependent on speed. If the components were large, the wires interconnecting them must be long. The electric signals took time to go through the circuit, thus slowing the computer.\nThe invention of the integrated circuit by Jack Kilby and Robert Noyce solved this problem by making all the components and the chip out of the same block (monolith) of semiconductor material. The circuits could be made smaller, and the manufacturing process could be automated. This led to the idea of integrating all components on a single-crystal silicon wafer, which led to small-scale integration (SSI) in the early 1960s, and then medium-scale integration (MSI) in the late 1960s.\nVLSI.\nGeneral Micro-electronics introduced the first commercial MOS integrated circuit in 1964. In the early 1970s, MOS integrated circuit technology allowed the integration of more than 10,000 transistors in a single chip. This paved the way for VLSI in the 1970s and 1980s, with tens of thousands of MOS transistors on a single chip (later hundreds of thousands, then millions, and now billions).\nThe first semiconductor chips held two transistors each. Subsequent advances added more transistors, and as a consequence, more individual functions or systems were integrated over time. The first integrated circuits held only a few devices, perhaps as many as ten diodes, transistors, resistors and capacitors, making it possible to fabricate one or more logic gates on a single device. Now known retrospectively as \"small-scale integration\" (SSI), improvements in technique led to devices with hundreds of logic gates, known as \"medium-scale integration\" (MSI). Further improvements led to \"large-scale integration\" (LSI), i.e. systems with at least a thousand logic gates. Current technology has moved far past this mark and today's microprocessors have many millions of gates and billions of individual transistors.\nAt one time, there was an effort to name and calibrate various levels of large-scale integration above VLSI. Terms like \"ultra-large-scale integration\" (ULSI) were used. But the huge number of gates and transistors available on common devices has rendered such fine distinctions moot. Terms suggesting greater than VLSI levels of integration are no longer in widespread use.\nIn 2008, billion-transistor processors became commercially available. This became more commonplace as semiconductor fabrication advanced from the then-current generation of 65 nanometer processors. Current designs, unlike the earliest devices, use extensive electronic design automation and automated logic synthesis to lay out the transistors, enabling higher levels of complexity in the resulting logic functionality. Certain high-performance logic blocks, like the SRAM (static random-access memory) cell, are still designed by hand to ensure the highest efficiency.\nStructured design.\nStructured VLSI design is a modular methodology originated by Carver Mead and Lynn Conway for saving microchip area by minimizing the interconnect fabric area. This is obtained by repetitive arrangement of rectangular macro blocks which can be interconnected using wiring by abutment. An example is partitioning the layout of an adder into a row of equal bit slices cells. In complex designs this structuring may be achieved by hierarchical nesting.\nStructured VLSI design had been popular in the early 1980s, but lost its popularity later because of the advent of placement and routing tools wasting a lot of area by routing, which is tolerated because of the progress of Moore's law. When introducing the hardware description language KARL in the mid-1970s, Reiner Hartenstein coined the term \"structured VLSI design\" (originally as \"structured LSI design\"), echoing Edsger Dijkstra's structured programming approach by procedure nesting to avoid chaotic \"spaghetti-structured\" programs.\nDifficulties.\nAs microprocessors become more complex due to technology scaling (see Moore's law), microprocessor designers have encountered several challenges which force them to think beyond the design plane, and look ahead to post-silicon:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32827", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32827", "title": "Vergeltungswaffe 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "32830", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32830", "title": "Voluntary Service Overseas", "text": "International development charity\nVSO is a not-for-profit international development organization charity with a vision for \"a fair world for everyone\" and a mission to \"create lasting change through volunteering\". VSO delivers development impact through a blended volunteer model consisting of international, national, and community volunteers working together to develop the systems and conditions for positive social change.\nIn 2022\u201323, VSO worked in 35 countries in Africa and Asia.\nVSO currently works in the following core programme areas: \nAnd through three core approaches that are relevant to all the areas:\nIn addition, VSO has a youth focus in which young people are both the beneficiaries of social change outcomes as well as the primary actors in creating the change.\nStructure and governance.\nVSO (formerly known as Voluntary Service Overseas) is a company limited by guarantee. VSO operates internationally largely through branch offices. Exceptions to this are:\nVSO's governing body is the International Board, currently comprising seven trustees. The day-to-day management of VSO is carried out by the executive board, which has operational oversight of VSO's global work. Each Executive Board member is responsible for a function of VSO: People, Programmes, Business Development, and Finance.\nHistory.\nVSO was founded in 1958 by Alec and Mora Dickson through a bishop's letter to the London paper, \"The Sunday Times\", as an educational experience overseas for school-leavers, initially only male, before starting university. Volunteers offered unskilled help in return for basic accommodation and pocket money. In 1962, the practice changed to using university graduate volunteers.\nBy 1980, the unskilled volunteers had been completely phased out and the length of service had been extended to two years. Active volunteer numbers initially dropped to about 750, but by 2003 had returned to about 1,400. Since December 2004, applications to volunteer have been accepted from those between ages 20 and 75, who also must have at least two years' experience in their field.\nIn the early 1990s, in order to meet growing demand for highly specialised and skilled volunteers from its partners in developing countries, VSO established partner agencies in Canada, the Netherlands, Kenya/Uganda (VSO Jitolee), and the Philippines (VSO Bahaginan). In 2004, VSO launched a partnership called iVolunteer Overseas (iVO) in India with iVolunteer, an existing volunteering program of MITRA, an Indian NGO. VSO's structure evolved to become an international federation which now includes Ireland, China and India as well as the above named countries. International volunteers are recruited through all of these bases, and they can be placed in any one of VSO's programmes (e.g. an Irish volunteer working in Nepal, or a Ugandan volunteer working in Tajikistan).\nFrom 2011, VSO led a consortium to deliver the UK government's International Citizen Service programme that provides international volunteer placements for 18- to 25-year-olds. The programme, funded by the Department for International Development (DFID), now includes Raleigh International and Restless Development. In 2016/17, 3,090 young people volunteered through the International Citizen Service programme.\nIn 2017, VSO was awarded a grant of \u00a350 million from the UK's Department of International Development (DFID) for a program called \"Volunteering for Development\". The three-year initiative aims to improve quality and access to health and education services as well as livelihood opportunities for the most poor and vulnerable, and targets more than 2 million of the poorest and most marginalised people across the globe. The grant supports VSO's vision to enhance effectiveness across a number of vital areas - including in VSO's \"core approaches\" of social inclusion and gender, social accountability, and resilience. During its first year the project successfully placed 606 international volunteers and 920 national volunteers across VSO's four areas of focus.\nToday.\nHighlights of VSO today include:\nPartnerships.\nVSO works with local partners in the communities they work with, placing volunteers with these partners to help increase their impact and effectiveness. VSO also has corporate partnerships and sponsors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32831", "revid": "169140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32831", "title": "Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov", "text": ""}
{"id": "32834", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32834", "title": "Varicose veins", "text": "Medical condition in which superficial veins become large and twisted\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nVaricose veins, also known as varicoses, are a medical condition in which superficial veins become enlarged and twisted. Although usually just a cosmetic ailment, in some cases they cause fatigue, pain, itching, and nighttime leg cramps. These veins typically develop in the legs, just under the skin. Their complications can include bleeding, skin ulcers, and superficial thrombophlebitis. Varices in the scrotum are known as varicocele, while those around the anus are known as hemorrhoids. The physical, social, and psychological effects of varicose veins can lower their bearers' quality of life.\nVaricose veins have no specific cause. Risk factors include obesity, lack of exercise, leg trauma, and family history of the condition. They also develop more commonly during pregnancy. Occasionally they result from chronic venous insufficiency. Underlying causes include weak or damaged valves in the veins. They are typically diagnosed by examination, including observation by ultrasound.\nBy contrast, spider veins affect the capillaries and are smaller.\nTreatment may involve lifestyle changes or medical procedures with the goal of improving symptoms and appearance. Lifestyle changes may include wearing compression stockings, exercising, elevating the legs, and weight loss. Possible medical procedures include sclerotherapy, laser surgery, and vein stripping. However, recurrence is common following treatment.\nVaricose veins are very common, affecting about 30% of people at some point in their lives. They become more common with age. Women develop varicose veins about twice as often as men. Varicose veins have been described throughout history and have been treated with surgery since at least the second century BC, when Plutarch tells of such treatment performed on the Roman leader Gaius Marius.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPeople with varicose veins might have a positive D-dimer blood test result due to chronic low-level thrombosis within dilated veins (varices).\nComplications.\nMost varicose veins are reasonably benign, but severe varicosities can lead to major complications, due to the poor circulation through the affected limb.\nCauses.\nVaricose veins are more common in women than in men and are linked with heredity. Other related factors are pregnancy, obesity, menopause, aging, prolonged standing, leg injury and abdominal straining. Varicose veins are unlikely to be caused by crossing the legs or ankles. Less commonly, but not exceptionally, varicose veins can be due to other causes, such as post-phlebitic obstruction or incontinence, venous and arteriovenous malformations.\nVenous reflux is a significant cause. Research has also shown the importance of pelvic vein reflux (PVR) in the development of varicose veins. Varicose veins in the legs could be due to ovarian vein reflux. Both ovarian and internal iliac vein reflux causes leg varicose veins. This condition affects 14% of women with varicose veins or 20% of women who have had vaginal delivery and have leg varicose veins. In addition, evidence suggests that failing to look for and treat pelvic vein reflux can be a cause of recurrent varicose veins.\nThere is increasing evidence for the role of incompetent perforator veins (or \"perforators\") in the formation of varicose veins. and recurrent varicose veins.\nVaricose veins could also be caused by hyperhomocysteinemia in the body, which can degrade and inhibit the formation of the three main structural components of the artery: collagen, elastin and the proteoglycans. Homocysteine permanently degrades cysteine disulfide bridges and lysine amino acid residues in proteins, gradually affecting function and structure. Simply put, homocysteine is a 'corrosive' of long-living proteins, i.e. collagen or elastin, or lifelong proteins, i.e. fibrillin. These long-term effects are difficult to establish in clinical trials focusing on groups with existing artery decline. Klippel\u2013Trenaunay syndrome and Parkes Weber syndrome are relevant for differential diagnosis.\nAnother cause is chronic alcohol consumption due to the vasodilatation side effect in relation to gravity and blood viscosity.\nDiagnosis.\nClinical test.\nClinical tests that may be used include:\nInvestigations.\nTraditionally, varicose veins were investigated using imaging techniques only if there was a suspicion of deep venous insufficiency, if they were recurrent, or if they involved the saphenopopliteal junction. This practice is now less widely accepted. People with varicose veins should now be investigated using lower limbs venous ultrasonography. The results from a randomised controlled trial on patients with and without routine ultrasound have shown a significant difference in recurrence rate and reoperation rate at 2 and 7 years of follow-up.\nStages.\nThe CEAP (Clinical, Etiological, Anatomical, and Pathophysiological) Classification, developed in 1994 by an international ad hoc committee of the American Venous Forum, outlines these stages\nEach clinical class is further characterized by a subscript depending upon whether the patient is symptomatic (S) or asymptomatic (A), e.g. C2S.\nTreatment.\nTreatment can be either active or conservative.\nActive.\nTreatment options include surgery, laser and radiofrequency ablation, and ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy. Newer treatments include cyanoacrylate glue, mechanochemical ablation, and endovenous steam ablation. No real difference could be found between the treatments, except that radiofrequency ablation could have a better long-term benefit.\nConservative.\nThe National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) produced clinical guidelines in July 2013 recommending that all people with symptomatic varicose veins (C2S) and worse should be referred to a vascular service for treatment. Conservative treatments such as support stockings should not be used unless treatment was not possible.\nThe symptoms of varicose veins can be controlled to an extent with the following:\nProcedures.\nStripping.\nStripping consists of removal of all or part the saphenous vein (great/long or lesser/short) main trunk. The complications include deep vein thrombosis (5.3%), pulmonary embolism (0.06%), and wound complications including infection (2.2%). There is evidence for the great saphenous vein regrowing after stripping. For traditional surgery, reported recurrence rates, which have been tracked for 10 years, range from 5% to 60%. In addition, since stripping removes the saphenous main trunks, they are no longer available for use as venous bypass grafts in the future (coronary or leg artery vital disease).\nOther.\nOther surgical treatments are:\nSclerotherapy.\nA commonly performed non-surgical treatment for varicose and \"spider leg veins\" is sclerotherapy, in which medicine called a sclerosant is injected into the veins to make them shrink. The medicines that are commonly used as sclerosants are polidocanol (POL branded Asclera in the United States, Aethoxysklerol in Australia), sodium tetradecyl sulphate (STS), Sclerodex (Canada), hypertonic saline, glycerin and chromated glycerin. STS (branded Fibrovein in Australia) liquids can be mixed at varying concentrations of sclerosant and varying sclerosant/gas proportions, with air or CO2 or O2 to create foams. Foams may allow more veins to be treated per session with comparable efficacy. Their use in contrast to liquid sclerosant is still somewhat controversial, and there is no clear evidence that foams are superior. Sclerotherapy has been used in the treatment of varicose veins for over 150 years. Sclerotherapy is often used for telangiectasias (spider veins) and varicose veins that persist or recur after vein stripping. Sclerotherapy can also be performed using foamed sclerosants under ultrasound guidance to treat larger varicose veins, including the great saphenous and small saphenous veins.\nThere is some evidence that sclerotherapy is a safe and possibly effective treatment option for improving the cosmetic appearance, reducing residual varicose veins, improving the quality of life, and reducing symptoms that may be present due to the varicose veins. There is also weak evidence that this treatment option may have a slightly higher risk of deep vein thrombosis. It is not known if sclerotherapy decreases the chance of varicose veins returning (recurrent varicose veins). It is also not known which type of substance (liquid or foam) used for the sclerotherapy procedure is more effective and comes with the lowest risk of complications.\nComplications of sclerotherapy are rare, but can include blood clots and ulceration. Anaphylactic reactions are \"extraordinarily rare but can be life-threatening,\" and doctors should have resuscitation equipment ready. There has been one reported case of stroke after ultrasound-guided sclerotherapy when an unusually large dose of sclerosant foam was injected.\nEndovenous thermal ablation.\nThere are three kinds of endovenous thermal ablation treatment possible: laser, radiofrequency, and steam.\nThe Australian Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) in 2008 determined that endovenous laser treatment/ablation (ELA) for varicose veins \"appears to be more effective in the short term, and at least as effective overall, as the comparative procedure of junction ligation and vein stripping for the treatment of varicose veins.\" It also found in its assessment of available literature, that \"occurrence rates of more severe complications such as DVT, nerve injury, and paraesthesia, post-operative infections, and haematomas, appears to be greater after ligation and stripping than after EVLT\". Complications for ELA include minor skin burns (0.4%) and temporary paresthesia (2.1%). The longest study of endovenous laser ablation is 39 months.\nTwo prospective randomized trials found speedier recovery and fewer complications after radiofrequency ablation (ERA) compared to open surgery. Myers wrote that open surgery for small saphenous vein reflux is obsolete. Myers said these veins should be treated with endovenous techniques, citing high recurrence rates after surgical management, and risk of nerve damage up to 15%. By comparison ERA has been shown to control 80% of cases of small saphenous vein reflux at 4 years, said Myers. Complications for ERA include burns, paraesthesia, clinical phlebitis and slightly higher rates of deep vein thrombosis (0.57%) and pulmonary embolism (0.17%). One 3-year study compared ERA, with a recurrence rate of 33%, to open surgery, which had a recurrence rate of 23%.\nSteam treatment consists in injection of pulses of steam into the sick vein. This treatment which works with a natural agent (water) has results similar to laser or radiofrequency. The steam presents a lot of post-operative advantages for the patient (good aesthetic results, less pain, etc.) Steam is a very promising treatment for both doctors (easy introduction of catheters, efficient on recurrences, ambulatory procedure, easy and economic procedure) and patients (less post-operative pain, a natural agent, fast recovery to daily activities).\nELA and ERA require specialized training for doctors and special equipment. ELA is performed as an outpatient procedure and does not require an operating theatre, nor does the patient need a general anaesthetic. Doctors use high-frequency ultrasound during the procedure to visualize the anatomical relationships between the saphenous structures.\nSome practitioners also perform phlebectomy or ultrasound-guided sclerotherapy at the time of endovenous treatment. This is also known as an ambulatory phlebectomy. The distal veins are removed following the complete ablation of the proximal vein. This treatment is most commonly used for varicose veins off of the great saphenous vein, small saphenous vein, and pudendal veins. Follow-up treatment to smaller branch varicose veins is often needed in the weeks or months after the initial procedure.\nMedical Adhesive.\nAlso called medical super glue, medical adhesive is an advanced non-surgical treatment for varicose veins during which a solution is injected into the diseased vein through a small catheter and under the assistance of ultrasound-guided imagery. The \"super glue\" solution is made of cyanoacrylate, aiming at sealing the vein and rerouting the blood flow to other healthy veins.\nPost-treatment, the body will naturally absorb the treated vein which will disappear. Involving only a small incision and no hospital stay, medical super glue has generated great interest within the last years, with a success rate of about 96.8%.\nA follow-up consultation is required after this treatment, just like any other one, in order to re-assess the diseased vein and further treat it if needed.\nEchotherapy Treatment.\nIn the field of varicose veins, the latest medical innovation is high-intensity focused ultrasound therapy (HIFU). This method is completely non-invasive and is not necessarily performed in an operating room, unlike existing techniques. This is because the procedure involves treating from outside the body, able to penetrate the skin without damage, to treat the veins in a targeted area. This leaves no scars and allows the patient to return to their daily life immediately.\nEpidemiology.\nVaricose veins are most common after age 50. It is more prevalent in females. There is a hereditary role. It has been seen in smokers, those who have chronic constipation, and in people with occupations which necessitate long periods of standing such as wait staff, nurses, conductors (musical and bus), stage actors, umpires (cricket, javelin, etc.), the King's guards, lectern orators, security guards, traffic police officers, vendors, surgeons, etc.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32836", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32836", "title": "Vicente Fox", "text": "President of Mexico from 2000 to 2006\nVicente Fox Quesada (; born 2 July 1942) is a Mexican businessman and politician who served as the 62nd president of Mexico from 2000 to 2006. After campaigning as a right-wing populist, Fox was elected president on the National Action Party (PAN) ticket in the 2000 election. He became the first president not from the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) since 1929, and the first elected from an opposition party since Francisco I. Madero in 1911. Fox won the election with 43 percent of the vote. Considered a social-welfare promoter, along with Julio Frenk Mora, he formulated, signed and implemented the Seguro Popular which helped circa 55 million independent workers.\nAs president, Fox continued the neoliberal economic policies his predecessors from the PRI had adopted since the 1980s. The first half of his administration saw a further shift of the federal government to the right, strong relations with the United States and George W. Bush, unsuccessful attempts to introduce a value-added tax to medicines and build an airport in Texcoco, and a diplomatic conflict with Cuban leader Fidel Castro. The murder of human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa in 2001 called into question the Fox administration's commitment to breaking with the authoritarian past of the PRI era.\nThe second half of his administration was marked by his conflict with Andr\u00e9s Manuel L\u00f3pez Obrador, the Mayor of Mexico City. The PAN and Fox administration unsuccessfully attempted to remove L\u00f3pez Obrador from office and prevent him from participating in the 2006 presidential elections. The Fox administration also became embroiled with diplomatic conflicts with Venezuela and Bolivia after supporting the creation of the Free Trade Area of the Americas, which was opposed by those two countries. His last year in office oversaw the controversial 2006 elections, where PAN candidate Felipe Calder\u00f3n was declared winner by a narrow margin over L\u00f3pez Obrador, who claimed the elections had been fraudulent and refused to recognize the results, calling for protests across the country. In the same year, there was civil unrest in Oaxaca, where a teacher's strike culminated into protests and violent clashes asking for the resignation of governor Ulises Ruiz Ortiz, and in the State of Mexico during the San Salvador Atenco riots, where the state and federal governments were later found guilty by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights of human rights violations during the violent repression. On the other hand, Fox was credited with maintaining economic growth and reducing the poverty rate from 43.7% in 2000 to 35.6% in 2006.\nAfter his presidency, Fox returned to his home state of Guanajuato. He has been involved in public speaking and the development of the Vicente Fox Center of Studies, Library and Museum. He is currently the co-president of the Centrist Democrat International, an international organization of centre-right political parties. Fox was expelled from the PAN in 2013, after having endorsed the PRI presidential candidate, Enrique Pe\u00f1a Nieto, in the 2012 elections. In the 2018 election, Fox endorsed the PRI candidate, Jos\u00e9 Antonio Meade.\nEarly years.\nVicente Fox Quesada was born on 2 July 1942 in Mexico City, the second of nine children. His father, Jos\u00e9 Luis Fox Pont, was a native-born Mexican of German-American descent. His mother, Mercedes Quesada Etxaide, was a Spanish Basque immigrant from San Sebasti\u00e1n, Gipuzkoa. Fox's family name was originally \"Fuchs\", but was anglicized to \"Fox\" at some point. His paternal grandfather, Joseph Louis Fuchs, was born in Cincinnati in 1865, attended Woodward High School and moved to Mexico at age 32.\nFox spent his childhood and adolescence at the family ranch in San Francisco del Rinc\u00f3n in Guanajuato. He spent a year at Campion High School in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin where he learned English. Upon reaching college age, Fox moved to Mexico City to attend the Universidad Iberoamericana and received a bachelor's degree in business administration in 1964. Then in 1974, Fox received a certificate in management skills from Harvard Business School.\nBusiness career.\nIn 1964, Fox was hired by the Coca-Cola Company as a route supervisor and drove a delivery truck. After nine years, he had risen to the top, serving as the President and Chief Executive of Coca-Cola Mexico; after six years in this role, he was invited to lead all of Coca-Cola's operations in Latin America, but Fox declined and later resigned from Coca-Cola in 1979. It was during the Fox's leadership of Coca-Cola Mexico that Coke became Mexico's top-selling soft drink, increasing Coca-Cola's sales by almost 50%.\nAfter retiring from Coca-Cola, Fox began to participate in various public activities in Guanajuato, where he created the \"Patronato de la Casa Cuna Amigo Daniel\", an orphanage. He was also the president of the Patronato Loyola, a sponsor of the Le\u00f3n campus of the Universidad Iberoamericana and of the Lux Institute.\nFamily life.\nIn 1969, Fox married Lilian de la Concha, a receptionist at Coca-Cola. They had four children, Ana Cristina, Vicente, Paulina and Rodrigo. In 1990, after 20 years of marriage, Lilian filed for and was granted a divorce.\nFox remarried on 2 July 2001, while serving as President of Mexico, to Marta Mar\u00eda Sahag\u00fan Jim\u00e9nez (until then his spokesperson). The wedding date was the first anniversary of his presidential election and his 59th birthday. For both Fox and Sahag\u00fan Jim\u00e9nez, it was their second marriage.\nEarly political career.\nWith the support of Manuel Clouthier, Vicente Fox joined the Partido Acci\u00f3n Nacional on 1 March 1988. That same year, he was elected to the federal Chamber of Deputies, representing the third congressional district in Le\u00f3n, Guanajuato.\nGovernor of Guanajuato.\nIn 1991, after serving in the Chamber of Deputies, Fox sought the governorship in Guanajuato, but lost the disputed election to Ram\u00f3n Aguirre Vel\u00e1zquez of the PRI. Following the election, local discontent over allegations of fraud surrounding Aguirre Vel\u00e1zquez's victory led the PRI candidate to decline to take office. The state congress appointed Carlos Medina Plascencia of the PAN as interim governor.\nIn the 1995 Guanajuato state election, Fox ran again, and was elected governor with over 58% of the vote. As governor, Fox promoted government efficiency and transparency. He was one of the first state governors of Mexico to give a clear, public and timely account of the finances of his state.\nFox also pushed for the consolidation of small firms, promoted the overseas sales of goods manufactured in Guanajuato, and created an extensive system of small loans to allow the poor to open a \"changarro\" (a small shop) and buy a car and a television. Under Fox, Guanajuato became the fifth most important Mexican state economy.\nCampaign for president.\nOn 7 July 1997, after the opposition parties first won a majority in the Chamber of Deputies, Vicente Fox decided to run for President of Mexico. In spite of opposition within his political party, Fox secured his candidacy representing the Alliance for Change, a political coalition formed by the National Action Party and the Green Ecological Party of Mexico on 14 November 1999.\nDuring the course of his campaign, a presidential debate was organized, but the three main contenders (Fox, Francisco Labastida of the PRI, and Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas of the PRD) disagreed on the details. One notable disagreement, which was broadcast on national television, was whether the presidential debate should be held that same day or on the following Friday.\nDuring the nationally televised presidential debate, Fox's main opponent, Francisco Labastida, claimed that Fox had repeatedly called him a \"sissy\" and a \"cross-dresser\" (\"la vestida\", a pun on his last name). Fox's campaign slogans were \"\u00a1Ya!\" (\"Right now!\"), \"Ya ganamos\" (\"We've already won\"), and \"Vota Alianza por el Cambio\" (\"Vote for Alliance for Change\").\nIn addition to some debate controversies, Fox also faced some controversy due to \"Amigos de Fox\" (Friends of Fox), a nonprofit fundraising group established by Denise Monta\u00f1o. The group was instrumental in getting Vicente Fox elected President of Mexico, and the phrase \"Amigos de Fox\" was used as a campaign slogan referring to the millions of people supporting Fox in the 2000 presidential election.\nIn 2003, money-laundering charges were lodged against \"Amigos de Fox\", but were dropped shortly before the July 2003 midterm elections.\nElection results.\nOn 2 July 2000, his 58th birthday, Fox won the presidential election with 43% (15,989,636 votes) of the popular vote, followed by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) candidate Francisco Labastida with 36% (13,579,718 votes), and Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) with 17% (6,256,780 votes). Fox declared victory that same night, a victory that was ratified by then-President Zedillo. After the final results were announced, President-elect Fox addressed thousands of supporters and celebrated his victory with them at the Angel of Independence monument in Mexico City. His opponents conceded the election later that night.\nAfter securing the election, Fox received substantial media coverage, as well as numerous congratulatory messages and phone calls from world leaders, including then-President of the United States Bill Clinton. He took office on 1 December 2000, the first time since 1917 that an opposition candidate had taken power from the long-reigning Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).\nPresidency.\nPublic image.\nDuring his campaign for president, Vicente Fox became well known for his cowboy style and quirkiness. As a speaker, Fox usually attracted big crowds in the early years of his presidency. At , Fox easily stood out in most crowds, and is believed to be one of the tallest presidents in Mexico's history. After his inauguration, President Fox usually wore suits for formal occasions, but opted to wear his signature boots and jeans during his many visits around Mexico.\nFox spread his image as one of peace and welcomed many to his own ranch in the state of Guanajuato. When Fox welcomed U.S. President George W. Bush to the ranch, both presidents were wearing Fox's signature black cowboy boots, prompting \"The Wall Street Journal\" to call it \"The Boot Summit\".\nApproval ratings.\nWhen Fox took office on 1 December 2000, his approval rating neared 80%. During the rest of his presidency, his average approval rating was of 53%, while his average disapproval rating was of 40%.\nAs seen in the graphic, after taking office the particularly high points of his approval ratings were:\nWhile the lowest points of his approval ratings were:\nLegacy and assessment.\nAlthough Fox's victory in the 2000 election and the end of seven decades of PRI rule raised great expectations of change among the Mexican people, his administration was criticized for failing to fulfill those expectations, as little progress was made in fighting corruption, crime, poverty, unemployment and inequality. Few key reforms were implemented during the Fox administration, which became characterised by a growing sense of power vacuum as Fox was increasingly perceived by Mexican society and political actors as a \"lame duck\" incapable of pushing the ambitious reform agenda that swept him into power in 2000. Alejandro Cacho points out that \"Fox incarnated the hope of alternancy [...] and he managed to kick the PRI out of Los Pinos, but his government was a disappointment. Corruption persisted; in fact, his sons-in-law (the Bribiesca-Sahag\u00fan brothers) became rich quickly and without explanation. The economy wasn't much better than it had been under Ernesto Zedillo, the wages didn't increase significantly, neither did jobs. His \"super cabinet\" [\"gabinetazo\", as Fox himself referred to it] created more controversy than it did good results. His wife, Marta Sahag\u00fan, had a big influence in the presidential decisions\".\nHaving assumed office with an approval rating of 80%, by the time he left office in 2006 his public image had become exhausted by the controversial presidential elections of that year and the few reforms implemented.\nIn terms of the significance of Fox's presidency, historian Philip Russell asserts that, \"Marketed on television, Fox made a far better candidate than he did president.\nHe failed to take charge and provide cabinet leadership, failed to set priorities, and turned a blind eye to alliance building.\" Fox himself asserted in 2001 (one year into his administration) that he much preferred his experience as candidate than actually being president.\nRussell also pointed to 2006 comments by political scientist Soledad Loaeza, who noted, \"The eager candidate became a reluctant president who avoided tough choices and appeared hesitant and unable to hide the weariness caused by the responsibilities and constraints of the office.\" Russell also asserted that Fox \"had little success in fighting crime. Even though he maintained the macroeconomic stability inherited from his predecessor, economic growth barely exceeded the rate of population increase. Similarly, the lack of fiscal reform left tax collection at a rate similar to that of Haiti . . . .\" Finally, Russell noted that \"during Fox's administration, only 1.4\u00a0million formal-sector jobs were created, leading to massive immigration to the United States and an explosive increase in informal employment.\" Ultimately, however, Russell concluded that Fox will be viewed by history as a transitional figure who was able to defeat one of Mexico's long-entrenched political parties.\nIn a national survey conducted in 2012 by BGC-Excelsior regarding former presidents, 32% of the respondents considered that the Fox administration was \"very good\" or \"good\", 25% responded that it was an \"average\" administration, and 42% responded that it was a \"very bad\" or \"bad\" administration.\nPost-presidential life.\nPublic speaking and advocacy.\nSince leaving office in December 2006, Fox has maintained himself in the public eye by speaking in countries such as Nigeria, Ireland, Canada, and the United States about topics such as the controversial 2006 election and the Iraq War. In Mexico, Fox has been criticized by some for his busy post-presidency since former Mexican presidents are traditionally expected to stay out of the political spotlight. In response, Fox has stated, \"There is no reason to hold to the anti-democratic rules of those who still live in the authoritarian past . . . now that Mexico is a democracy, every citizen has the right to express himself, even a former president.\"\nVicente Fox joined four other Latin American presidents at the One Young World Summit 2014 in Dublin, Ireland, to discuss the Telef\u00f3nica Millennial Survey. He told those in the audience that eradicating corruption \"has to start with education\" and that his focus is now on promoting leadership.\nVicente Fox is a member of the Global Leadership Foundation, a not-for-profit organization that offers, discreetly and confidentially, a range of experienced advisors to political leaders facing difficult situations.\nIn 2013, Fox discussed why the West has pursued a moral crusade against drugs at HowTheLightGetsIn festival in Hay-on-Wye. with Chris Bryant and John Ralston Saul. The three debated whether it is hypocritical to ban certain drugs while continuing to export others such as alcohol and tobacco, and whether to follow the lead of Washington and Colorado states in the U.S. and allow the free trading of drugs.\nVicente Fox gave a video interview in July 2013 to \"High Times\", in which he discussed the failure of drug prohibition, and cited Portugal's decriminalization policies as \"working splendid(ly).\" He said he supports drug legalization despite not being a user himself, just as he said he also \"fully respects\" same-sex marriage although he does not personally agree with it.\nIn February 2014, Fox wrote an opinion piece that was published in Toronto's \"The Globe and Mail\" in which he stated that, \"Legalization of not just marijuana, but all drugs, is the right thing to do.\" He also said that \"we must be given the very freedom to decide our own behaviour and to act responsibly, as long as we do not detrimentally affect the rights of others\".\nIn 2016, Fox co-signed a letter to Ban Ki-moon calling for a more humane drug policy.\nIn July 2017, Fox was an international observer to the unofficial Venezuelan referendum held by the opposition. During the trip, Fox gave a speech that compared the referendum to the 2000 Mexican elections. He said that \"this battle has been won\" and \"step by step, vote by vote, the dictator will leave.\" He was subsequently declared a persona non grata by the Venezuelan government. Venezuelan Foreign Minister Samuel Moncada said that Fox had taken advantage of the country's hospitality and \"was paid to come to Venezuela to promote violence and the intervention of foreign powers.\" Moncada said the ban came from Maduro and criticized Fox and the other former Latin American leaders invited as observers (Andr\u00e9s Pastrana, Jorge Quiroga, Laura Chinchilla and Miguel \u00c1ngel Rodr\u00edguez) as \"political sicarios,\" \"clowns\" and \"mercenaries\" that \"sell themselves to the highest bidder to go to various destinations and repeat what they are told.\" Fox said he was not surprised by the ban and that the vote would weaken Maduro.\nIn 2018, Fox joined the \"High Times\" board of directors. He left the board in 2020 over concerns surrounding the company's stock offering.\nHe supported Javier Milei in 2023 Argentine general election.\nCriticism of Donald Trump.\nFox has been an outspoken critic of U.S. President Donald Trump, beginning with Trump's bid for the Republican candidacy in the 2016 presidential election.\nIn an interview with Univision's Jorge Ramos in February 2016, Fox responded to then-candidate Trump's proposal to build a wall at the border between the United States and Mexico at Mexico's expense, declaring in English, \"I am not going to pay for that fucking wall. He should pay for it. He's got the money.\" Fox went on to call Trump a \"crazy guy\" and a \"false prophet,\" and questioned the claim that Trump received 44% of the Hispanic vote in the Republican caucus in Nevada. Trump took to Twitter in response, demanding that Fox apologize for using \"the F word while discussing the wall.\" Fox eventually apologized for the remark, while also asking for Trump to apologize for his remarks about Mexicans and inviting Trump to visit Mexico.\nDespite his apology, Fox continued to criticize Trump to the international media and troll Trump on Twitter, stating, \"I'm committed to be Donald Trump's shadow until he is done with politics.\" Fox would later go on to congratulate President-elect Joe Biden and his victory in the 2020 United States presidential election, defeating Trump. When Trump visited Mexico on 31 August 2016 upon President Enrique Pe\u00f1a Nieto's invitation, Fox slammed the visit, calling it a \"desperate move\" on the part of Pe\u00f1a Nieto and stating, \"He is not welcome in Mexico. We don't like him. We don't want him. We reject his visit.\" Trump responded by pointing out Fox's previous invitation, to which Fox clarified that he invited Trump to Mexico on the condition that he used the visit to apologize to the Mexican people. He directly addressed the American people the next day on CNN, where he described Trump as a \"false prophet\" who is \"absolutely crazy\" and warned that they need to \"wake up\" and realize the harm that Trump's immigration and economic policies would inflict on the United States.\nLater in September 2016, \"The Washington Post\" reported that Fox had received multiple emails from Trump's campaign soliciting donations throughout the month. Fox received the first email on 9 September, which he posted on Twitter and responded, \"Donald Trump, I won't pay for that fucking wall! Also, campaigning in Mexico? Running out of money and friends?\" Fox received two additional emails on 24 and 27 September, both of which he also posted on Twitter and mocked as being \"desperate\" and \"begging.\" The revelation of the emails has raised concern, as accepting campaign donations from foreign nationals is illegal in the United States.\nDuring a September 2016 appearance on the radio show \"El Show de Piol\u00edn\", Fox smashed a Trump pi\u00f1ata hanging on the streets of Los Angeles while loudly singing the traditional Pi\u00f1ata song. Upon breaking it open, Fox noted its lack of contents and remarked, \"Empty. Totally Empty. He doesn't have any brains.\" Discussing the event during a subsequent interview with \"GQ\", Fox expanded, \"I had such a joy in my heart by doing that, because in Mexico, pi\u00f1atas are very meaningful. Pi\u00f1atas are a celebration. Pi\u00f1atas let you send messages. And the message is: Trump is empty inside. He's empty in his head. That's why I put my hand into his head. There was no brain there. That's what he is, an empty person.\"\nThe day after Trump won the election, Fox wrote an editorial on the \"International Business Times\" website where he lamented Trump's victory and explored what Mexico could do in response. \"Even though Trump is not the prettiest person in the room, we still have to dance with him. Now, we ought to look out for ourselves and find a way to work with the most powerful economy in the world, which is now led by an authoritarian racist[...]Donald Trump's promises have an expiration date. When the time comes to truly deliver to the American people, his \"billion dollar show\" will finally crumble beneath his feet,\" Fox wrote, concluding his editorial with, \"I find quite sad that America, formerly the most open and cutting edge nation, has chosen to lock itself down inside concrete walls. It's tragic that fear, anger and wrath took over and pierced the hearts of their people. It will be hard to recover from this wound; but we better start working to heal as quickly as possible \u2013 and bring down the walls that blinded us in the beginning.\"\nFox has continued criticizing Trump on Twitter after the election. In a series of tweets in January 2017, Fox again criticized Trump's proposed Mexican border wall, calling it a \"racist monument\" and insisted that Mexico will never fund it, calling on Trump to \"be honest with US taxpayers\" about that fact. Following the release of a U.S. government intelligence report that accused Russia of interfering in the 2016 election to ensure Trump's victory, Fox tweeted, \"Sr Trump, the intelligence report is devastating. Losing election by more than 3M votes and in addition this. Are you a legitimate president?\" Fox further criticized Trump's response to the intelligence report, calling him a \"bully\" and a \"bluff\" and stating that Trump is \"bringing in a new era of dictatorship.\" Though on 12 January, Fox broke with his criticism of Trump and simply tweeted, \"America Will Survive.\"\nIn an interview with Anderson Cooper on 25 January 2017, and during an appearance on Conan O'Brien's late night talk show on 1 March 2017, Fox again asserted that Mexico should not have to pay for the wall.\nIn September 2017, Fox was once again in the news after President Trump announced he would end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program in six months if the U.S. congress failed to pass legislation to address the issue. In response, Fox tweeted to President Trump's Twitter account, \"Ending DACA is on the top of the vilest acts you've pulled off. You're destroying the legacy of greater men before you.\" In another tweet, Fox suggested that President Trump's DACA decision was a result of him compensating for earlier failures to pass healthcare legislation to replace the Affordable Care Act. Fox then went on to post a video in which he claimed that President Trump had \"failed America\" and stated that \"[t]his measure is cruel and heartless, worse than any machine. You're cancelling the future of 800,000 children and young people.\"\nAs Fox frequently uses Twitter (in English) to respond to tweets by President Trump, he has attracted more than 1\u00a0million followers on his Twitter account.\nSince May 2017, Fox has appeared in a series of humorous videos seriously denouncing Donald Trump, including \"Vicente Fox is Running for President of the United States\" (fake announcement for the candidacy) which was released in September.\nAutobiography.\nFox's autobiography, entitled \"Revolution of Hope: The Life, Faith and Dreams of a Mexican President\", was released in September 2007. To promote its release, Fox toured many U.S. cities to do book-signings and interviews with U.S. media. During his tour, however, he faced protests from Mexican immigrants who accused him of actions that forced them to emigrate and find jobs in the United States. He faced the subject several times during interviews, such as one held with Fox News's Bill O'Reilly, who questioned him about the massive illegal immigration problem of Mexicans into the United States. Finally, during an interview with Telemundo's Rub\u00e9n Luengas, the interviewer asked Fox about allegations concerning some properties of Vicente Fox's wife, Marta Sahag\u00fan. After Fox explained the situation, he asked the interviewer not to make false accusations and to prove what he was saying. Luengas said, \"I'm telling you in your face, I'm not a liar.\" After this, Fox walked out of the studio, calling the interviewer a \"liar,\" \"vulgar,\" and \"stupid.\"\nUpon the book's release, some readers viewed several excerpts as being highly critical of U.S. President George W. Bush, considered by many to be a close friend. For example, Fox wrote that Bush was \"the cockiest guy I have ever met in my life,\" and claimed that he was surprised that Bush had ever made it to the White House. Later, in an interview with Larry King, Fox explained that this was a misunderstanding and that what he meant by calling George W. Bush \"cocky\" was to say he was \"confident.\" Fox also referred to Bush in his autobiography as a \"windshield cowboy,\" due to Bush's apparent fear of a horse Fox offered him to ride.\n\"See: Vicente Fox Center of Studies, Library and Museum\"\nFox Center of Studies, Library and Museum.\nOn 12 January 2007, over a month after he left office, Fox announced the construction of a center of studies, library and museum that was labeled by the U.S. press as Mexico's first presidential library. The project will be a library, museum, a center for the advancement of democracy, a study center and a hotel, and it will be completely privately funded. It is expected to be a genuine U.S.-style presidential library. It will be built in Fox's home state of Guanajuato, in his home town of San Francisco del Rinc\u00f3n.\nWhile museums are abundant throughout the country, there is nothing comparable to a presidential library where personal documents, records, and gifts amassed by the country's leader are open to the public. Fox's library will be modeled after the Bill Clinton Library in Little Rock, Arkansas, which, according to the former president, will allow Mexicans to enjoy, for the first time in Mexico's history, a library in which to review the documents, images and records that made up his six years as president.\nAccording to the official website, the construction of the center is in progress and advancing. Final completion of the library was expected by late 2007.\nIn 2015, Fox was interviewed by Peter High for Forbes at the library, which is called \"Centro Fox\" (the Fox Center). During the interview, Fox remarked that the guiding principle behind the library is that \"[w]e are a Latin American center that is geared around ideas, leadership, and strategies. We do it through, number one, young kids. The middle-upper class and the rest have access to the best universities. But the broader constituency does not receive any messages or aspirations of happiness in life at home.\"\nIn addition to the library's completion, there has been some indications that Centro Fox was joining hands with UST Global to transform Mexico into a world-class technological economy. Fox stated in a press release that \"UST Global is partnering Centro Fox to help accomplish nothing less than the transformation of my country into a world-class technology economy . . . . Together, we will establish Mexico at the forefront of the information technology revolution in the region.\" These efforts appear to be ongoing.\nCentrist Democratic International.\nOn 20 September 2007, Fox was elected co-president of the Centrist Democratic International (along with the re-elected Pier Ferdinando Casini) at its leaders' meeting in Rome. The CDI is the international organization of political parties that counts Fox's party, the National Action Party, as a member.\nStatue controversy.\nIn October 2007, an announcement was made in the municipality of Boca del R\u00edo, Veracruz, that a 3-meter (10\u00a0ft) statue of Vicente Fox was to be erected to honor the former president. This aroused criticism from the opposition Party of the Democratic Revolution towards Boca del R\u00edo's mayor, who was affiliated with the same political party (PAN) as Fox.\nThe statue was put in place amidst protests on the dawn of 13 October 2007. The inauguration was to have been held on 14 October. Some hours after the statue was erected, a crowd of about 100 people (many of whom were members of the PRI, the political party opposed to Fox and which Fox had defeated in the 2000 election) brought the statue down by putting a rope around the statue's neck and pulling it down, damaging it. The statue was put back in place for the inauguration, then taken away for repairs.\nPAN members accused Veracruz's governor, Fidel Herrera Beltr\u00e1n, of \"ordering the attack on the statue,\" and Fox called the governor intolerant. Others in the media argued that the installation of the statue was inappropriate, since former President Fox was facing allegations relating to an illicit enrichment scandal at the time.\nHealth.\nOn 7 August 2021, it was reported and confirmed that Vicente Fox and his wife Martha Sahag\u00fan were preventively admitted to a hospital in Le\u00f3n, Guanajuato after being infected with COVID-19 during the pandemic in Mexico, but without serious symptoms.\n2023 xenophobia controversy.\nFox stirred controversy in July 2023 when he shared an image on his Twitter account criticizing some of the Morena contenders for the 2024 presidential elections and supporting the PAN pre-candidate X\u00f3chitl G\u00e1lvez. The image, which made reference to the contenders' ancestries, read: \"Sheinbaum is a Bulgarian Jew, Marcelo is a French \"fif\u00ed\", Noro\u00f1a is an alien and Ad\u00e1n Augusto is from Transylvania. The only one who's Mexican is X\u00f3chitl!\". Fox was immediately criticized and accused of being antisemitic and xenophobic by social media users and politicians, even from those belonging to the PAN and the opposition to Morena, who noted that the former President himself was of German and Spanish ancestry. Eventually X\u00f3chitl G\u00e1lvez herself condemned the tweet. Fox later deleted the image and on July 23 he apologized to the Jewish community, stating that he had not created the image and had merely retweeted it, and affirming that he had a \"profound respect for the Jewish community\".\nResponse to the 2025 Mexican protests.\nIn response to the 2025 Mexican protests, Fox framed the protests as a \"great homage\" to Manzo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32837", "revid": "47130321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32837", "title": "Vietnamese", "text": "Vietnamese may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32838", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32838", "title": "Vincent Ward (director)", "text": "New Zealand film director, screenwriter and artist\nVincent Ward (born 16 February 1956) is a New Zealand film director, screenwriter and artist.\nLife and career.\nVincent Ward was born on 16 February 1956 near Greytown, New Zealand. He attended Ilam School of Fine Arts at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand where he received a Diploma in Fine Arts (with Honours) in 1981. In 2014 the University of Canterbury awarded him an Honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts and an adjunct professorship.\nHis debut short feature, \"A State of Siege\", adapted a novel by Janet Frame. It was released theatrically and reviewed by The Los Angeles Times who described it as, \u2018Rigorously constructed with one exquisitely composed image following another ... film becomes poetry\u2019. The film won a Special Jury Prize at the Miami Film Festival 1978 and a Golden Hugo Award at the Chicago Film Festival that same year.\nWard lived in remote Te Urewera with a T\u016bhoe woman named Puhi and her adult schizophrenic son Niki and made a documentary called \"In Spring One Plants Alone\", which won the 1982 Grand Prix at Cin\u00e9ma du R\u00e9el (Paris), and a Silver Hugo at the Chicago Film Festival.\nWard's next three films, \"Vigil\" (1984), \"\" (1988) and \"Map of the Human Heart\" (1993) were the first films by a New Zealander to be officially selected \u2018in competition\u2019 at the Cannes Film Festival. Between them they garnered close to 30 national and international awards (including the Grand Prix at festivals in Italy, Spain, Germany, France and the United States).\n\"Vigil\" (1984), follows an imaginative, solitary child living on a remote farm and is partly inspired by Ward's own rural upbringing in the Wairarapa. It was produced by John Maynard and shot in Taranaki. Child actor Fiona Kay played the central role.\nWard's second feature, a fantasy-adventure film, \"\" (1988), was inspired by an experience he had in Germany. He recounts attempting to cross the autobahn on foot and ending up dodging traffic. The experience made such an impression on him, it was the key image that sparked the idea for the film. The Navigator follows a group of 14th-century Cumbrian villagers who tunnel through the earth, and find themselves in modern-day Auckland. Ward says \u201cwhat I wanted to do was look at the 20th Century through medieval eyes, its as if the demons of our contemporary world, our technological monsters of destruction, could be foreseen in the nightmares of medieval men\u201d. Rolling Stone's review hailed it as \u201cA visionary film of rare courage and imperishable heart.\u201d The film won the Grand Prix at four film festivals including; Sitges Film Festival, Fanta Film Festival, and Oporto Film Festival 1998/89. And took home Best Film and Best Director at both the Australian and New Zealand film industry awards in 1989.\nIn 1990, Ward wrote a treatment for \"Alien 3\", and was originally slated to direct it before being replaced by David Fincher, while part of his treatment was used in the film, thus receiving a \"story by\" credit in the end. The heart of his original script, known as \u2018the monks in space\u2019 version, was however not captured in the final film and has since been recognised by the London Times Online, who in 2008 gave it the top spot on their list of 'greatest sci-fi movies never made\u2019.\nWard's next film \"Map of the Human Heart\" (1993) charts a relationship between an Inuk boy, a M\u00e9tis girl and a visiting British cartographer. Ward and his co-writer Louis Nowra spent time travelling and researching the project together in Canada and Vincent went on to travel extensively in the Arctic before they began writing the script. Ward suffered minor frostbite whilst location scouting in the Arctic that was still visible throughout the shoot. The film stars Jason Scott Lee, Anne Parillaud and Patrick Bergin, and features Jeanne Moreau and John Cusack in minor roles. It was produced by Tim Bevan and Ward, and it was screened as a work in progress at Cannes Film Festival in 1992, it was later nominated for best film at the Australian Film Institute Awards. American reviewer, Roger Ebert, said in his review: \"The best movies seem to reinvent themselves as they move along, not drawing from worn-out sources, and \u201cMap of the Human Heart\u201d is one of the year\u2019s best films.\"\nIn the 1990s Ward spent several years in and out of Hollywood, where he developed multiple projects before he signed on to direct \"What Dreams May Come\" (1998) a screenplay adapted by Ronald Bass from Richard Matheson's 1978 novel. What Dreams May Come was released in the United States on 2,600 screens and starred Robin Williams, Annabella Sciorra, Cuba Gooding Jr. and Max von Sydow. It reached US$71 million in theatrical sales and performed strongly in the video market. The film was nominated for Best Production Design and Best Visual Effects at the 1999 Academy Awards and won an Oscar for visual effects. It continues to be popular with audiences scoring 84% on Rotten Tomatoes.\nThe 2003 epic, \"The Last Samurai\" was based on a project Ward spent four years developing with the film's producers. Eventually, after Ward approached several directors, including Francis Ford Coppola and Peter Weir, he got Edward Zwick to helm the film. Ward was an executive producer of the film.\nDuring his time in Hollywood, Ward became interested in acting and trained under acting coach Penny Allen. He had a small part in Mike Figgis\u2019 film \"Leaving Las Vegas\" (1995), and a larger role in Figgis\u2019 next film \"One Night Stand\" (1997). He was given one of the leading role in a US independent feature film \"The Shot\" (1996), and a role in Geoff Murphy's film \"Spooked\" (2004).\nIn 2005, he returned to New Zealand and made \"River Queen\". Starring Samantha Morton, Kiefer Sutherland, Stephen Rea, Temuera Morrison and Cliff Curtis.\n\"Rain of the Children\" followed in 2008, wherein Ward retells the story of Puhi, the elderly Tuhoe woman who was the subject of his earlier documentary \"In Spring One Plants Alone\". \"Rain of the Children\" won the Grand Prix at Era New Horizons Film Festival. The film was nominated for best director and won best composer at the Qantas Film and TV Awards in New Zealand. Vincent Ward was also nominated for best director at the Australian Directors Guild Awards.\nWard has had 2 full retrospectives of his films. In 1984 at Germany's Hof International Film Festival and in 2008 at Poland's Era New Horizons Film Festival.\n\"The Boston Globe\" has called Vincent Ward \"one of film's great image makers\", while Roger Ebert, one of America's foremost film critics, hailed him as \"a true visionary.\"\nPainting and photography.\nSince 2010 Ward has launched a second career as a painter and video artist. In 2012 he had his first major solo show, \"Breath\", at New Zealand's cutting edge public gallery, the Govett-Brewster Art Gallery/Len Lye Centre in New Plymouth. This was followed by two other public gallery showings in Auckland and a solo pavilion at the 9th Shanghai Biennale 2012.\nWard received an honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts from the University of Canterbury (2014) and an adjunct professorship. In 2015 he had a guest professorship at the China Academy of Art, in Hanzhou, as well as a residency at the Shanghai University School of Fine Arts.\nWard is represented in New Zealand by Milford Galleries and by Void Gallery in Melbourne Australia.\nArt writer and reviewer Anthony Byrt (Art Forum) described the work as \u201cintense... stunning... virtuosic\u201d and said \u201cWard has never shied away from the truth: he digs and digs until he gets somewhere other filmmakers and artists don't often visit: a psychic space where violence, memory, myth, sex and religion mingle in a landscape scarred by history.\u201d.\nRhana Devenport, director Govett-Brewster Art Gallery, wrote in her catalog for the exhibition: Ward's ongoing concerns with metamorphosis, falling, light, fear, memory, darkness and the transformative moment have led him to create a series of vast, physically imposing works that delve into other-worldly landscapes and transcendent states, to evocations of loss, redemption and unconscious realms.\nFilmography.\nShort film\nFeature film\nExecutive producer\nAwards and honours.\nAustralian Film Institute\nCannes Film Festival\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32840", "revid": "1280002957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32840", "title": "WikiPedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "32851", "revid": "49768436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32851", "title": "Wiki", "text": "Type of website edited collaboratively\nA wiki ( ) is a form of hypertext publication on the internet which is collaboratively edited and managed by its audience directly through a web browser. A typical wiki contains multiple pages that can either be edited by the public or limited to use within an organization for maintaining its internal knowledge base. Its name derives from the first user-editable website called \"WikiWikiWeb\" \u2013 (pronounced ) is a Hawaiian word meaning 'quick'.\nWikis are powered by wiki software, also known as wiki engines. Being a form of content management system, these differ from other web-based systems such as blog software or static site generators in that the content is created without any defined owner or leader. Wikis have little inherent structure, allowing one to emerge according to the needs of the users. Wiki engines usually allow content to be written using a lightweight markup language and sometimes edited with the help of a rich-text editor. There are dozens of different wiki engines in use, both standalone and part of other software, such as bug tracking systems. Some wiki engines are free and open-source, whereas others are proprietary. Some permit control over different functions (levels of access); for example, editing rights may permit changing, adding, or removing material. Others may permit access without enforcing access control. Further rules may be imposed to organize content. In addition to hosting user-authored content, wikis allow those users to interact, hold discussions, and collaborate.\nThere are hundreds of thousands of wikis in use, both public and private, including wikis functioning as knowledge management resources, note-taking tools, community websites, and intranets. Ward Cunningham, the developer of the first wiki software, WikiWikiWeb, originally described wiki as \"the simplest online database that could possibly work\". \nThe online encyclopedia project Wikipedia is the most popular wiki-based website, as well being one of the internet's most popular websites, having been ranked consistently as such since at least 2007. Wikipedia is not a single wiki but rather a collection of hundreds of wikis, with each one pertaining to a specific language, making it the largest reference work of all time. The English-language Wikipedia has the largest collection of articles, standing at as of 2025.\nCharacteristics.\nIn their 2001 book \"The Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web\", Ward Cunningham and co-author Bo Leuf described the essence of the wiki concept:\nEditing.\nSource editing.\nSome wikis will present users with an edit button or link directly on the page being viewed. This will open an interface for writing, formatting, and structuring page content. The interface may be a source editor, which is text-based and employs a lightweight markup language (also known as \"wikitext\", \"wiki markup\", or \"wikicode\"), or a visual editor. For example, in a source editor, starting lines of text with asterisks could create a bulleted list.\nThe syntax and features of wiki markup languages for denoting style and structure can vary greatly among implementations. Some allow the use of HTMLTooltip Hypertext Markup Language and CSSTooltip Cascading Style Sheets, while others prevent the use of these to foster uniformity in appearance.\nExample of syntax.\nA short section of the 1865 novel \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" rendered in wiki markup:\nVisual editing.\nWhile wiki engines have traditionally offered source editing to users, in recent years some implementations have added a rich text editing mode. This is usually implemented, using JavaScript, as an interface which translates formatting instructions chosen from a toolbar into the corresponding wiki markup or HTML. This is generated and submitted to the server transparently, shielding users from the technical detail of markup editing and making it easier for them to change the content of pages. An example of such an interface is the VisualEditor in MediaWiki, the wiki engine used by Wikipedia. WYSIWYG editors may not provide all the features available in wiki markup, and some users prefer not to use them, so a source editor will often be available simultaneously.\nVersion history.\nSome wiki implementations keep a record of changes made to wiki pages, and may store every version of the page permanently. This allows authors to revert a page to an older version to rectify a mistake, or counteract a malicious or inappropriate edit to its content.\nThese stores are typically presented for each page in a list, called a \"log\" or \"edit history\", available from the page via a link in the interface. The list displays metadata for each revision to the page, such as the time and date of when it was stored, and the name of the person who created it, alongside a link to view that specific revision. A diff (short for \"difference\") feature may be available, which highlights the changes between any two revisions.\nEdit summaries.\nThe edit history view in many wiki implementations will include \"edit summaries\" written by users when submitting changes to a page. Similar to the function of a log message in a revision control system, an edit summary is a short piece of text which summarizes and perhaps explains the change, for example \"Corrected grammar\" or \"Fixed table formatting to not extend past page width\". It is not inserted into the article's main text.\nNavigation.\nTraditionally, wikis offer free navigation between their pages via hypertext links in page text, rather than requiring users to follow a formal or structured navigation scheme. Users may also create indexes or table of contents pages, hierarchical categorization via a taxonomy, or other forms of ad hoc content organization. Wiki implementations can provide one or more ways to categorize or tag pages to support the maintenance of such index pages, such as a backlink feature which displays all pages that link to a given page. Adding categories or tags to a page makes it easier for other users to find it.\nMost wikis allow the titles of pages to be searched amongst, and some offer full text search of all stored content.\nNavigation between wikis.\nSome wiki communities have established navigational networks between each other using a system called \"WikiNodes\". A WikiNode is a page on a wiki which describes and links to other, related wikis. Some wikis operate a structure of \"neighbors\" and \"delegates\", wherein a neighbor wiki is one which discusses similar content or is otherwise of interest, and a delegate wiki is one which has agreed to have certain content delegated to it. WikiNode networks act as webrings which may be navigated from one node to another to find a wiki which addresses a specific subject.\nLinking to and naming pages.\nThe syntax used to create internal hyperlinks varies between wiki implementations. Beginning with the WikiWikiWeb in 1995, most wikis used camel case to name pages, which is when words in a phrase are capitalized and the spaces between them removed. In this system, the phrase \"camel case\" would be rendered as \"CamelCase\". In early wiki engines, when a page was displayed, any instance of a camel case phrase would be transformed into a link to another page named with the same phrase.\nWhile this system made it easy to link to pages, it had the downside of requiring pages to be named in a form deviating from standard spelling, and titles of a single word required abnormally capitalizing one of the letters (e.g. \"WiKi\" instead of \"Wiki\"). Some wiki implementations attempt to improve the display of camel case page titles and links by reinserting spaces and possibly also reverting to lower case, but this simplistic method is not able to correctly present titles of mixed capitalization. For example, \"Kingdom of France\" as a page title would be written as \"KingdomOfFrance\", and displayed as \"Kingdom Of France\".\nTo avoid this problem, the syntax of wiki markup gained \"free links\", wherein a term in natural language could be wrapped in special characters to turn it into a link without modifying it. The concept was given the name in its first implementation, in UseModWiki in February 2001. In that implementation, link terms were wrapped in a double set of square brackets, for example Kingdom of France. This syntax was adopted by a number of later wiki engines.\nIt is typically possible for users of a wiki to create links to pages that do not yet exist, as a way to invite the creation of those pages. Such links are usually differentiated visually in some fashion, such as being colored red instead of the default blue, which was the case in the original WikiWikiWeb, or by appearing as a question mark next to the linked words.\nHistory.\nWikiWikiWeb was the first wiki. Ward Cunningham started developing it in 1994, and installed it on the Internet domain c2.com on March 25, 1995. Cunningham gave it the name after remembering a Honolulu International Airport counter employee telling him to take the \"Wiki Wiki Shuttle\" bus that runs between the airport's terminals, later observing that \"I chose wiki-wiki as an alliterative substitute for 'quick' and thereby avoided naming this stuff quick-web.\"\nCunningham's system was inspired by his having used Apple's hypertext software HyperCard, which allowed users to create interlinked \"stacks\" of virtual cards. HyperCard, however, was single-user, and Cunningham was inspired to build upon the ideas of Vannevar Bush, the inventor of hypertext, by allowing users to \"comment on and change one another's text\". Cunningham says his goals were to link together people's experiences to create a new literature to document programming patterns, and to harness people's natural desire to talk and tell stories with a technology that would feel comfortable to those not used to \"authoring\".\nWikipedia became the most famous wiki site, launched in January 2001 and entering the top ten most popular websites in 2007. In the early 2000s, wikis were increasingly adopted in enterprise as collaborative software. Common uses included project communication, intranets, and documentation, initially for technical users. Some companies use wikis as their collaborative software and as a replacement for static intranets, and some schools and universities use wikis to enhance group learning. On March 15, 2007, the word \"wiki\" was listed in the online \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nAlternative definitions.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, the word \"wiki\" was used to refer to both user-editable websites and the software that powers them, and the latter definition is still occasionally in use.\nBy 2014, Ward Cunningham's thinking on the nature of wikis had evolved, leading him to write that the word \"wiki\" should not be used to refer to a single website, but rather to a mass of user-editable pages or sites so that a single website is not \"a wiki\" but \"an instance of wiki\". In this concept of wiki federation, in which the same content can be hosted and edited in more than one location in a manner similar to distributed version control, the idea of a single discrete \"wiki\" no longer made sense.\nImplementations.\nThe software which powers a wiki may be implemented as a series of scripts which operate an existing web server, a standalone application server that runs on one or more web servers, or in the case of personal wikis, run as a standalone application on a single computer. Some wikis use flat file databases to store page content, while others use a relational database, as indexed database access is faster on large wikis, particularly for searching.\nHosting.\nWikis can also be created on wiki hosting services (also known as \"wiki farms\"), where the server-side software is implemented by the wiki farm owner, and may do so at no charge in exchange for advertisements being displayed on the wiki's pages. Some hosting services offer private, password-protected wikis requiring authentication to access. Free wiki farms generally contain advertising on every page.\nTrust and security.\nAccess control.\nThe four basic types of users who participate in wikis are readers, authors, wiki administrators and system administrators. System administrators are responsible for the installation and maintenance of the wiki engine and the container web server. Wiki administrators maintain content and, through having elevated privileges, are granted additional functions (including, for example, preventing edits to pages, deleting pages, changing users' access rights, or blocking them from editing).\nControlling changes.\nWikis are generally designed with a \"soft security\" philosophy in which it is easy to correct mistakes or harmful changes, rather than attempting to prevent them from happening in the first place. This allows them to be very open while providing a means to verify the validity of recent additions to the body of pages. Most wikis offer a \"recent changes\" page which shows recent edits, or a list of edits made within a given time frame. Some wikis can filter the list to remove edits flagged by users as \"minor\" and automated edits. The version history feature allows harmful changes to be reverted quickly and easily.\nSome wiki engines provide additional content control, allowing remote monitoring and management of a page or set of pages to maintain quality. A person willing to maintain pages will be alerted of modifications to them, allowing them to verify the validity of new editions quickly. Such a feature is often called a \"watchlist\".\nSome wikis also implement \"patrolled revisions\", in which editors with the requisite credentials can mark edits as being legitimate. A \"flagged revisions\" system can prevent edits from going live until they have been reviewed.\nWikis may allow any person on the web to edit their content without having to register an account on the site first (\"anonymous editing\"), or require registration as a condition of participation. On implementations where an administrator is able to restrict editing of a page or group of pages to a specific group of users, they may have the option to prevent anonymous editing while allowing it for registered users.\nTrustworthiness and reliability of content.\nCritics of publicly editable wikis argue that they could be easily tampered with by malicious individuals, or even by well-meaning but unskilled users who introduce errors into the content. Proponents maintain that these issues will be caught and rectified by a wiki's community of users. High editorial standards in medicine and health sciences articles, in which users typically use peer-reviewed journals or university textbooks as sources, have led to the idea of expert-moderated wikis. Wiki implementations retaining and allowing access to specific versions of articles has been useful to the scientific community, by allowing expert peer reviewers to provide links to trusted version of articles which they have analyzed.\nSecurity.\nTrolling and cybervandalism on wikis, where content is changed to something deliberately incorrect or a hoax, offensive material or nonsense is added, or content is maliciously removed, can be a major problem. On larger wiki sites it is possible for such changes to go unnoticed for a long period.\nIn addition to using the approach of soft security for protecting themselves, larger wikis may employ sophisticated methods, such as bots that automatically identify and revert vandalism. For example, on Wikipedia, the bot \"ClueBot NG\" uses machine learning to identify likely harmful changes, and reverts these changes within minutes or even seconds.\nDisagreements between users over the content or appearance of pages may cause \"edit wars\", where competing users repetitively change a page back to a version that they favor. Some wiki software allows administrators to prevent pages from being editable until a decision has been made on what version of the page would be most appropriate.\nSome wikis may be subject to external structures of governance which address the behavior of persons with access to the system, for example in academic contexts.\nHarmful external links.\nAs most wikis allow the creation of hyperlinks to other sites and services, the addition of malicious hyperlinks, such as sites infected with malware, can also be a problem. For example, in 2006 a German Wikipedia article about the Blaster Worm was edited to include a hyperlink to a malicious website, and users of vulnerable Microsoft Windows systems who followed the link had their systems infected with the worm. Some wiki engines offer a blacklist feature which prevents users from adding hyperlinks to specific sites that have been placed on the list by the wiki's administrators.\nCommunities.\nApplications.\nThe English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web and ranks in the top 10 among all Web sites in terms of traffic. Other large wikis include the WikiWikiWeb, Memory Alpha, Wikivoyage, and previously Susning.nu, a Swedish-language knowledge base. Medical and health-related wiki examples include Ganfyd, an online collaborative medical reference that is edited by medical professionals and invited non-medical experts. Many wiki communities are private, particularly within enterprises. They are often used as internal documentation for in-house systems and applications. Some companies use wikis to allow customers to help produce software documentation. A study of corporate wiki users found that they could be divided into \"synthesizers\" and \"adders\" of content. Synthesizers' frequency of contribution was affected more by their impact on other wiki users, while adders' contribution frequency was affected more by being able to accomplish their immediate work. From a study of thousands of wiki deployments, Jonathan Grudin concluded careful stakeholder analysis and education are crucial to successful wiki deployment.\nIn 2005, the Gartner Group, noting the increasing popularity of wikis, estimated that they would become mainstream collaboration tools in at least 50% of companies by 2009. Wikis can be used for project management. Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries. In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work. In the mid-2000s, the increasing trend among industries toward collaboration placed a heavier impetus upon educators to make students proficient in collaborative work, inspiring even greater interest in wikis being used in the classroom.\nWikis have found some use within the legal profession and within the government. Examples include the Central Intelligence Agency's Intellipedia, designed to share and collect intelligence assessments, DKosopedia, which was used by the American Civil Liberties Union to assist with review of documents about the internment of detainees in Guant\u00e1namo Bay; and the wiki of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, used to post court rules and allow practitioners to comment and ask questions. The United States Patent and Trademark Office operates Peer-to-Patent, a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to the examination of pending patent applications. Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park. Cornell Law School founded a wiki-based legal dictionary called Wex, whose growth has been hampered by restrictions on who can edit.\nIn academic contexts, wikis have also been used as project collaboration and research support systems.\nCity wikis.\nA \"city wiki\" or \"local wiki\" is a wiki used as a knowledge base and social network for a specific geographical locale. The term city wiki is sometimes also used for wikis that cover not just a city, but a small town or an entire region. Such a wiki contains information about specific instances of things, ideas, people and places. Such highly localized information might be appropriate for a wiki targeted at local viewers, and could include:\nGrowth factors.\nA study of several hundred wikis in 2008 showed that a relatively high number of administrators for a given content size is likely to reduce growth; access controls restricting editing to registered users tends to reduce growth; a lack of such access controls tends to fuel new user registration; and that a higher ratio of administrators to regular users has no significant effect on content or population growth.\nLegal environment.\nJoint authorship of articles, in which different users participate in correcting, editing, and compiling the finished product, can also cause editors to become tenants in common of the copyright, making it impossible to republish without permission of all co-owners, some of whose identities may be unknown due to pseudonymous or anonymous editing. Some copyright issues can be alleviated through the use of an open content license. Version 2 of the GNU Free Documentation License includes a specific provision for wiki relicensing, and Creative Commons licenses are also popular. When no license is specified, an implied license to read and add content to a wiki may be deemed to exist on the grounds of business necessity and the inherent nature of a wiki.\nWikis and their users can be held liable for certain activities that occur on the wiki. If a wiki owner displays indifference and forgoes controls (such as banning copyright infringers) that they could have exercised to stop copyright infringement, they may be deemed to have authorized infringement, especially if the wiki is primarily used to infringe copyrights or obtains a direct financial benefit, such as advertising revenue, from infringing activities. In the United States, wikis may benefit from Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which protects sites that engage in \"Good Samaritan\" policing of harmful material, with no requirement on the quality or quantity of such self-policing. It has also been argued that a wiki's enforcement of certain rules, such as anti-bias, verifiability, reliable sourcing, and no-original-research policies, could pose legal risks. When defamation occurs on a wiki, theoretically, all users of the wiki can be held liable, because any of them had the ability to remove or amend the defamatory material from the \"publication\". It remains to be seen whether wikis will be regarded as more akin to an internet service provider, which is generally not held liable due to its lack of control over publications' contents, than a publisher. It has been recommended that trademark owners monitor what information is presented about their trademarks on wikis, since courts may use such content as evidence pertaining to public perceptions, and they can edit entries to rectify misinformation.\nConferences.\nActive conferences and meetings about wiki-related topics include:\nFormer wiki-related events include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32852", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32852", "title": "WeekEnd", "text": ""}
{"id": "32860", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32860", "title": "WorldWarOne", "text": ""}
{"id": "32864", "revid": "1010519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32864", "title": "WikiWikiWeb", "text": "First user-editable website (launched 1995)\nThe WikiWikiWeb is the first wiki, or user-editable website. It was launched on 25 March 1995 by programmer Ward Cunningham and has been a read-only archive since 2015. The name \"WikiWikiWeb\" originally also applied to the wiki software that operated the website, which was later renamed to \"WikiBase\".\nDescription.\nWikiWikiWeb is the first wiki, or user-editable website. The site was launched on 25 March 1995 by programmer Ward Cunningham to accompany the Portland Pattern Repository website discussing software design patterns.\nThe name \"WikiWikiWeb\" originally also applied to the wiki software that operated the website, written in the Perl programming language and later renamed to \"WikiBase\".\nHyperlinks between pages on WikiWikiWeb are created by joining capitalized words together, a technique referred to as camel case. This convention of wiki markup formatting is still followed by some more recent wiki software, whereas others, such as the MediaWiki software that powers Wikipedia, allow links without camel case.\nHistory.\nThe software and website were developed in 1994 by Cunningham in order to make the exchange of ideas between programmers easier. This concept was based on the ideas developed in HyperCard stacks that Cunningham built in the late 1980s. On March 25, 1995, he installed the software on his company's (Cunningham &amp; Cunningham) website: c2.com. The site was frequently referred to by its users as simply \"Wiki\"; users of the early network of wiki sites that followed in the 1990s and 2000s followed a convention that using the word with a capitalized \"W\" referred exclusively to WikiWikiWeb.\nIn December 2014, WikiWikiWeb came under the attack of vandals, and had to be put into a read-only state. On February 1, 2015, Cunningham announced that the Wiki had been rewritten as a single-page application and migrated to the new Federated Wiki.\nWhen moved to read-only, the WikiWikiWeb's \"\" page contained the following description in the first two paragraphs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Welcome to , also known as \"Wiki\". A lot of people had their first wiki experience here. This community has been around since 1995 and consists of many people. We always accept newcomers with valuable contributions. If you haven't used a wiki before, be prepared for a bit of . The usefulness of Wiki is in the freedom, simplicity, and power it offers.\nThis site's primary focus is in . However, it is more than just an . It started there, but the theme has created a culture and all its own. All Wiki content is . Most of all, this is a forum where people share ideas! It changes as people come and go. Much of the information here is subjective. If you are looking for a dedicated reference site, try ; !\nEtymology.\nCunningham came up with the name WikiWikiWeb because he remembered a Honolulu International Airport counter employee who told him to take the Wiki Wiki Shuttle, a shuttle bus line that runs between the airport's terminals. \"Wiki Wiki\" is a reduplication of \"wiki\", a Hawaiian language word for \"quick\". Cunningham's idea was to make WikiWikiWeb's pages quickly editable by its users, so he initially thought about calling it \"QuickWeb\", but later changed his mind and dubbed it \"WikiWikiWeb\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32866", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32866", "title": "WarsaW", "text": ""}
{"id": "32867", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32867", "title": "WalterWilliams", "text": ""}
{"id": "32870", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32870", "title": "WhyPhilosophize", "text": ""}
{"id": "32871", "revid": "46546583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32871", "title": "WhatIsGod", "text": ""}
{"id": "32872", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32872", "title": "WolVes", "text": ""}
{"id": "32876", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32876", "title": "Word (disambiguation)", "text": "A word is a unit of language.\nWord(s) may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32877", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32877", "title": "WolfgangAmadeusMozart", "text": ""}
{"id": "32881", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32881", "title": "Warez", "text": "Movies, software or music distributed in violation of copyright\nWarez refers to pirated software and other copyrighted digital media\u2014such as video games, movies, music, and e-books\u2014illegally distributed online, often after bypassing digital rights management (DRM). The term, derived from \"software\", is pronounced like \"wares\" (). Warez is typically shared via peer-to-peer networks, file-hosting services, and IRC. The global community involved is known as The Scene. Warez culture dates back to the 1980s and remains embedded in online communities. Its distribution generally violates copyright law and continues to raise legal and ethical concerns.\nTerminology.\nWarez, and its leetspeak form \"W4r3z\", are plural representations of the word \"ware\" (short for computer software), and are terms used to refer to \"[p]irated software distributed over the Internet,\" that is, \"[s]oftware that has been illegally copied and made available\" e.g., after having \"protection codes de-activated\". \"Cracking\", or circumventing copy protection, is an essential part of the warez process,\" and via this commonality, the definition focused on computer software has been extended to include other forms of material under copyright protection, especially movies. As Aaron Schwabach notes, the term covers both supported and unsupported materials (the latter unsupported, termed abandonware), and legal recourses aimed at stemming the creation and distribution of warez are designed to cover both profit-driven and \"enthusiast\" practitioners. Hence, the term refers to copyrighted works that are distributed without fees or royalties and so traded in general violation of copyright law.\nThe term \"warez,\" which is intended to be pronounced like the word \"wares\" (/\u02c8w\u025b\u0259rz/), was coined in the 1990s; its origin is with an unknown member of an underground computing circle, but has since become commonplace among Internet users and the mass media. It is used most commonly as a noun: \"My neighbour downloaded 10 gigabytes of warez yesterday\"; but has also been used as a verb: \"The new Windows was warezed a month before the company officially released it\". The global collection of warez groups has been referred to as \"The Warez Scene,\" or more ambiguously \"The Scene.\"\nWhile the term 'piracy' is commonly used to describe a significant range of activities, most of which are unlawful, the relatively neutral meaning in this context is \"...mak[ing] use of or reproduc[ing] the work of another without authorization\". Some groups (including the GNU project of the Free Software Foundation, FSF) object to the use of this and other words such as \"theft\" because they represent an attempt to create a particular impression in the reader:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The FSF advocates the use of terms like \"prohibited copying\" or \"unauthorized copying\", or \"sharing information with your neighbor.\" Hence, the term \"software pirate\" is controversial; FSF derides its use, while many self-described pirates take pride in the term, and some groups (e.g., Pirates with Attitudes) fully embrace it.\n\"Direct download [DDL] sites\" are web locations that index links to locations where files can be directly downloaded to the user's computer; many such sites link to free file hosting services, for the hosting of materials. DDL sites do not directly host the material and can avoid the fees that normally accompany large file hosting.\nMotivations and arguments.\nThe production and/or distribution of warez is illegal in most countries due to the protections provided in the TRIPS Agreement. Software infringers generally exploit the international nature of the copyright issue to avoid law enforcement in specific countries. Violations are typically overlooked in poorer third world countries, and other countries with weak or non-existent protection for intellectual property. Additionally, some first world countries have loopholes in legislation that allow the warez to continue.\nThere is also a movement, exemplified by groups like The Pirate Party and scholars at The Mises Institute, that the very idea of intellectual property is an anathema to free society. This is in contrast to some of the more traditional open source advocates such as Lawrence Lessig, who advocate for middle ground between freedom and intellectual property.\nLegality.\nGenerally, there are four elements of criminal copyright infringement: the existence of a valid copyright, that copyright was infringed, the infringement was willful, and the infringement was either substantial, or for commercial gain (at levels often set by statute). Offering warez is generally understood to be a form of copyright infringement that is punishable as either a civil wrong or a crime.6307\nOften, sites hosting torrent files claim that they are not breaking any laws because they are not offering the actual data; rather, the sites only offer a link to other places or peers that contain the infringing material. However, many prosecution cases and convictions argue to the contrary. For instance, Dimitri Mader, the French national who operates a movie distribution warez site, Wawa-Mania, was fined 20,000 \u20ac and sentenced, in absentia, to a year in jail by a European court (after fleeing France for the Philippines), for his role in managing the site. In the U.S., through 2004, more than 80 individuals had been prosecuted and convicted for trade in warez products (under the NET Act and other statutes), for movie and software pirating in particular, with a number of individuals being imprisoned, including some enthusiast traders.\nHowever, laws and their application to warez activities may vary greatly from country to country; for instance, while Wawa-Mania is under sanction in France, it remains in operation via a host in Moldova, and through use of an Ecuadorian top-level domain. Hence, while high-profile web hosts and domain providers generally do not permit the hosting of warez, and delete sites found to be hosting them, private endeavours and small commercial entities continue to allow the trade in warez to continue. And, in some countries, and at some times, software \"piracy\" has been encouraged, and international and usual national legal protections ignored. A dispute between Iran and United States over membership in WTO and subsequent U.S. block of Iran's attempts at full-membership has led Iran to encourage the copying of U.S. software; hence, there has been a subsequent surge in Iranian \"warez\" and \"crackz\" websites (as Iranian laws do not forbid hosting them inside Iran). The same policy has been adopted by Antigua, and others.\nDistribution.\nWarez are often distributed outside of The Scene (a collection of warez groups) by torrents (files including tracker info, piece size, uncompressed file size, comments, and vary in size from 1\u00a0k, to 400\u00a0k.) uploaded to a popular P2P website by an associate or friend of the cracker or cracking crew. An nfo or FILE ID.DIZ is often made to promote who created the release. It is then leeched (downloaded) by users of the tracker and spread to other sharing sites using P2P, or other sources such as newsgroups. From there, it can be downloaded by millions of users all over the world. Often, one release is duplicated, renamed, then re-uploaded to different sites so that eventually, it can become impossible to trace the original file. Another increasingly popular method of distributing Warez is via one-click hosting websites. In the early 1990s, warez were often published on bulletin boards that had a warez section.\nRise of software infringement.\nUnauthorized copying has been an ongoing phenomenon that started when high quality, commercially produced software was released for sale. Whether the medium was cassette tape or floppy disk, cracking enthusiasts found a way to duplicate the software and spread it without the permission of the maker. Bootlegging communities were built around the Apple II, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit computers, ZX Spectrum, Amiga, Atari ST and other systems. Entire networks of BBSes sprang up to traffic illegal software from one user to the next. Machines like the Amiga and the Commodore 64 had an international network, through which software not available on one continent would eventually make its way to every region via bulletin board systems.\nIt was also common in the 1980s to use physical floppy disks and the postal service for spreading software, in an activity known as \"mail trading\". Prior to the sale of software that came on CD-ROM discs and after hard drives had become available, the software did not require the floppy disc to be in the drive when starting and using the program. So, a user could install it onto their computer and mail the disk to the next person, who could do the same. Particularly widespread in continental Europe, mail trading was even used by many of the leading cracker groups as their primary channel of interaction. Software copyright violation via mail trading was also the most common means for many computer hobbyists in the Eastern bloc countries to receive new Western software for their computers.\nCopy-protection schemes for the early systems were designed to defeat casual duplication attempts, as \"crackers\" would typically release a copied game to the \"pirate\" community the day they were earmarked for market.\nA famous event in the history of software copyright policy was an open letter written by Bill Gates of Microsoft, dated February 3, 1976, in which he argued that the quality of available software would increase if \"software piracy\" were less prevalent. However, until the early 1990s, software copyright infringement was not yet considered a serious problem by most people. In 1992, the Software Publishers Association began to battle against this phenomenon, with its promotional video \"Don't Copy That Floppy\". It and the Business Software Alliance have remained the most active anti-infringement organizations worldwide, although to compensate for extensive growth in recent years, they have gained the assistance of the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), as well as American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers (ASCAP) and Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI).\nToday most warez files are distributed to the public via bittorrent and One-click hosting sites. Some of the most popular software companies that are being targeted are Adobe, Microsoft, Nero, Apple, DreamWorks, and Autodesk, to name a few. To reduce the spread of illegal copying, some companies have hired people to release \"fake\" torrents (known as Torrent poisoning), which look real and are meant to be downloaded, but while downloading the individual does not realize that the company that owns the software has received their IP address. They will then contact their ISP, and further legal action may be taken by the company/ISP.\nCauses that have accelerated its growth.\nSimilar to televisions and telephones, computers have become a necessity to every person in the information age. As the use of computers increased, so had software and cyber crimes.\nIn the mid-1990s, the average Internet user was still on dial-up, with average speed ranging between 28.8 and 33.6 kbit/s. If one wished to download a piece of software, which could run about 200 MB, the download time could be longer than one day, depending on network traffic, the Internet Service Provider, and the server. Around 1997, broadband began to gain popularity due to its greatly increased network speeds. As \"large-sized file transfer\" problems became less severe, warez became more widespread and began to affect large software files like animations and movies.\nIn the past, files were distributed by point-to-point technology: with a central uploader distributing files to downloaders. With these systems, a large number of downloaders for a popular file uses an increasingly larger amount of bandwidth. If there are too many downloads, the server can become unavailable. The opposite is true for peer-to-peer networking; the \"more\" downloaders the \"faster\" the file distribution is. With swarming technology as implemented in file sharing systems like eDonkey2000 or BitTorrent, downloaders help the uploader by picking up some of its uploading responsibilities. There are many sites with links to One-click hosting websites and other sites where one can upload files that contribute to the growing amount of warez.\nDistribution via compromised FTP servers.\nPrior to the development of modern peer-to-peer sharing systems and home broadband service, sharing warez sometimes involved warez groups scanning the Internet for weakly secured computer systems with high-speed connections. These weakly secured systems would be compromised by exploiting the poor FTP security, creating a special directory on the server with an unassuming name to contain the illegal content.\nA common mistake of early FTP administrators was to permit a directory named /incoming that allows full read and write access by external users, but the files themselves in /incoming were hidden; by creating a directory inside /incoming, this hidden directory would then allow normal file viewing. Users of the compromised site would be directed to log in and go to a location such as /incoming/data/warez to find the warez content. Messages could be left for other warez users by uploading a plain text file with the message inside.\nHackers would also use known software bugs to illicitly gain full administrative remote control over a computer, and install a hidden FTP service to host their wares. This FTP service was usually running on an unusual port number, or with a non-anonymous login name like \"login: warez / Password: warez\" to help prevent discovery by legitimate users; information about this compromised system would then be distributed to a select group of people who were part of the warez scene.\nIt was important for warez group members to regulate who had access to these compromised FTP servers, to keep the network bandwidth usage low. A site that suddenly became very popular would be noticed by the real owners of the equipment, as their business systems became slow or low on disk space; investigation of system usage would then inevitably result in discovery and removal of the warez, and tightening of the site security.\nAutomated warez distribution via IRC bots.\nAs the ability to compromise and attain full remote control of business servers became more developed, the warez groups would hack a server and install an IRC bot on the compromised systems alongside the FTP service, or the IRC bot would provide file sharing directly by itself. This software would intelligently regulate access to the illicit data by using file queues to limit bandwidth usage, or by only running during off-hours overnight when the business owning the compromised hardware was closed for the day.\nIn order to advertise the existence of the compromised site, the IRC software would join public IRC \"warez\" channels as a \"bot\" and post into the channel with occasional status messages every few minutes, providing information about how many people are logged into the warez host, how many files are currently being downloaded, what the upload/download ratio is (to force users into contributing data of their own before they can download), which warez distributor is running the bot, and other status information.\nThis functionality still exists and can still be found on IRC \"warez\" channels, as an alternative to the modern and streamlined P2P distribution systems. The opportunity to find and compromise poorly secured systems on which to create an illicit warez distribution site has only increased with the popular use of broadband service by home users who may not fully understand the security implications of having their home computer always turned on and connected to the Internet\nTypes.\nThere is generally a distinction made between different sub-types of warez. The unusual spellings shown here were commonly used as directory names within a compromised server, to organize the files rather than having them all thrown together in a single random collection.\nMovie infringement.\nMovie copyright infringement was looked upon as impossible by the major studios. When dial-up was common in early and mid-1990s, movies distributed on the Internet tended to be small. The technique that was usually used to make them small was to use compression software, thus lowering the video quality significantly. At that time, the largest copyright violation threat was software.\nHowever, along with the rise in broadband internet connections beginning around 1998, higher quality movies began to see widespread distribution \u2013 with the release of DeCSS, ISO images copied directly from the original DVDs were slowly becoming a feasible distribution method. Today, movie sharing has become so common that it has caused major concern amongst movie studios and their representative organizations. Because of this the MPAA is often running campaigns during movie trailers where it tries to discourage people from copying material without permission. Unlike the music industry, which has had online music stores available for several years, the movie industry moved to online distribution only in 2006, after the launch of Amazon Unbox.\nBecause of this, cameras are sometimes forbidden in movie theaters.\nFile formats.\nA CD software release can contain up to 700\u00a0megabytes of data, which presented challenges when sending over the Internet, particularly in the late 1990s when broadband was unavailable to most home consumers. These challenges apply to an even greater extent for a single-layer DVD release, which can contain up to 4.7\u00a0GB of data. The warez scene made it standard practice to split releases up into many separate pieces, called disks, using several file compression formats: (historical TAR, LZH, ACE, UHA, ARJ), ZIP, and most commonly RAR. The original purpose of these \"disks\" was so that each .rar file could fit on a single 1.44\u00a0MB 3\u00bd inch floppy disk. With the growing size of games, this is no longer feasible, as hundreds of disks would need to be used. The average size of disks released by groups today are 50\u00a0megabytes or 100\u00a0megabytes, however it is common to find disks up to 200\u00a0megabytes.\nThis method has many advantages over sending a single large file:\nDespite the fact that many modern ftp programs support segmented downloading, the compression via RAR, ZIP, and breaking up of files has not changed.\nReleases of software titles often come in two forms. The full form is a full version of a game or application, generally released as CD or DVD-writable disk images (BIN or ISO files). A rip is a cut-down version of the title in which additions included on the legitimate DVD/CD (generally PDF manuals, help files, tutorials, and audio/video media) are omitted. In a game rip, generally all game video is removed, and the audio is compressed to MP3 or Vorbis, which must then be decoded to its original form before playing. These rips are very rare today, as most modern broadband connections can easily handle the full files, and the audio is usually already compressed by the original producer in some fashion.\nWarez and malware.\nThere is a common perception that warez sites represent high risk in terms of malware. In addition, there are several papers showing there is indeed correlation between warez/file sharing sites and malware. In particular, one study shows that out of all domains the study classified as \"pirate\", 7.1% are infected (while out of \"random\" domains only 0.4% were infected); another study maintains that '\"maliciousness\" of the content for sites they classified as \"pirate\" (which specifically included \"warez\" sites) is the highest among all the researched site categories. Domains related to anti-copy protection tools are among the most malicious sites. Another study specifically targeted anti-copy protection tools such as cracks and key generators. They conclude that the majority of these programs aim to infect the user's computer with one or more types of malware. The chance of the end-user being exposed to malicious code when dealing with cracked applications or games is more than 50%.\nInfected warez directly from the warez scene on the other hand, is a very unusual occurrence. The malicious content is usually added at a later stage by third parties.\nDemographics.\nWarez traders share many similarities to both hackers and crackers. Primary warez distribution groups include a single cracker that renders all copy protected technologies in a warez inoperable. Unlike the typical age of a hacker and cracker, the general age and demographics of a warez trader are older and married IT professionals. The need for attention is another similarity between the groups as well as the belief that digital property should be free.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32883", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32883", "title": "WilliamShakespeare", "text": ""}
{"id": "32884", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32884", "title": "WaltZ", "text": ""}
{"id": "32893", "revid": "50376663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32893", "title": "Wedding", "text": "Ceremony where people are united in marriage\nA wedding is a ceremony in which two people are united in marriage. Wedding traditions and customs vary greatly between cultures, ethnicities, races, religions, denominations, countries, social classes, and sexual orientations. Most wedding ceremonies involve an exchange of marriage vows by a couple; a presentation of a gift (e.g., an offering, rings, a symbolic item, flowers, money, or a dress); and a public proclamation of marriage by an authority figure or celebrant. Special wedding garments are often worn, and the ceremony is sometimes followed by a wedding reception. Music, poetry, prayers, or readings from religious texts or literature are also commonly incorporated into the ceremony, as well as superstitious customs.\nCommon elements across cultures.\nSome cultures have adopted the traditional Western custom of the white wedding, in which a bride wears a white wedding dress and veil. This tradition was popularized through the marriage of Queen Victoria. Some say Queen Victoria's choice of a white gown may have simply been a sign of extravagance, but may have also been influenced by the values she held which emphasized sexual purity.\nThe use of a wedding ring has long been part of religious weddings in Indian sub-continent, Europe and America, but the origin of the tradition is unclear. One possibility is the Roman belief in the vena amoris, which was believed to be a blood vessel that ran from the fourth finger (ring finger) directly to the heart. Thus, when a couple wore rings on this finger, their hearts were connected. Historian Vicki Howard points out that the belief in the \"ancient\" quality of the practice is most likely a modern invention. In the United States, a groom's wedding band has not appeared until the early 20th century, while in Europe it has been part of the tradition since the ancient Romans, as witnessed by the jurist Gaius.\nThe exit from the wedding ceremony is also called the \"send off\" and often includes traditional practices; for instance, in Ethiopian weddings, newlyweds and the rest of the wedding party bow and kiss the elders' knees. In most of the Western world, as well as in countries such as India and Malaysia, the send off often includes the practice of throwing rice (a symbol of prosperity and fertility) or other seeds at the newlyweds. Despite popular belief, using uncooked rice for this purpose is not harmful to birds. In several cultures, people toss shoes instead of rice.\nThe wedding ceremony is often followed by a wedding reception or wedding breakfast, in which the rituals may include speeches from a groom, best man, father of a bride and possibly a bride, the newlyweds' first dance as a couple, and the cutting of an elegant wedding cake. In recent years traditions have changed to include a father-daughter dance for a bride and her father, and sometimes also a mother-son dance for a groom and his mother.\nLocations.\nIn some countries there are restrictions on where a wedding may take place, for example before the Marriage Act 1994, marriages in England and Wales could only take place in authorized religious buildings or civil register offices, but the Act extended the options available to allow weddings in other \"approved premises\". Cretney identified a wide range of venues which sought approval after the implementation of this legal change, including funeral homes, hotels, stately homes, baseball fields, football grounds, basketball courts, beaches, a cemetery's chapel, town halls, museums, performing arts centers, health clubs, urban parks and former warships. Related outdoor locations could also be approved for weddings after the Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Approved Premises) (Amendment) Regulations 2022 were adopted.\nWedding music.\nWestern weddings.\nMusic played at Western weddings includes a processional song (e.g., the Wedding March) for walking down the aisle, either before or after the marriage service. An example of such use is reported in the 1878 wedding of Nora Robinson and Alexander Kirkman Finlay.\nThe \"Bridal Chorus\" from \"Lohengrin\" by Richard Wagner, commonly known as \"Here Comes the Bride\", is often used as the processional. Wagner is said to have been anti-Semitic, and as a result, the Bridal Chorus is normally not used at Jewish weddings. UK law forbids music with any religious connotations to be used in a civil ceremony.\nJohann Pachelbel's Canon in D is an alternative processional. Other alternatives include various contemporary melodies, such as Bob Marley's One Love, which is sometimes performed by a steel drum band. The music used in modern weddings is usually left completely up to the bride and groom, and it is becoming increasingly popular for couples to add their own twist to the song they walk down the aisle to. Many brides and grooms use songs that hold special value for them.\nIn the United States, approximately 2 million people get married each year, and close to 70 million people attend a wedding and spend more than $100 on a gift.\nIn the United Kingdom, according to a survey, the average minimum amount spent on a wedding gift is \u00a324.70, and the average maximum amount spent is \u00a3111.46. Eighty-five percent of people said that they were more likely to spend more money on a person if they had a good relationship with him or her.\nCustoms associated with various religions and cultures.\nChristian customs.\nMost Christian churches give some form of blessing to a marriage, which is seen as a sacred institution in some sense, although terminology and associated theological meanings vary widely from one denomination to another (e.g., \"holy matrimony\", \"sacrament of marriage\", \"holy ordinance of marriage\", or \"holy union\").\nA celebration of Holy Matrimony typically includes mutual vows or solemn promises of lifelong love and fidelity by the couple, and may include some sort of pledge by the community to support the couple's relationship. A \"church wedding\" is a ceremony held in a church and presided over by a Christian pastor. Traditionally, Christian weddings occur in a church, as Christian marriage ideally begins where one started his or her faith journey. (Christians receive the sacrament of baptism in church in the presence of their congregation.) Catholic Christian weddings must \"take place in a church building\", as holy matrimony is a sacrament; sacraments normatively occur in the presence of Christ in the house of God, and \"members of the faith community [should be] present to witness the event and provide support and encouragement for those celebrating the sacrament.\" Bishops never grant permission \"to those requesting to be married in a garden, on the beach, or some other place outside of the church\" and a dispensation is only granted \"in extraordinary circumstances (for example, if a bride or groom is ill or disabled and unable to come to the church).\" Marriage in the church, for Christians, is seen as contributing to the fruit of the newlywed couple regularly attending church each Lord's Day and raising children in the faith.\nWedding ceremonies typically contain prayers and readings from the Holy Bible and reflect the church's teachings about the spiritual significance of marriage, as well as its purpose and obligations. The wedding service often includes the reception of Holy Communion, especially in the context of Mass (as with Catholicism, Lutheranism, and Anglicanism). In some traditional weddings of Western Christianity (especially Catholicism, Lutheranism and Anglicanism), a \"care cloth\" or \"nuptial veil\" (\"velatio nuptialis\") \"signifying a marriage yoke joining the bride and groom together\" may be held over the kneeling couple during the nuptial blessing given by the priest.\nPre-marital counseling may be recommended or required for an engaged couple. In some Christian countries or denominations, a betrothal rite, as well as the reading of banns of marriage may also be required before the wedding date.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, Holy Matrimony is considered to be one of the seven sacraments, in this case, one that the spouses bestow upon each other in front of a priest and members of the community as witnesses. As with all sacraments, it is seen as having been instituted by Jesus himself (see Gospel of Matthew 19:1\u20132, Catechism of the Catholic Church \u00a71614\u20131615). The Second Vatican Council's \"Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy\" noted that there can be a place for appropriate \"customs and ceremonies\" to be incorporated into a Catholic marriage service.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, it is one of the Mysteries and is seen as an ordination and a martyrdom. The Christian wedding ceremony of Saint Thomas Christians, an ethnoreligious group of Christians in India, incorporates elements from local Indian traditions. Protestant weddings may be elaborate (as with Lutheranism and Anglicanism) or simple (as with Baptists). For example, in the United Methodist Church, the Service of Christian Marriage (Rite I) includes the elements found in a typical Sunday service, such as hymns, prayers, and readings from the Bible, as well as other elements unique to a wedding, including taking marriage vows and an optional exchange of wedding rings, as well as a special benediction for the couple. Holy Communion may be part of the wedding service in liturgical Protestant churches (e.g., Lutheran, Anglican, or Methodist), but is rarely, if ever, found in weddings of other low-church Protestant denominations (e.g., Baptists).\nA Quaker wedding ceremony in a Friends meeting is similar to any other meeting for worship, and therefore often very different from the experience expected by non-Friends.\nIn some Western countries, a separate and secular civil wedding ceremony is required for recognition by the state, while in other Western countries, couples must merely obtain a marriage license from a local government authority and can be married by Christian or other clergy authorized by law to do so.\nSince the beginning of the 21st century, same-sex couples have been allowed to marry civilly in many countries, and some Christian churches in those countries allow religious marriages of same-sex couples, though some forbid it. See the article Same-sex marriage.\nHindu customs.\nHindu ceremonies are usually conducted totally or at least partially in Sanskrit, the language of the Hindu scriptures. The wedding celebrations may last for several days and they can be extremely diverse, depending upon the region, denomination, and community. Mehendi ceremony is a traditional ritual in Hindu weddings, where Henna application takes place on the bride's hands and legs, before the wedding. On the wedding day, the bride and the bridegroom garland each other in front of the guests. Most guests witness only this short ceremony and then socialize, have food, and leave. The religious part (if applicable) comes hours later, witnessed by close friends and relatives. In cases where a religious ceremony is present, a Brahmin (Hindu priest) arranges a sacred \"yajna\" (fire-sacrifice), and the sacred fire (Agni) is considered the prime witness (\"s\u0101ksh\u012b\") of the marriage. He chants mantras from the Vedas and subsidiary texts while the couple is seated before the fire. The most important step is \"saptapadi\" or \"saat phere\", wherein the bride and the groom, hand-in-hand, encircle the sacred fire seven times, each circle representing a matrimonial vow. Then the groom marks the bride's hair parting with vermilion (\"sindoor\") and puts a gold necklace (\"mangalsutra\") around her neck. Or a yellow thread applied with turmeric is knotted around the bride's neck 3 times at marriage. The first knot represents her obedience and respect to her husband, the second one to his parents and the third represents her respect to God. Several other rituals may precede or follow these afore-mentioned rites. Then the bride formally departs from her blood-relatives to join the groom's family.\nJewish customs.\nA traditional Jewish wedding usually follows this format:\n\"If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand forget its skill.\"\n\"May my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth.\"\n\"If I do not remember you,\"\n\"if I do not consider Jerusalem in my highest joy.\"\nIn more observant communities, the couple will celebrate for seven more days, called the \"Sheva Brachot\" (seven blessings) during which the seven wedding blessings are recited at every large gathering during this time.\nIslamic customs.\nA wedding is typically a happy time for families to celebrate. In the Middle East, there are colorful, cultural variations from place to place.\nTwo male witnesses who are the members of the family in most cases are required for Nikah. According to the Quran, in a married Muslim couple, both husband and wife act as each other's protector and comforter and therefore only meant \"for each other\".\nAll Muslim marriages have to be declared publicly and are never to be undertaken in secret. For many Muslims, it is the ceremony that counts as the actual wedding alongside a confirmation of that wedding in a registry office according to \"fiqh\". In Islam a wedding is also viewed as a legal contract particularly in Islamic jurisprudences. However, most Muslim cultures separate both the institutions of the mosque and marriage; no religious official is necessary, but very often an Imam presides and performs the ceremony, he may deliver a short sermon. Celebrations may differ from country to country depending on their culture but the main ceremony is followed by a Walima (the marriage banquet).\nIn Islam, polygyny is allowed with certain religious restrictions. Despite that, an overwhelming majority of Muslims traditionally practice monogamy.\nIt is forbidden in Islam for parents or anyone else: to force, coerce, or trick either man or woman into a marriage that is contrary to the individual will of any one of the couples. It is also necessary for all marriages to commence with the best of intentions.\nChinese customs.\nAt traditional Chinese weddings, the tea ceremony is the equivalent of an exchange of vows at a Western wedding ceremony. This ritual is still practiced widely among rural Chinese; however, young people in larger cities, as well as in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Singapore, tend to practice a combination of Western style of marriage together with the tea ceremony.\nWhen the bride leaves her home with the groom to his house, a \"Good Luck Woman\" will hold a red umbrella over her head, meaning, \"Raise the bark, spread the leaves.\" This \"Good Luck Woman\" should be someone who is blessed with a good marriage, healthy children, and husband and living parents. Other relatives will scatter rice, red beans, and green beans in front of her. The red umbrella protects the bride from evil spirits, and the rice and beans are to attract the attention of the gold chicken.\nThe newlyweds kneel in front of parents presenting tea. A Good Luck Woman making the tea says auspicious phrases to bless the newlyweds and their families. The newlyweds also present tea to each other, raising the tea cups high to show respect before presenting the tea to each other.\nThe attendants receiving the tea usually give the bride gifts such as jewelry or a red envelope.\nThe tea ceremony is an official ritual to introduce the newlyweds to each other's family, and a way for newlyweds to show respect and appreciation to their parents. The newlyweds kneel in front of their parents, serving tea to both sides of parents, as well as elder close relatives. Parents give their words of blessing and gifts to the newlyweds.\nWelsh customs.\nPrior to the 19th century, first recorded in the 13th century in the Book of Aneirin, a custom known as a 'Neithior' or 'Neithor' was observed by the Welsh, it consisted of a great feast being held the following Sunday after the Wedding at the bride's parental home, the guests would pay for the meals and entertainments so that the new couple could afford a new home.\nHumanist weddings.\nWhile many wedding traditions and rituals have origins in religions and are still performed by religious leaders, some marriage traditions are cultural and predate the prevalent religions in those regions. Non-religious people will often want to have a wedding that is secular (not religious) in content. In order to meet this demand, secular ceremonies carried out by humanist celebrants first developed in the 19th century. Humanists UK members pioneered humanist weddings in the 1890s, and its weddings continue to be popular with couples across England, Wales, and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, Humanist Society Scotland (HSS) has carried out secular ceremonies in the country since the 1980s. These have been legally recognized since 2005, and became more numerous than church weddings in 2018. Humanist weddings vary in their content, but tend to include a combination of elements from traditional and modern weddings with an emphasis on the couple's values and their unique love story.\nHumanist wedding ceremonies are carried out in a variety of countries like the U.S., Canada and recently Brazil, having legal status in only a few of these countries. Humanist celebrants are able to perform valid civil marriages and civil partnerships in the Republic of Ireland. Secular weddings are becoming more popular in Ireland due to a declining influence of the Catholic Church. Since 2015, Irish humanists have conducted more weddings than the Church of Ireland.\nTypes.\nThere are many ways to categorize weddings, such as by the size or cultural traditions. A wedding may fall into several categories, such as a destination microwedding, or a civil elopement.\nWhite wedding.\nA white wedding is a term for a traditional formal or semi-formal Western wedding. This term refers to the color of the wedding dress, which became popular after Queen Victoria wore a pure white gown when she married Prince Albert and many were quick to copy her choice. At the time, the color white symbolized both extravagance and virginal purity to many and had become the color for use by young women being formally presented to the royal court. White weddings often take place in a place of worship, such as a church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.\nCivil wedding.\nA civil wedding is a ceremony presided over by a local civil authority, such as an elected or appointed judge, Justice of the peace or the mayor of a locality. Civil wedding ceremonies may use references to God or a deity (except in U.K law where readings and music are also restricted), but generally no references to a particular religion or denomination.\nCivil weddings allow partners of different faiths to marry without one partner converting to the other partner's religion.\nThey can be either elaborate or simple. Many civil wedding ceremonies take place in local town or city halls, courthouses in judges' chambers, in attorneys offices, in the mayor's office, or in the governor's office.\nThe relevance of civil weddings varies greatly from country to country. Some countries do not provide any form of civil wedding at all (Israel and many Islamic countries), while in others it is the only legally recognized form of marriage (most countries in North America, South America, Europe, Asia, Australia and The Pacific). In this case civil weddings are typically either a mandatory prerequisite for any religious ceremony or religious weddings have no legal significance at all. See Civil marriage.\nDestination wedding.\nNot to be confused with an elopement, a \"destination wedding\" is one in which a wedding is hosted, often in a vacation-like setting, at a location to which most of the invited guests must travel and often stay for several days. This type of ceremony could be held on a beach, in a metropolitan resort, a hotel, a banquet hall, a mountain, or at the home of a geographically distant friend or relative. During the recession of 2009, destination weddings continued to see growth compared to traditional weddings, as the typically smaller size results in lower costs. Some of the most popular European destinations for weddings include Lake Como in Italy, Santorini in Greece, Paris in France, and Tuscany in Italy.\nDestination weddings are prohibited in certain denominations of Christianity, such as the Catholic Church, which teach that Christian marriages should take place in the presence of God at church, where Christians began their journey of faith in the sacrament of baptism.\nIn the United Kingdom, a variation known as \"home-country destination weddings\" refers to weddings celebrated within the couple\u2019s country of residence that are planned to replicate the atmosphere, aesthetics, and symbolic qualities of international destination weddings. These events typically involve travel within the country to culturally or scenically significant locations and are structured to provide an immersive, multi-day experience without crossing national borders.\nDouble wedding.\nA double wedding is a double ceremony where two affianced couples rendezvous for two simultaneous or consecutive weddings. Typically, a fianc\u00e9 with a sibling or cousin who is also engaged, or four close friends in which both couples within the friendship are engaged might plan a double wedding where both couples legally marry.\nElopement.\nElopement is the act of getting married, often unexpectedly, without inviting guests to the wedding. In some cases, a small group of family or friends may be present, while in others, the engaged couple may marry without the consent or knowledge of parents or others. While the couple may or may not be widely known to be engaged prior to the elopement, the wedding itself is generally a surprise to those who are later informed of its occurrence.\nHandfasting.\nA handfasting is an old pagan custom, dating back to the time of the ancient Celts. A handfasting was originally more like an engagement period, where two people would declare a binding union between themselves for a year and a day. The original handfasting was a trial marriage.\nHighland or Scottish wedding.\nA Highland or Scottish wedding has the groom, with some or all of the groom's men wear a kilt. The bride may wear a sash or other tartan clothing. The Scottish basket sword is used for any Saber Arch.\nMass wedding.\nA collective or mass wedding is a single ceremony where numerous couples are married simultaneously.\nMicrowedding.\nA microwedding or minimony is defined by the small number of friends and family members present. The number of guests is usually understood to be no more than 10 or 15 people including family members, although some sources will use this label for a small wedding with up to 50 guests. Compared to an elopement or a civil wedding with no guests, a microwedding is planned and announced in advance and may incorporate whatever traditions and activities the family wants to maintain, such as a wedding cake, photographs, or religious ceremonies. Although the cost per guest may be higher, the overall cost of a microwedding is usually significantly less than a large wedding.\nMicroweddings gained attention during the COVID-19 pandemic as a way to have a wedding event in compliance with public health restrictions. After pandemic restrictions were lifted, they remained popular, with couples particularly appreciating their significantly lower costs.\nMilitary wedding.\nA military wedding is a ceremony conducted in a military chapel and may involve a saber arch. In most military weddings one or both of the people getting married will wear a military dress uniform in lieu of civilian formal wear. Some retired military personnel who marry after their service has ended may opt for a military wedding.\nPeasant wedding.\nA peasant wedding is a Dutch carnival custom.\nNot everywhere in Limburg and Brabant is a \"boerenbruiloft\" (peasant's wedding) part of the carnival. Especially in the northern and central part of Limburg and eastern part of North Brabant is the \"boerenbruiloft\" very often held during the carnival and is an important part of the carnival culture. Each carnival association has its own tradition concerning choosing the spouse for a wedding. Often the bride and groom are chosen by the council of eleven or by the couple that was married the year before. It is not necessary that the newlyweds are a couple in real life. It is also not necessary that the bride and groom are single. Both the bride and groom, however, should be in love during the carnival and they need to transfer their love to all the people who celebrate their wedding along with them. The highlight of the festival of the peasant wedding is the wedding and feast of the \"onecht\" (not-marriage) of the bride and groom. There are many aspects that can be found in a real-life marriage. First the engagement will be announced just as if it would be an official marriage. And both the families should learn to know each other very well in organizing the party and the ceremony, like a normal wedding. The two families prepare a piece of entertainment for the wedding. And just like a real wedding, a reception and a feast is organized where guests are asked to wear appropriate clothing. The bride and groom will often dress in wedding clothing from before 1940. The bride, for example, will often wear a poffer, which is a traditional Brabantian headdress.\nSame-sex wedding.\nA same-sex wedding is a wedding between two people of the same sex.\nSequel wedding.\nA sequel wedding is a large-scale wedding ceremony occurring some time after a couple's legal nuptials, which are typically much smaller. Sequel weddings are generally meant to celebrate a couple's union among many guests who were unable to attend the initial wedding or elopement.\nShotgun wedding.\nA shotgun wedding is a wedding in which the groom is reluctant to marry the bride but is strongly encouraged to do so to avoid family, social or legal repercussions. In many cases, the bride is pregnant before the wedding and the family of the bride, most commonly her father, insists that the groom marry the bride before the pregnancy becomes obvious.\nVow renewal wedding.\nA wedding vow renewal is a ceremony in which a married couple renews or reaffirms their wedding vows. Typically, this ceremony is held to commemorate a milestone wedding anniversary. It may also be held to recreate the marriage ceremony in the presence of family and friends, especially in the case of an earlier elopement.\nWeekend wedding.\nA weekend wedding is a wedding in which couples and their guests celebrate over the course of an entire weekend. Special activities, such as spa treatments and golf tournaments may be scheduled into the wedding itinerary. Lodging usually is at the same facility as the wedding and couples often host a Sunday brunch for the weekend's finale.\nBlack wedding.\nA black wedding, also known as \"shvartse khasene\" in Yiddish, or a plague wedding, referred to as \"mageyfe khasene\" in Yiddish, is a Jewish tradition where a wedding takes place in times of crisis, particularly during epidemics. In this custom, the bride and groom, often impoverished orphans, beggars, or individuals with disabilities, are united in marriage as a means to fend off diseases.\nWedding ceremony participants.\nWedding ceremony participants also referred to as the wedding party, are the people that participate directly in the wedding ceremony itself.\nDepending on the location, religion, and style of the wedding, this group may include only the individual people that are marrying, or it may include one or more \"brides\", \"grooms\" (or \"bridegrooms\"), \"persons of honor\", \"bridespersons\", \"best persons\", \"groomsmen\", \"flower girls\", \"pages\", and \"ring bearers\".\nA \"bride's party\" consists of those chosen to participate from her family or friends, while a \"groom's party\" consists of those from his family or friends.\nWedding industry.\nThe global wedding industry was worth $300 billion as of 2016. The United States wedding industry alone was estimated to be worth $60 billion as of the same year. In the United States, the wedding industry employs over one million people throughout 600,000 businesses and grows 2% each year. The industry has undergone a transition due to the increased use of technology. Bridal websites, blogs, and social media accounts have driven spending up and created new trends and traditions.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], the average cost of a wedding in the US was $29,858 ($ in current dollars). Extravagant spending on weddings is associated with debt stress and short-lived marriages that end in divorce. Couples who spent less than US$10,000 on all wedding-related expenses, who went on a honeymoon trip, and who had a relatively large number of guests in attendance, were the least likely to divorce. (The cost of the honeymoon itself had no effect.) Couples who start their marriage in debt are more likely to have fights early on their marriage which can lead to divorce. The best way to avoid disagreement is to have open communication with families and plan based on means. Even if the wedding goes well and the couple is happy to be married, the stress of putting on the event can lead to post-wedding anxiety or depression.\nA \"wedding tax\" is the concept of goods or services being purchased for a wedding being more expensive when compared to other events such as a family reunion or anniversary. It is also known as a \"wedding markup\". In 2016, an article published by \"Consumer Reports\" identified that 28% of secret shoppers who queried vendors would be charged a wedding markup. Vendors may charge more because they perceive wedding clients as more demanding or willing to spend more. Weddings can also be more time- and labour-intensive events for the vendor (e.g., lengthy planning discussions or ongoing touch-ups for makeup), require additional liability insurance or different materials (e.g., products that can keep the bride's hair in place during many hours of activity). Wedding clients may also receive a markup simply because they are more likely to pay compared to other consumers. Clients are also less likely to understand what a baseline price for these products are given that they are not commonplace purchases.\nBy country.\nVietnam.\nIn the past, the Vietnamese called this ceremony the \"bride-fetching ceremony\". Nowadays, it is commonly referred to as the \"wedding ceremony\" or \"nuptial ceremony\". It is a celebration to honor the happiness of the bride, groom, and their two families. This ceremony is also considered important in some societies and is usually only held after the couple has obtained a marriage certificate from the government. Vietnamese weddings often require choosing an auspicious date for the ceremony and the bride's arrival at the groom's house.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32895", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32895", "title": "Waltz", "text": "Ballroom and folk dance\nThe waltz (from de \" Walzer\" , meaning \"to roll or revolve\") is a ballroom and folk dance, in triple () time, performed primarily in closed position. Along with the l\u00e4ndler and allemande, the waltz was sometimes referred to by the generic term German Dance in publications during the late 18th and early 19th centuries.\nHistory.\nThere are many references to a sliding or gliding dance, including the \"volta\", that would evolve into the waltz that date from 16th-century Europe, including the representations of the printmaker Hans Sebald Beham. The French philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote of a dance he saw in 1580 in Augsburg, where the dancers held each other so closely that their faces touched. Kunz Haas (of approximately the same period) wrote, \"Now they are dancing the godless \"Weller\" or \"Spinner\".\" \"The vigorous peasant dancer, following an instinctive knowledge of the weight of fall, uses his surplus energy to press all his strength into the proper beat of the bar, thus intensifying his personal enjoyment in dancing.\" Around 1750, the lower classes in the regions of Bavaria, Tyrol, and Styria began dancing a couples dance called \"Walzer\". The \"L\u00e4ndler\", also known as the \"Schleifer\", a country dance in time, was popular in Bohemia, Austria, and Bavaria, and spread from the countryside to the suburbs of the city. While the eighteenth-century upper classes continued to dance the minuets (such as those by Mozart, Haydn and Handel), bored noblemen slipped away to the balls of their servants.\nIn the 1771 German novel \"Geschichte des Fr\u00e4uleins von Sternheim\" by Sophie von La Roche, a high-minded character complains about the newly introduced waltz among aristocrats thus: \"But when he put his arm around her, pressed her to his breast, cavorted with her in the shameless, indecent whirling-dance of the Germans and engaged in a familiarity that broke all the bounds of good breeding\u2014then my silent misery turned into burning rage.\"\nDescribing life in Vienna (dated at either 1776 or 1786), Don Curzio wrote, \"The people were dancing mad\u00a0... The ladies of Vienna are particularly celebrated for their grace and movements of waltzing of which they never tire.\" There is a waltz in the second act finale of the 1786 opera \"Una Cosa Rara\" by Martin y Soler. Soler's waltz was marked \"andante con moto\", or \"at a walking pace with motion\", but the flow of the dance was sped-up in Vienna leading to the \"Geschwindwalzer\", and the \"Galloppwalzer\".\nIn the 19th century, the word primarily indicated that the dance was a turning one; one would \"waltz\" in the polka to indicate rotating rather than going straight forward without turning.\nShocking many when it was first introduced, the waltz became fashionable in Vienna around the 1780s, spreading to many other countries in the years to follow. According to contemporary singer Michael Kelly, it reached England in 1791. During the Napoleonic Wars, infantry soldiers of the King's German Legion introduced the dance to the people of Bexhill, Sussex, from 1804.\nIt became fashionable in Britain during the Regency period, having been made respectable by the endorsement of Dorothea Lieven, wife of the Russian ambassador. Diarist Thomas Raikes later recounted that \"No event ever produced so great a sensation in English society as the introduction of the waltz in 1813.\" In the same year, a sardonic tribute to the dance by Lord Byron was anonymously published (written the previous autumn). Influential dance master and author of instruction manuals, Thomas Wilson published \"A Description of the Correct Method of Waltzing\" in 1816. Almack's, the most exclusive club in London, permitted the waltz, though the entry in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" shows that it was considered \"riotous and indecent\" as late as 1825. In \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", by Anne Bront\u00eb, in a scene set in 1827, the local vicar Reverend Milward tolerates quadrilles and country dances but intervenes decisively when a waltz is called for, declaring \"No, no, I don't allow that! Come, it's time to be going home.\"\nThe waltz, especially its closed position, became the example for the creation of many other ballroom dances. Subsequently, new types of waltz have developed, including many folk and several ballroom dances.\nVariants.\nIn the 19th and early 20th century, numerous different waltz forms existed, including versions performed in , or (sauteuse), and time ( waltz, half and half).\nIn the 1910s, a form called the Hesitation Waltz was introduced by Vernon and Irene Castle. It incorporated \"hesitations\" and was danced to fast music. A hesitation is basically a halt on the standing foot during the full waltz bar, with the moving foot suspended in the air or slowly dragged. Similar figures (Hesitation Change, Drag Hesitation, and Cross Hesitation) are incorporated in the International Standard Waltz Syllabus.\nThe Country Western Waltz is mostly progressive, moving counter clock wise around the dance floor. Both the posture and frame are relaxed, with posture bordering on a slouch. The exaggerated hand and arm gestures of some ballroom styles are not part of this style. Couples may frequently dance in the promenade position, depending on local preferences. Within Country Western waltz, there is the Spanish Waltz and the more modern (for the late 1930s- early 1950s) Pursuit Waltz. At one time it was considered ill treatment for a man to make the woman walk backwards in some locations.\nIn California, the waltz was banned by Mission priests until 1834 because of the \"closed\" dance position. Thereafter a Spanish Waltz was danced. This Spanish Waltz was a combination of dancing around the room in closed position, and a \"formation\" dance of two couples facing each other and performing a sequence of steps. \"Valse a Trois Temps\" was the \"earliest\" waltz step, and the Rye Waltz was preferred as a couple dance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32897", "revid": "9149531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32897", "title": "William Shakespeare", "text": "English playwright and poet (1564\u20131616)\nWilliam Shakespeare (c. 23 April 1564 \u2013 23 April 1616) was an English playwright, poet and actor. He is widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist. He is often called England's national poet and the \"Bard of Avon\" or simply \"the Bard\". His extant works, including collaborations, consist of some 39 plays, 154 sonnets, three long narrative poems and a few other verses, some of uncertain authorship. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright. Shakespeare remains arguably the most influential writer in the English language, and his works continue to be studied and reinterpreted.\nShakespeare was born and raised in Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire. At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three children: Susanna, and twins Hamnet and Judith. Sometime between 1585 and 1592 he began a successful career in London as an actor, writer, and part-owner (\"sharer\") of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, later known as the King's Men after the ascension of King James VI of Scotland to the English throne. At age 49 (around 1613) he appears to have retired to Stratford, where he died three years later. Few records of Shakespeare's private life survive; this has stimulated considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance, his sexuality, his religious beliefs and even certain fringe theories as to whether the works attributed to him were written by others.\nShakespeare produced most of his known works between 1589 and 1613. His early plays were primarily comedies and histories and are regarded as some of the best works produced in these genres. He then wrote mainly tragedies until 1608, among them \"Hamlet\", \"Othello\", \"King Lear\" and \"Macbeth\", all considered to be among the finest works in English. In the last phase of his life he wrote tragicomedies (also known as romances) such as \"The Winter's Tale\" and \"The Tempest\", and collaborated with other playwrights.\nMany of Shakespeare's plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime. However, in 1623 John Heminges and Henry Condell, two fellow actors and friends of Shakespeare's, published a more definitive text known as the First Folio, a posthumous collected edition of Shakespeare's dramatic works that includes 36 of his plays. Its preface includes a prescient poem by Ben Jonson, a former rival of Shakespeare, who hailed Shakespeare with the now-famous epithet: \"not of an age, but for all time\".\nLife.\nEarly life.\nShakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover (glove-maker) originally from Snitterfield in Warwickshire, and Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning family. He was born in Stratford-upon-Avon, where he was baptised on 26 April 1564. His date of birth is unknown but is traditionally observed on 23 April, Saint George's Day. This date, which can be traced to William Oldys and George Steevens, has proved appealing to biographers because Shakespeare died on the same date in 1616. He was the third of eight children, and the eldest surviving son.\nAlthough no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School in Stratford, a free school chartered in 1553, about a quarter-mile (400\u00a0m) from his home. Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely similar: the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree, and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon Latin classical authors.\nAt the age of 18, Shakespeare married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway. The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27 November 1582. The next day, two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage. The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste; the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times. Six months after the marriage, Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised 26 May 1583. Twins, son Hamnet and daughter Judith, followed almost two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585. Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596.\nAfter the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592. The exception is the appearance of his name in the \"complaints bill\" of a law case before the Queen's Bench court at Westminster dated Michaelmas Term 1588 and 9 October 1589. Scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as Shakespeare's \"lost years\". Biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories. Nicholas Rowe, Shakespeare's first biographer, recounted a Stratford legend that Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy. Shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him. Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London. John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster. Some 20th-century scholars suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who named a certain \"William Shakeshafte\" in his will. Little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.\nLondon and theatrical career.\nIt is not known definitively when Shakespeare began writing, but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the London stage by 1592. By then, he was sufficiently known in London to be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his \"Groats-Worth of Wit\" from that year:\n...\u00a0there is an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his \"Tiger's heart wrapped in a Player's hide\", supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute \"Johannes factotum\", is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country.\nScholars differ on the exact meaning of Greene's words, but most agree that Greene was accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match such university-educated writers as Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Nashe and Greene himself (the so-called \"University Wits\"). The italicised phrase parodying the line \"Oh, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide\" from Shakespeare's \"Henry VI, Part 3\", along with the pun \"Shake-scene\", clearly identify Shakespeare as Greene's target. As used here, \"Johannes Factotum\" (\"Jack of all trades\") refers to a second-rate tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common \"universal genius\".\nGreene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare's work in the theatre. Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid-1580s to just before Greene's remarks. After 1594 Shakespeare's plays were performed at The Theatre, in Shoreditch, only by the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in London. After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the new King James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAll the world's a stage,\nand all the men and women merely players:\nthey have their exits and their entrances;\nand one man in his time plays many parts\u00a0...\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014\"As You Like It\", Act II, Scene 7, 139\u2013142\nIn 1599 a partnership of members of the company built their own theatre on the south bank of the River Thames, which they named the Globe. In 1608 the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre. Extant records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate that his association with the company made him a wealthy man, and in 1597 he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 1605 invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.\nSome of Shakespeare's plays were published in quarto editions, beginning in 1594, and by 1598 his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages. Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright. The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's \"Works\" names him on the cast lists for \"Every Man in His Humour\" (1598) and \"Sejanus His Fall\" (1603). The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson's \"Volpone\" is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end. The First Folio of 1623, however, lists Shakespeare as one of \"the Principal Actors in all these Plays\", some of which were first staged after \"Volpone\", although one cannot know for certain which roles he played. In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that \"good Will\" played \"kingly\" roles. In 1709 Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet's father. Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in \"As You Like It\", and the Chorus in \"Henry V\", though scholars doubt the sources of that information.\nThroughout his career, Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford. In 1596, the year before he bought New Place as his family home in Stratford, Shakespeare was living in the parish of St Helen's, Bishopsgate, north of the River Thames. He moved across the river to Southwark by 1599, the same year his company constructed the Globe Theatre there. By 1604 he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses. There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy, a maker of women's wigs and other headgear.\nLater years and death.\nNicholas Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by Samuel Johnson, that Shakespeare retired to Stratford \"some years before his death\". He was still working as an actor in London in 1608; in an answer to the sharers' petition in 1635, Cuthbert Burbage stated that after purchasing the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre in 1608 from Henry Evans, the King's Men \"placed men players\" there, \"which were Heminges, Condell, Shakespeare, etc.\". However, it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in London throughout 1609. The London public playhouses were repeatedly closed during extended outbreaks of the plague (a total of over 60 months closure between May 1603 and February 1610), which meant there was often no acting work. Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time. Shakespeare continued to visit London during the years 1611\u20131614. In 1612 he was called as a witness in \"Bellott v Mountjoy\", a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary. In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory; and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, John Hall. After 1610 Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after 1613. His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John Fletcher, who succeeded him as the house playwright of the King's Men. He retired in 1613, before the Globe Theatre burned down during the performance of \"Henry VIII\" on 29 June.\nShakespeare died on 23 April 1616, at the age of 52. He died within a month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself as being in \"perfect health\". No extant contemporary source explains how or why he died. Half a century later, John Ward, the vicar of Stratford, wrote in his notebook: \"Shakespeare, Drayton, and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted\", not an impossible scenario since Shakespeare knew Jonson and Michael Drayton. Of the tributes from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively sudden death: \"We wondered, Shakespeare, that thou went'st so soon / From the world's stage to the grave's tiring room.\"\nHe was survived by his wife and two daughters. Susanna had married a physician, John Hall, in 1607, and Judith had married Thomas Quiney, a vintner, two months before Shakespeare's death. Shakespeare signed his last will and testament on 25 March 1616; the following day, Thomas Quiney, his new son-in-law, was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by Margaret Wheeler, both of whom had died during childbirth. Thomas was ordered by the church court to do public penance, which would have caused much shame and embarrassment for the Shakespeare family.\nShakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna under stipulations that she pass it down intact to \"the first son of her body\". The Quineys had three children, all of whom died without marrying. The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare's direct line. Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably entitled to one-third of his estate automatically. He did make a point, however, of leaving her \"my second best bed\", a bequest that has led to much speculation. Some scholars see the bequest as an insult to Anne, whereas others believe that the second-best bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.\nShakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death. The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nSome time before 1623 a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall, with a half-effigy of him in the act of writing. Its plaque compares him to Nestor, Socrates, and Virgil. In 1623, in conjunction with the publication of the First Folio, the Droeshout engraving was published. Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world, including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.\nPlays.\nMost playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, as critics agree Shakespeare did, mostly early and late in his career.\nThe first recorded works of Shakespeare are \"Richard III\" and the three parts of \"Henry VI\", written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama. Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date precisely, however, and studies of the texts suggest that \"Titus Andronicus\", \"The Comedy of Errors\", \"The Taming of the Shrew,\" and \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\" may also belong to Shakespeare's earliest period. His first histories, which draw heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed's \"Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland\", dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the Tudor dynasty. The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca. \"The Comedy of Errors\" was also based on classical models, but no source for \"The Taming of the Shrew\" has been found, though it has an identical plot but different wording as another play with a similar name. Like \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\", in which two friends appear to approve of rape, the \"Shrew\"'s story of the taming of a woman's independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics, directors, and audiences.\nShakespeare's early classical and Italianate comedies, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies. \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes. Shakespeare's next comedy, the equally romantic \"The Merchant of Venice\", contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender Shylock, which reflects dominant Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences. The wit and wordplay of \"Much Ado About Nothing\", the charming rural setting of \"As You Like It\", and the lively merrymaking of \"Twelfth Night\" complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies. After the lyrical \"Richard II\", written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, \"Henry IV, Part 1\" and \"2\", and \"Henry V\". \"Henry IV\" features Falstaff, rogue, wit and friend of Prince Hal. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work. This period begins and ends with two tragedies: \"Romeo and Juliet\", the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death; and \"Julius Caesar\"\u2014based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's \"Parallel Lives\"\u2014which introduced a new kind of drama. According to the Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, in \"Julius Caesar\", \"the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other\".\nIn the early-17th century, Shakespeare wrote the so-called \"problem plays\" \"Measure for Measure\", \"Troilus and Cressida\", and \"All's Well That Ends Well\" and a number of his best known tragedies. Many critics believe that Shakespeare's tragedies represent the peak of his art. Hamlet has probably been analysed more than any other Shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy which begins \"To be or not to be; that is the question\". Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, Othello and Lear are undone by hasty errors of judgement. The plots of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves. In \"Othello\", Iago stokes Othello's sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him. In \"King Lear\", the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which led to the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester and the murder of Lear's youngest daughter, Cordelia. According to the critic Frank Kermode, \"the play...offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty\". In \"Macbeth\", the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies, uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne until their own guilt destroys them in turn. In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure. His last major tragedies, \"Antony and Cleopatra\" and \"Coriolanus\", contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot. Eliot wrote, \"Shakespeare acquired more essential history from Plutarch than most men could from the whole British Museum.\"\nIn his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays: \"Cymbeline\", \"The Winter's Tale,\" and \"The Tempest\", as well as the collaboration, \"Pericles, Prince of Tyre\". Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors. Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day. Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, \"Henry VIII\" and \"The Two Noble Kinsmen\", probably with John Fletcher.\nClassification.\nShakespeare's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623, listed according to their folio classification as comedies, histories, and tragedies. Two plays not included in the First Folio, \"The Two Noble Kinsmen\" and \"Pericles, Prince of Tyre\", are now accepted as part of the canon, with today's scholars agreeing that Shakespeare made major contributions to the writing of both. No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio, partly because the collection was compiled by men of theatre.\nIn the late 19th century the critic Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them \"tragicomedies\", Dowden's term is often used. In 1896 Frederick S. Boas coined the term \"problem plays\" to describe four plays: \"All's Well That Ends Well\", \"Measure for Measure\", \"Troilus and Cressida\" and \"Hamlet\". \"Dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies\", he wrote. \"We may, therefore, borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare's problem plays.\" The term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though \"Hamlet\" is definitively classed as a tragedy.\nPerformances.\nIt is not clear for which companies Shakespeare wrote his early plays. The title page of the 1594 edition of \"Titus Andronicus\" reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes. After the plagues of 1592\u201393, Shakespeare's plays were performed by his own company at The Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch, north of the Thames. Londoners flocked there to see the first part of \"Henry IV\", Leonard Digges recording, \"Let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest\u00a0... and you scarce shall have a room\". When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark. The Globe opened in autumn 1599, with \"Julius Caesar\" one of the first plays staged. Most of Shakespeare's greatest post-1599 plays were written for the Globe, including \"Hamlet\", \"Othello,\" and \"King Lear\".\nAfter the Lord Chamberlain's Men were renamed the King's Men in 1603, they entered a special relationship with the new King James. Although the performance records are patchy, the King's Men performed seven of Shakespeare's plays at court between 1 November 1604, and 31 October 1605, including two performances of \"The Merchant of Venice\". After 1608, they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer. The indoor setting, combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices. In \"Cymbeline\", for example, Jupiter descends \"in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The ghosts fall on their knees.\"\nThe actors in Shakespeare's company included the famous Richard Burbage, William Kempe, Henry Condell and John Heminges. Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare's plays, including \"Richard III\", \"Hamlet\", \"Othello\", and \"King Lear\". The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in \"Romeo and Juliet\" and Dogberry in \"Much Ado About Nothing\", among other characters. He was replaced around 1600 by Robert Armin, who played roles such as Touchstone in \"As You Like It\" and the fool in \"King Lear\". In 1613 Sir Henry Wotton recorded that \"Henry VIII\" \"was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony\". However, on 29 June a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event that pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision.\nTextual sources.\nIn 1623 John Heminges and Henry Condell, two of Shakespeare's colleagues from the King's Men, published the First Folio, a collected edition of Shakespeare's plays. It contained 36 texts, including 18 printed for the first time. Most of the others had already appeared in quarto versions\u2014flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves. No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions, which the First Folio describes as \"stol'n and surreptitious copies\".\nAlfred Pollard termed some of the pre-1623 versions as \"bad quartos\" because of their adapted, paraphrased or garbled texts, which may in places have been reconstructed from memory. Where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the others. The differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from Shakespeare's own papers. In some cases, for example, \"Hamlet\", \"Troilus and Cressida,\" and \"Othello\", Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions. In the case of \"King Lear\", however, while most modern editions do conflate them, the 1623 folio version is so different from the 1608 quarto that the \"Oxford Shakespeare\" prints them both, arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion.\nPoems.\nIn 1593 and 1594, when the theatres were closed because of plague, Shakespeare published two narrative poems on sexual themes, \"Venus and Adonis\" and \"The Rape of Lucrece\". He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton. In \"Venus and Adonis\", an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus; while in \"The Rape of Lucrece\", the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin. Influenced by Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust. Both proved popular and were often reprinted during Shakespeare's lifetime. A third narrative poem, \"A Lover's Complaint\", in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the \"Sonnets\" in 1609. Most scholars now accept that Shakespeare wrote \"A Lover's Complaint\". Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects. \"The Phoenix and the Turtle\", printed in Robert Chester's 1601 \"Love's Martyr\", mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove. In 1599, two early drafts of sonnets 138 and 144 appeared in \"The Passionate Pilgrim\", published under Shakespeare's name but without his permission.\nSonnets.\nPublished in 1609, the \"Sonnets\" were the last of Shakespeare's non-dramatic works to be printed. Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership. Even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in \"The Passionate Pilgrim\" in 1599, Francis Meres had referred in 1598 to Shakespeare's \"sugred Sonnets among his private friends\". Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare's intended sequence. He seems to have planned two contrasting series: one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion (the \"dark lady\"), and one about conflicted love for a fair young man (the \"fair youth\"). It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial \"I\" who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself, although William Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets \"Shakespeare unlocked his heart\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nShall I compare thee to a summer's day?\nThou art more lovely and more temperate\u00a0...\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014Opening lines from Shakespeare's Sonnet 18.\nThe 1609 edition was dedicated to a \"Mr. W.H.\", credited as \"the only begetter\" of the poems. It is not known whether this was written by Shakespeare himself or by the publisher, Thomas Thorpe, whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page; nor is it known who Mr. W.H. was, despite numerous theories, or whether Shakespeare even authorised the publication. Critics praise the \"Sonnets\" as a profound meditation on the nature of love, sexual passion, procreation, death, and time.\nStyle.\nShakespeare's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day. He wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama. The poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetorical\u2014written for actors to declaim rather than speak. The grand speeches in \"Titus Andronicus\", in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\" has been described as stilted.\nHowever, Shakespeare soon began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes. The opening soliloquy of \"Richard III\" has its roots in the self-declaration of Vice in medieval drama. At the same time, Richard's vivid self-awareness looks forward to the soliloquies of Shakespeare's mature plays. No single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style. Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with \"Romeo and Juliet\" perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles. By the time of \"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Richard II\" and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" in the mid-1590s, Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry. He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.\nShakespeare's standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter. In practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable. The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones. It is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony. Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow. This technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as \"Julius Caesar\" and \"Hamlet\". Shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in Hamlet's mind:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting\nThat would not let me sleep. Methought I lay\nWorse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly\u2014\nAnd prais'd be rashness for it\u2014let us know\nOur indiscretion sometimes serves us well\u00a0...&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAfter \"Hamlet\", Shakespeare varied his poetic style further, particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies. The literary critic A. C. Bradley described this style as \"more concentrated, rapid, varied, and, in construction, less regular, not seldom twisted or elliptical\". In the last phase of his career, Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects. These included run-on lines, irregular pauses and stops, and extreme variations in sentence structure and length. In \"Macbeth\", for example, the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another: \"was the hope drunk/ Wherein you dressed yourself?\" (1.7.35\u201338); \"...\u00a0pity, like a naked new-born babe/ Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd/ Upon the sightless couriers of the air\u00a0...\" (1.7.21\u201325). The listener is challenged to complete the sense. The late romances, with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot, inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another, clauses are piled up, subject and object are reversed, and words are omitted, creating an effect of spontaneity.\nShakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre. Like all playwrights of the time, he dramatised stories from sources such as Plutarch and Raphael Holinshed. He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible. This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting, and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama. As Shakespeare's mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech. He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however. In Shakespeare's late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nShakespeare's work has made a significant and lasting impression on later theatre and literature. In particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre. Until \"Romeo and Juliet\", for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy. Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events, but Shakespeare used them to explore characters' minds. His work heavily influenced later poetry. The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama, though with little success. The critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Samuel Taylor Coleridge to Alfred, Lord Tennyson, as \"feeble variations on Shakespearean themes\". John Milton, considered by many to be the most important English poet after Shakespeare, wrote in tribute: \"Thou in our wonder and astonishment/ Hast built thyself a live-long monument.\"\nShakespeare influenced novelists such as Thomas Hardy, William Faulkner and Charles Dickens. The American novelist Herman Melville's soliloquies owe much to Shakespeare; his Captain Ahab in \"Moby-Dick\" is a classic tragic hero, inspired by \"King Lear\". Scholars have identified 20,000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare's works, including Felix Mendelssohn's overture and incidental music for \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" and Sergei Prokofiev's ballet \"Romeo and Juliet\". His work has inspired several operas, among them Giuseppe Verdi's \"Macbeth\", \"Otello\" and \"Falstaff\", whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays. Shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the Romantics and the Pre-Raphaelites, while William Hogarth's 1745 painting of actor David Garrick playing Richard III was decisive in establishing the genre of theatrical portraiture in Britain. The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli, a friend of William Blake, even translated \"Macbeth\" into German. The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud drew on Shakespearean psychology, in particular, that of Hamlet, for his theories of human nature. Shakespeare has been a rich source for filmmakers; Akira Kurosawa adapted \"Macbeth\" and \"King Lear\" as \"Throne of Blood\" and \"Ran\". Other examples of Shakespeare on film include Max Reinhardt's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", Laurence Olivier's \"Hamlet\" and Al Pacino's documentary \"Looking For Richard\". Orson Welles, a lifelong lover of Shakespeare, directed and starred in \"Macbeth\", \"Othello\" and \"Chimes at Midnight\", in which he plays John Falstaff, which Welles himself called his best work.\nIn Shakespeare's day English grammar, spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now, and his use of language helped to shape modern English. Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his \"A Dictionary of the English Language\", the first serious work of its type. Expressions such as \"with bated breath\" (\"Merchant of Venice\") and \"a foregone conclusion\" (\"Othello\") have found their way into everyday English speech.\nShakespeare's influence extends far beyond his native England and the English language. His reception in Germany was particularly significant; as early as the 18th century Shakespeare was widely translated and popularised in Germany, and gradually became a \"classic of the German Weimar era;\" Christoph Martin Wieland was the first to produce complete translations of Shakespeare's plays in any language. The actor and theatre-director Simon Callow writes, \"this master, this titan, this genius, so profoundly British and so effortlessly universal, each different culture \u2013 German, Italian, Russian \u2013 was obliged to respond to the Shakespearean example; for the most part, they embraced it, and him, with joyous abandon, as the possibilities of language and character in action that he celebrated liberated writers across the continent. Some of the most deeply affecting productions of Shakespeare have been non-English, and non-European. He is that unique writer: he has something for everyone.\"\nAccording to \"Guinness World Records\", Shakespeare remains the world's best-selling playwright, with sales of his plays and poetry believed to have achieved in excess of four billion copies in the almost 400 years since his death. He is also the third most translated author in history, with his plays translated into over 80 languages, from major world tongues such as German, Hindi, and Japanese, to constructed languages like Esperanto and Klingon. Major festivals, including the Globe to Globe Festival in London (2012), have staged all 37 plays in 37 different languages, with productions ranging from \"Hamlet\" in Lithuanian to \"The Merchant of Venice\" in Hebrew, performed by Habima Theatre, Israel's national theatre.\nCritical reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe was not of an age, but for all time.\n\u2014Ben Jonson\nShakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received a large amount of praise. In 1598 the cleric and author Francis Meres singled him out from a group of English playwrights as \"the most excellent\" in both comedy and tragedy. The authors of the \"Parnassus\" plays at St John's College, Cambridge, numbered him with Geoffrey Chaucer, John Gower and Edmund Spenser. In the First Folio, Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the \"Soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage\", although he had remarked elsewhere that \"Shakespeare wanted art\" (lacked skill).\nBetween the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century, classical ideas were in vogue. As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson. Thomas Rymer, for example, condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic. Nevertheless, the poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly, saying of Jonson, \"I admire him, but I love Shakespeare\". He also famously remarked that Shakespeare \"was naturally learned; he needed not the spectacles of books to read nature; he looked inwards, and found her there.\" For several decades, Rymer's view held sway. But during the 18th century, critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and, like Dryden, to acclaim what they termed his natural genius. A series of scholarly editions of his work, notably those of Samuel Johnson in 1765 and Edmond Malone in 1790, added to his growing reputation. By 1800, he was firmly enshrined as the national poet, and described as the \"Bard of Avon\" (or simply \"the Bard\"). In the 18th and 19th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad. Among those who championed him were the writers Voltaire, Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe, Stendhal and Victor Hugo.\nDuring the Romantic era Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism. In the 19th century, critical admiration for Shakespeare's genius often bordered on adulation. \"This King Shakespeare,\" the essayist Thomas Carlyle wrote in 1840, \"does not he shine, in crowned sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of rallying signs; indestructible\". The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale. The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as \"bardolatry\", claiming that the new naturalism of Henrik Ibsen's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete.\nThe modernist revolution in the arts during the early 20th century, far from discarding Shakespeare, eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avant-garde. The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays. The Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare. The poet and critic T. S. Eliot argued against Shaw that Shakespeare's \"primitiveness\" in fact made him truly modern. Eliot, along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare's imagery. In the 1950s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for post-modern studies of Shakespeare. Comparing Shakespeare's accomplishments to those of leading figures in philosophy and theology, Harold Bloom wrote, \"Shakespeare was larger than Plato and than St. Augustine. He \"encloses\" us because we \"see\" with his fundamental perceptions.\" In the 21st century, his reputation remains pre-eminent. Emma Smith, professor of Shakespeare Studies at the University of Oxford, in a study published in 2019, called him \"the world's greatest playwright\"; while Dennis Kennedy, Samuel Beckett Professor of Drama and Theatre (Emeritus) at Trinity College Dublin, noted in 2004 that he remains \"the most performed playwright in the world\". Gary Taylor, co-editor of The New Oxford Shakespeare published in 2017, wrote; \"most of the most important, the most talented, and best educated writers and readers of the last four centuries have considered Shakespeare the best writer in English, or the best modern writer in any language, or the world's best playwright, or the best Western writer of the last thousand years, or the best writer ever, or the greatest genius of all time\".\nSpeculation.\nAuthorship.\nAround 230 years after Shakespeare's death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him. Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford. Several \"group theories\" have also been proposed. All but a few Shakespeare scholars and literary historians consider it a fringe theory, with only a small minority of academics who believe that there is reason to question the traditional attribution, but interest in the subject, particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship, continues into the 21st century.\nReligion.\nShakespeare conformed to the official state religion, but his private views on religion have been the subject of debate. Shakespeare's will uses a Protestant formula, and he was a confirmed member of the Church of England, where he was married, his children were baptised, and where he is buried.\nSome scholars are of the view that members of Shakespeare's family were Catholics, at a time when practising Catholicism in England was against the law. Shakespeare's mother, Mary Arden, certainly came from a pious Catholic family. The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by his father, John Shakespeare, found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street. However, the document is now lost and scholars differ as to its authenticity. In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church \"for fear of process for debt\", a common Catholic excuse. In 1606 the name of William's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford.\nOther authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about Shakespeare's religious beliefs. Scholars find evidence both for and against Shakespeare's Catholicism, Protestantism, or lack of belief in his plays, but the truth may be impossible to prove.\nIn 1934, Rudyard Kipling published a short story in \"The Strand Magazine\", \"Proofs of Holy Writ\", postulating that Shakespeare had helped to polish the prose of the King James Bible, published in 1611.\nSexuality.\nFew details of Shakespeare's sexuality are known. At 18 he married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway, who was pregnant. Susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on 26 May 1583. Over the centuries, some readers have posited that Shakespeare's sonnets are autobiographical, and point to them as evidence of his love for a young man. Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than romantic love. The 26 so-called \"Dark Lady\" sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.\nPortraiture.\nNo written contemporary description of Shakespeare's physical appearance survives, and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait. From the 18th century, the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare. That demand also led to the production of several fake portraits, as well as misattributions, re-paintings, and relabelling of portraits of other people.\nSome scholars suggest that the Droeshout portrait, which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness, and his Stratford monument provide perhaps the best evidence of his appearance. Of the claimed paintings, the art historian Tarnya Cooper concluded that the Chandos portrait had \"the strongest claim of any of the known contenders to be a true portrait of Shakespeare\". After a three-year study supported by the National Portrait Gallery, London, the portrait's owners, Cooper contended that its composition date, contemporary with Shakespeare, its subsequent provenance, and the sitter's attire, all supported the attribution.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles and online\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nDigital editions\nExhibitions\nMusic\nEducation\nLegacy and criticism"}
{"id": "32898", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32898", "title": "William Kennedy Dickson", "text": "British-American inventor (1860\u20131935)\nWilliam Kennedy Laurie Dickson (3 August 1860\u00a0\u2013 28 September 1935) was a British-American inventor who devised an early motion picture camera under the employment of Thomas Edison.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Kennedy Dickson was born on 3 August 1860 in Le Minihic-sur-Rance, Brittany, France. His mother, Elizabeth Kennedy-Laurie (1823\u20131879) was American, born in Virginia. His father was James Waite Dickson, a Scottish artist, astronomer and linguist. James Dickson claimed direct lineage from the painter William Hogarth, and from Judge John Waite, the man who sentenced King Charles I to death.\nInventor and film innovator.\nAt age 19 in 1879, William Dickson wrote a letter to American inventor and entrepreneur Thomas Edison seeking employment. He was turned down. That same year Dickson, his mother, and two sisters moved from Britain to Virginia. In 1883 he was finally hired to work at Edison's laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey. In 1888, Edison conceived of a device that would do \"for the Eye what the phonograph does for the Ear\". In October, Edison filed a preliminary claim, known as a caveat, with the United States Patent and Trademark Office; outlining his plans for the device, subsequently named the Kinetoscope. Dickson, then the Edison company's official photographer, was assigned to turn the concept into a reality.\nInitial attempts were focused on recording micro-photographs on a cylinder. In late 1889, inspired by a recent encounter with \u00c9tienne-Jules Marey, Edison came up with a fourth caveat and ordered the team to change direction to work with rolls of film. William Dickson collaborated with the Eastman company to develop a practical celluloid film for this application. Initially using 19mm film, fed horizontally, shooting circular images, Dickson eventually settled on 35 mm film with a 1.33:1 picture ratio, a standard format which is still in use to this day in cinema.\nWilliam Dickson and his team, at the Edison lab, simultaneously worked on the development of the Kinetoscope viewing machine. The first working prototype, using the 19mm film, was unveiled in May 1891 to a meeting of the National Federation of Women's Clubs, hosted by his wife. The 35mm camera was essentially finalised by the fall of 1892. The completed version of the 35mm Kinetoscope was unveiled at the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences on 9 May 1893. It was a peep show machine showing a continuous loop of film, lit by a small lamp, viewed individually through the window of a cabinet housing its components.\nWilliam Dickson and his team created the illusion of movement by continuously moving the strip of perforated film, bearing sequential images, whilst illuminating it by brief flashes of light through the slit in a rotating shutter. They also devised the Kinetograph, a motion picture camera to photograph films for in-house experiments and eventually, commercial Kinetoscope presentations, at speeds of up to 46 frames per second. To govern the intermittent movement of the film in the camera, allowing the strip to stop long enough so each frame could be fully exposed and then advancing it quickly (in about 1/460 of a second) to the next frame, the sprocket wheel that engaged the strip was driven by an escapement disc mechanism\u2014the first practical system for the high-speed stop-and-go film movement that would be the foundation for the next century of cinematography.\nIn late 1894 or early 1895, William Dickson became an ad hoc advisor to the motion picture operation of the Latham brothers, Otway and Grey, who ran one of the leading Kinetoscope exhibition companies, and their father, Woodville Latham who had lectured in science. Seeking to develop a movie projector system, they hired former Edison employee Eugene Lauste, probably at Dickson's suggestion. In April 1895, Dickson left Edison's employ and provided some assistance to the Latham outfit. Alongside Lauste, he may have devised what would become known as the Latham loop, allowing the photography and exhibition of much longer filmstrips than had previously been possible. This idea had first been made public in 1890 in descriptions of the moving picture camera of William Friese-Greene. These former Edison associates helped to design the Eidoloscope projector system and a widescreen camera to film with, which would be used in the first commercial movie screening in world history on 20 May 1895. But Dickson soon parted company with them, to become part of the group that formed the American Mutoscope and Biograph Company, returning permanently to work in the United Kingdom in 1897 for the British side of the company. William Dickson was the first person to make a film of the Pope, and at the time his Biograph camera was blessed by Pope Leo XIII.\nThe Mutoscope machines produced moving images by means of a revolving drum of photographs/frames, similar in concept to flip-books, taken from an actual piece of film. They were often featured at seaside locations, showing (usually) sequences of women undressing or acting as an artist's model. In Britain, they became known as \"What the butler saw\" machines, taking the name from one of the first and most famous softcore reels.\nDeath.\nHis association with Biograph ended inexplicably in 1911. Dickson spent his last years quietly in his house in Twickenham, England. He died on 28 September 1935, at the age of 75. He died without being given credit for his contributions to the history of modern filmography. This omission was corrected by the exhaustive research of Gordon Hendricks and Paul Spehr who revealed the full extent of his contributions to many moving picture projects.\nLegacy.\nDickson was the first to direct and likely star in a film with live recording. In 1894, he directed \"The Dickson Experimental Sound Film\". A man (likely Dickson) played \"The Song of the Cabin Boy\" on the violin into a megaphone used for a partially off-camera phonograph. The film was the first to use the Kinetophone, the first device used in the earliest sound films.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32899", "revid": "21295589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32899", "title": "William Alston", "text": "American philosopher (1921\u20132009)\nWilliam Payne Alston (November 29, 1921 \u2013 September 13, 2009) was an American philosopher. He is widely considered to be one of the most important epistemologists and philosophers of religion of the twentieth century, and is also known for his work in metaphysics and the philosophy of language. His views on foundationalism, internalism and externalism, speech acts, and the epistemic value of mystical experience, among many other topics, have been very influential. He earned his PhD from the University of Chicago and taught at the University of Michigan, Rutgers University, University of Illinois, and Syracuse University.\nEarly life and education.\nAlston was born to Eunice Schoolfield and William Alston on November 29, 1921, in Shreveport, Louisiana. He graduated from high school when he was 15 and went on to Centenary College of Louisiana, graduating in 1942 with a Bachelor of Music in piano. During World War II, he played clarinet and bass drum in a military band in California. During this time, he became interested in philosophy, sparked by W. Somerset Maugham's book \"The Razor's Edge\", and read the works of well-known philosophers such as Jacques Maritain, Mortimer J. Adler, Francis Bacon, Plato, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and John Locke. Alston was honorably discharged from the US army in 1946, going on to enter a graduate program for philosophy at the University of Chicago, even though he had never formally taken a class on the subject. While he was there, he learned more about philosophy from Richard McKeon and Charles Hartshorne, and he received his PhD in 1951. His dissertation was on the subject of the philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead.\nCareer.\nFrom 1949 until 1971, Alston was a professor at the University of Michigan, and he became professor of philosophy in 1961. He then taught at Rutgers University for five years, followed by the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign from 1976 to 1980 and then Syracuse University from 1980 to 1992. Alston's early work was on the philosophy of language, later going on to focus on epistemology and the philosophy of religion from the early 1970s onwards.\nTogether with Alvin Plantinga, Nicholas Wolterstorff, Robert Adams, and Michael L. Peterson, Alston helped to found the journal \"Faith and Philosophy\". With Plantinga, Wolterstorff, and others, Alston was also responsible for the development of \"Reformed epistemology\" (a term that Alston, an Episcopalian, never fully endorsed), one of the most important contributions to Christian thought in the twentieth century. Alston was president of the Western Division (now the Central Division) of the American Philosophical Association in 1979, the Society for Philosophy and Psychology, and the Society of Christian Philosophers, which he co-founded. He was widely recognized as one of the core figures in the late twentieth-century revival of the philosophy of religion. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1990.\nDeath.\nAlston died in a nursing home in Jamesville, New York, on September 13, 2009, at the age of 87.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32901", "revid": "45451243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32901", "title": "Woody Allen", "text": "American filmmaker, actor and comedian (born 1935)\nWoody Allen (born Allan Stewart Konigsberg; November 30, 1935) is an American filmmaker, actor, writer, and comedian whose career spans eight decades. He has written for film, television, and theater, and has published several short stories, a novel, and a memoir. Allen has received many accolades, including the most nominations (16) for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. He has won four Academy Awards, ten BAFTA Awards, two Golden Globe Awards and a Grammy Award, as well as nominations for a Emmy Award and a Tony Award. Allen has also received numerous honors, including an Honorary Golden Lion in 1995, the BAFTA Fellowship in 1997, an Honorary Palme d'Or in 2002, and the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2014. Two of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.\nAllen began his career as part of a team of comedy writers for several Sid Caesar specials, and later wrote numerous humor pieces for \"The New Yorker\" as well as several Broadway plays, such as \"Don't Drink the Water\" (1966) and \"Play It Again, Sam\" (1969). He transitioned to working as a stand-up comedian in Greenwich Village, where he developed a monologue style and the persona of an insecure, intellectual, fretful nebbish. He released three comedy albums, earning a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album nomination for \"Woody Allen\" (1964). Allen also published several books of short stories, such as \"Getting Even\" (1971), \"Without Feathers\" (1975), and \"Side Effects\" (1980).\nAllen then established himself as prominent director of the New Hollywood era of auteur filmmakers. After writing, directing, and starring in a string of slapstick comedies, such as \"Take the Money and Run\" (1969), \"Bananas\" (1971), \"Sleeper\" (1973), and \"Love and Death\" (1975), he directed his seminal work \"Annie Hall\" (1977), a romantic comedy-drama featuring Allen and his frequent collaborator Diane Keaton. The film received widespread acclaim and won four Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director and Best Original Screenplay, and Best Actress for Keaton. Allen has since directed many films set in New York City, including \"Manhattan\" (1979), \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" (1986), and \"Crimes and Misdemeanors\" (1989).\nSince becoming a filmmaker, Allen has made one almost every year. They include \"Interiors\" (1978), \"Stardust Memories\" (1980), \"Zelig\" (1983), \"Broadway Danny Rose\" (1984), \"The Purple Rose of Cairo\" (1985), \"Radio Days\" (1987), \"Husbands and Wives\" (1992), \"Bullets Over Broadway\" (1994), \"Deconstructing Harry\" (1997), \"Match Point\" (2005), \"Vicky Cristina Barcelona\" (2008), \"Midnight in Paris\" (2011), and \"Blue Jasmine\" (2013). In 2014, he returned to Broadway, adapting his 1994 film into the musical \"Bullets Over Broadway\". He wrote the Amazon Prime Video series \"Crisis in Six Scenes\" (2016), and released a memoir, \"Apropos of Nothing\" (2020), and a novel, \"What's With Baum?\" (2025).\nFrom 1980 to 1992, Allen had a professional and personal relationship with actress Mia Farrow. They collaborated on 13 films. The couple separated after he began a relationship in 1991 with Farrow and Andre Previn's 21-year-old adopted daughter Soon-Yi Previn. In 1992, Farrow publicly accused him of sexually abusing their adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow. The allegation gained substantial media attention, but Allen was never charged with a crime and has denied the allegation. Allen married Previn in 1997 and they have adopted two children.\nEarly life and education.\nAllen was born Allan Stewart Konigsberg at Mount Eden Hospital in Bronx, New York City, on November 30, 1935, to Nettie (\"n\u00e9e\" Cherry; 1906\u20132002), a bookkeeper at her family's delicatessen, and Martin Konigsberg (1900\u20132001), a jewelry engraver and waiter. His grandparents were Jewish immigrants to the U.S. from Austria and Panev\u0117\u017eys, Lithuania. They spoke German, Hebrew, and Yiddish. He and his younger sister, film producer Letty Aronson, were raised in Brooklyn's Midwood neighborhood. Their parents were both born and raised on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.\nAllen's parents did not get along, and he had an estranged relationship with his mother. He spoke German in his early years. While attending Hebrew school for eight years, he also attended Public School 99, now the Isaac Asimov School for Science and Literature, and then Midwood High School, from which he graduated in 1953. Unlike his comic persona, he was more interested in baseball than school and was picked first for teams. He impressed students with his talent for cards and magic tricks.\nAllen began to call himself Woody in high school. According to Allen, his first published joke read: \"Woody Allen says he ate at a restaurant that had O.P.S. prices\u2014over people's salaries.\" He was soon earning more than both of his parents combined. After high school, he attended New York University, studying communication and film in 1953, before dropping out after failing the course \"Motion Picture Production\". He briefly attended City College of New York in 1954, dropping out during his first semester. He taught himself rather than studying in the classroom. He later taught at The New School and studied with writing teacher Lajos Egri.\nCareer.\nNote: For a list of Allen's films, see Woody Allen filmography.\n1955\u20131959: Comedy writer and television work.\nAllen began writing short jokes when he was 15, and the next year began offering them to various Broadway writers for sale. One of them, Abe Burrows, co-author of \"Guys and Dolls\", wrote, \"Wow! His stuff was dazzling.\" Burrows wrote Allen letters of introduction to Sid Caesar, Phil Silvers, and Peter Lind Hayes, who immediately sent Allen a check for just the jokes Burrows included as samples. As a result of the jokes Allen mailed to various writers, he was invited, then age 19, to join the NBC Writer's Development Program in 1955, followed by a job on \"The NBC Comedy Hour\" in Los Angeles, then a job as a full-time writer for humorist Herb Shriner, initially earning $25 a week. He began writing scripts for \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", \"The Tonight Show\", specials for Sid Caesar post-\"Caesar's Hour\" (1954\u20131957), and other television shows. By the time he was working for Caesar, he was earning $1,500 a week. He worked alongside Mel Brooks, Carl Reiner, Larry Gelbart, and Neil Simon. He also worked with Danny Simon, whom Allen credits for helping form his writing style. In 2021, Brooks said of working with Allen, \"Woody was so young then. I was about 24 when I started, but Woody must have been 19, but so wise, so smart. He had this tricky little mind and he'd surprise you, which is the trick of being a good comedy writer.\" In 1962 alone, he estimated that he wrote 20,000 jokes for various comics. Allen also wrote for \"Candid Camera\" and appeared in several episodes.\nAllen wrote jokes for the Buddy Hackett sitcom \"Stanley\" and \"The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom,\" and in 1958 he co-wrote a few Sid Caesar specials with Larry Gelbart. Composer Mary Rodgers said he was gaining a reputation. When given an assignment for a show, he would leave and come back the next day with \"reams of paper\", according to producer Max Liebman. Similarly, after he wrote for Bob Hope, Hope called him \"half a genius\". Dick Cavett said: \"He can go to a typewriter after breakfast and sit there until the sun sets and his head is pounding, interrupting work only for coffee and a brief walk, and then spend the whole evening working.\" Allen once estimated that to prepare for a 30-minute show, he spent six months of intensive writing. He enjoyed writing, despite the work: \"Nothing makes me happier than to tear open a ream of paper. And I can't wait to fill it!\"\nAllen started writing short stories and cartoon captions for magazines such as \"The New Yorker\"; he was inspired by the tradition of \"New Yorker\" humorists S. J. Perelman, George S. Kaufman, Robert Benchley, and Max Shulman, whose material he modernized. His collections of short pieces include \"Getting Even\", \"Without Feathers\", \"Side Effects\", and \"Mere Anarchy\". In 2010 Allen released audio versions of his books in which he read 73 selections entitled, \"The Woody Allen Collection\". He was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album.\n1960\u20131969: Stand-up comedian.\nFrom 1960 to 1969 Allen performed as a comedian in various places around Greenwich Village, including The Bitter End and Cafe Au Go Go, alongside such contemporaries as Lenny Bruce, the team of Mike Nichols and Elaine May, Joan Rivers, George Carlin, Richard Pryor, Dick Cavett, Bill Cosby and Mort Sahl (his personal favorite), as well as such other artists of the day as Bob Dylan and Barbra Streisand. Comedian Milton Berle claims to have suggested to Allen to go into standup comedy and even introduced him at the Village Vanguard. Comedy historian Gerald Nachman writes, \"He helped turn it into biting, brutally honest satirical commentary on the cultural and psychological tenor of the times.\"\nAllen's new manager, Jack Rollins, suggested he perform his written jokes as a stand-up. \"I'd never had the nerve to talk about it before. Then Mort Sahl came along with a whole new style of humor, opening up vistas for people like me.\" Allen made his professional stage debut at the Blue Angel nightclub in Manhattan in October 1960, where comedian Shelley Berman introduced him as a young television writer who would perform his own material.\nIn his early stand-up shows, Allen did not improvise: \"I put very little premium on improvisation\", he told Studs Terkel. His jokes were created from life experiences, and typically presented with a dead serious demeanor that made them funnier: \"I don't think my family liked me. They put a live teddy bear in my crib.\" And although he was described as a \"classic nebbish\", he did not tell the standard Jewish jokes of the period. Comedy screenwriter Larry Gelbart compared Allen's style to Elaine May's: \"He just styled himself completely after her\".\nCavett recalled seeing the Blue Angel audience mostly ignore Allen's monologue: \"I resented the fact that the audience was too dumb to realize what they were getting.\" It was his subdued stage presence that eventually became one of Allen's strongest traits, Nachman argues: \"The utter absence of showbiz veneer and shtick was the best shtick any comedian had ever devised. This uneasy onstage naturalness became a trademark.\" Allen brought innovation to the comedy monologue genre.\nAllen first appeared on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" on November 1, 1963, and over nine years his guest appearances included 17 in the host's chair. He subsequently released three LP albums of live nightclub recordings: the self-titled \"Woody Allen\" (1964), \"Volume 2\" (1965), and \"The Third Woody Allen Album\" (1968), recorded at a fund-raiser for Senator Eugene McCarthy's presidential run. In 1965, Allen filmed a half-hour standup special in England for Granada Television, titled \"The Woody Allen Show\" in the UK and \"Woody Allen: Standup Comic\" in the U.S. It is the only complete standup show of Allen's on film. The same year, Allen, along with Nichols and May, Barbra Streisand, Carol Channing, Harry Belafonte, Julie Andrews, Carol Burnett, and Alfred Hitchcock, took part in Lyndon B. Johnson's inaugural gala in Washington, D.C., on January 18, 1965. First Lady Lady Bird Johnson described Allen and the event in her published diary, \"A White House Diary\", writing in part, \"Woody Allen, that forlorn, undernourished little comedian, stopped shooting a movie in Paris and flew across the Atlantic for about five minutes of jokes\".\nIn 1966, Allen wrote an hour-long musical comedy television special for CBS, \"Gene Kelly in New York City\". It focused on Gene Kelly in a musical tour around Manhattan, dancing along such landmarks as Rockefeller Center, the Plaza Hotel and the Museum of Modern Art, which serve as backdrops for the show's production numbers. Guest stars included choreographer Gower Champion, British musical comedy star Tommy Steele, and singer Damita Jo DeBlanc. In 1967, Allen hosted a TV special for NBC, \"Woody Allen Looks at 1967\". It featured Liza Minnelli, who acted alongside Allen in some skits; Aretha Franklin, the musical guest; and conservative writer William F. Buckley, the featured guest. In 1969, Allen hosted his first American special for CBS television, \"The Woody Allen Special\", which included skits with Candice Bergen, a musical performance by the 5th Dimension, and an interview between Allen and Billy Graham.\nAllen also performed standup comedy on other series, including \"The Andy Williams Show\" and \"The Perry Como Show\", where he interacted with other guests and occasionally sang. In 1971, he hosted one of his final \"Tonight Shows\", with guests Bob Hope and James Coco. Hope praised Allen on the show, calling him \"one of the finest young talents in show business and a great delight\". \"Life\" magazine put Allen on the cover of its March 21, 1969, issue.\n1965\u20131976: Broadway debut and early films.\nAllen's first movie was the Charles K. Feldman production \"What's New Pussycat?\" (1965) Allen was disappointed with the final product, which led him to direct every film he wrote thereafter except \"Play It Again, Sam\". Allen's first directorial effort was \"What's Up, Tiger Lily?\" (1966, co-written with Mickey Rose). That same year, Allen wrote the play \"Don't Drink the Water\", starring Lou Jacobi, Kay Medford, Anita Gillette, and Allen's future movie co-star Tony Roberts. In 1994 Allen directed and starred in a second version for television, with Michael J. Fox and Mayim Bialik.\nThe next play Allen wrote for Broadway was \"Play It Again, Sam\", which opened on February 12, 1969, starring Allen, Diane Keaton and Roberts. The play received a positive review from Clive Barnes of \"The New York Times\", who wrote, \"Not only are Mr. Allen's jokes\u2014with their follow-ups, asides, and twists\u2014audaciously brilliant (only Neil Simon and Elaine May can equal him in this season's theater) but he has a great sense of character\". The play was significant to Keaton's budding career, and she has said she was in \"awe\" of Allen even before auditioning for her role, which was the first time she met him. In 2013, Keaton said that she \"fell in love with him right away\", adding, \"I wanted to be his girlfriend so I did something about it.\" For her performance she was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play. After co-starring alongside Allen in the subsequent film version of \"Play It Again, Sam\", she acted in seven more of his films. including \"Sleeper\", \"Love and Death\", \"Annie Hall\", \"Interiors\", and \"Manhattan\". Keaton said of their collaboration: \"He showed me the ropes and I followed his lead. He is the most disciplined person I know. He works very hard\".\nIn 1969, Allen directed, starred in, and co-wrote with Mickey Rose the mockumentary crime comedy \"Take the Money and Run\", in which he plays the low-level thief Virgil Starkwell. The film received positive reviews; critic Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Allen has made a movie that is, in effect, a feature-length, two-reel comedy\u2014something very special and eccentric and funny.\" In 1971, Allen wrote and directed the slapstick comedy film \"Bananas\", in which he plays Fielding Mellish, a bumbling New Yorker who becomes involved in a revolution in a country in Latin America. The film also starred Louise Lasser as his romantic interest. In an interview with Roger Ebert, Allen said, \"The big, broad laugh comedy is a form that's rarely made these days and sometimes I think it's the hardest kind of movie to make... with a comedy like \"Bananas\", if they're not laughing, you're dead, because laughs are all you have.\"\nThe next year, Allen made the film \"Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)\", starring Allen, Gene Wilder, Lou Jacobi, Anthony Quayle, Tony Randall, and Burt Reynolds, which received mixed reviews. \"Time\" wrote, \"the jokes are well-worn, and good, manic ideas are congealing into formulas\". Allen reunited with Keaton in \"Sleeper\" (1973), the first of four screenplays co-written by Allen and Marshall Brickman.\nAllen collaborated again with Keaton in the comedy \"Love and Death\" (1975), set during the Napoleonic era and a satire of Russian literature and film. At the time of its release, Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film Allen's \"grandest work\". In 1976, Allen starred as cashier Howard Prince in the Hollywood blacklist comedy-drama \"The Front,\" directed by Martin Ritt and co-starring Zero Mostel.\n1977\u20131989: Established career.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI don't like meeting heroes. There's nobody I want to meet and nobody I want to work with\u2014I'd rather work with Diane Keaton than anyone\u2014she's absolutely great, a natural.\n\u2014Woody Allen in July 1976\nIn 1977 Allen wrote, directed, and starred in the romantic comedy film \"Annie Hall\", which became his seminal and most personal work. He played Alvy Singer, a comic evaluating his past relationship with Annie Hall, portrayed by Diane Keaton. Critic Roger Ebert praised the film, saying Allen had \"developed... into a much more thoughtful and... more mature director\". Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" praised Allen's direction, specifically citing his hiring of actors in the film such as Shelley Duvall, Paul Simon, Carol Kane, Colleen Dewhurst, and Christopher Walken. In an interview with journalist Katie Couric, Keaton did not deny that Allen wrote the part for and about her. The film won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actress in a Leading Role for Keaton, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Director for Allen. It was ranked 35th on the \"American Film Institute\"'s \"100 Best Movies\" and fourth on the AFI list of the \"100 Best Comedies\". The screenplay was also named the funniest ever written by the Writers Guild of America in its list of the \"101 Funniest Screenplays\". In 1992, the Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 1979, Allen paid tribute at the Film Society at Lincoln Center to one of his comedy idols, Bob Hope, who said of the honor: \"It's great to have your past spring up in front of your eyes, especially when it's done by Woody Allen, because he's a near genius. Not a whole genius, but a near genius\". With \"Manhattan\" (1979), Allen directed a comic homage to New York City, focused on the complicated relationship between middle-aged Isaac Davis (Allen) and 17-year-old Tracy (Mariel Hemingway), co-starring Keaton and Meryl Streep. Keaton, who has made eight movies with Allen, has said, \"He just has a mind like nobody else. He's bold. He's got a lot of strength, a lot of courage in terms of his work. And that is what it takes to do something really unique.\"\n\"Stardust Memories\" was based on \"8\u00bd\", which it parodies, and \"Wild Strawberries\". Allen's comedy \"A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy\" was adapted from \"Smiles of a Summer Night\". \"Hannah and Her Sisters\", \"Another Woman\" and \"Crimes and Misdemeanors\" have elements reminiscent of \"Wild Strawberries.\" In \"Stardust Memories\" (1980), Allen's character says, \"I don't want to make funny movies anymore\" and a running gag has various people (including visiting space aliens) telling him that they appreciate his films, \"especially the early, funny ones\". Allen considers it one of his best films. In 1981, Allen's play \"The Floating Light Bulb\", starring Danny Aiello and Bea Arthur, premiered on Broadway and ran for 65 performances. \"New York Times\" critic Frank Rich gave the play a mild review, writing, \"there are a few laughs, a few well-wrought characters, and, in Act II, a beautifully written scene that leads to a moving final curtain\". Allen has written several off-Broadway one-act plays, including \"Riverside Drive\", \"Old Saybrook\" (at the Atlantic Theater Company), and \"A Second Hand Memory\" (at the Variety Arts Theatre).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMia's a good actress who can play many different roles. She has a very good range, and can play serious to comic roles. She's also very photogenic, very beautiful on screen. She's just a good realistic actress\u00a0... and no matter how strange and daring it is, she does it well.\n\u2014Woody Allen (1993)\n\"A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy\" (1982) was the first movie Allen made with Mia Farrow, who stepped into Diane Keaton's role when Keaton was shooting \"Reds\". He next directed \"Zelig\", in which he starred as a man whose appearance transforms to match that of those around him. \"Radio Days\", a film about his childhood in Brooklyn and the importance of the radio, co-starred Farrow in a part Allen wrote for her. \"Time\" magazine called \"The Purple Rose of Cairo\" one of the 100 best films of all time. Allen has called it one of his three best films, with \"Stardust Memories\" and \"Match Point\". In 1989, Allen and directors Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese made \"New York Stories\", an anthology film about New Yorkers. Vincent Canby called Allen's contribution, \"Oedipus Wrecks\", \"priceless\".\n1990\u20132004: Continued work.\nAllen's 1991 film \"Shadows and Fog\" is a black-and-white homage to the German expressionists and features the music of Kurt Weill. Allen then made his critically acclaimed comedy-drama \"Husbands and Wives\" (1992), which received two Oscar nominations: Best Supporting Actress for Judy Davis and Best Original Screenplay for Allen. \"Manhattan Murder Mystery\" (1993) combined suspense with dark comedy and marked the return of Diane Keaton, Alan Alda and Anjelica Huston.\nHe returned to lighter fare such as the showbiz comedy involving mobsters \"Bullets Over Broadway\" (1994), which earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Director, followed by a musical, \"Everyone Says I Love You\" (1996). The singing and dancing scenes in \"Everyone Says I Love You\" are similar to musicals starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. The comedy \"Mighty Aphrodite\" (1995), in which Greek drama plays a large role, won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Mira Sorvino. Allen's 1999 jazz-based comedy-drama \"Sweet and Lowdown\" was nominated for two Academy Awards, for Sean Penn (Best Actor) and Samantha Morton (Best Supporting Actress). In contrast to these lighter movies, Allen veered into darker satire toward the end of the decade with \"Deconstructing Harry\" (1997) and \"Celebrity\" (1998).\nOn March 8, 1995, Allen's one-act play \"Central Park West\"&lt;ref name=\"concordtheatricals/12825\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; opened&lt;ref name=\"nytimes/1995/urban-neuroses\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; off-Broadway as a part of a larger piece titled \"Death Defying Acts\",&lt;ref name=\"concordtheatricals/2909\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; with two other one-act plays, one by David Mamet and one by Elaine May. Critics described Allen's contribution as \"the longest and most substantial of the evening\". During this decade Allen also starred in the television film \"The Sunshine Boys\" (1995), based on the Neil Simon play of the same name, and made a sitcom \"appearance\" via telephone in a 1997 episode, \"My Dinner with Woody\", of \"Just Shoot Me!\" that paid tribute to several of his films. He provided the voice of Z in DreamWorks' first animated film, \"Antz\" (1998), which featured many actors he had worked with; Allen's character was similar to his earlier roles.\n\"Small Time Crooks\" (2000) was Allen's first film with the DreamWorks studio and represented a change in direction: he began giving more interviews and made an attempt to return to his slapstick roots. The film is similar to the 1942 film \"Larceny, Inc.\" (from a play by S. J. Perelman). Allen never commented on whether this was deliberate or if his film was in any way inspired by it. \"Small Time Crooks\" was a relative financial success, grossing over $17\u00a0million domestically, but Allen's next four films foundered at the box office, including Allen's most costly film, \"The Curse of the Jade Scorpion\" (with a budget of $26\u00a0million). \"Hollywood Ending\", \"Anything Else\", and \"Melinda and Melinda\" have \"rotten\" ratings on film-review website Rotten Tomatoes and each earned less than $4\u00a0million domestically. Some critics claimed that Allen's early 2000s films were subpar and expressed concern that his best years were behind him. Others were less harsh; reviewing the little-liked \"Melinda and Melinda\", Roger Ebert wrote, \"I cannot escape the suspicion that if Woody had never made a previous film, if each new one was Woody's Sundance debut, it would get a better reception. His reputation is not a dead shark but an albatross, which with admirable economy Allen has arranged for the critics to carry around their own necks.\"\n2005\u20132014: Career resurgence.\n\"In the United States things have changed a lot, and it's hard to make good small films now\", Allen said in a 2004 interview. \"The avaricious studios couldn't care less about good films\u2014if they get a good film they're twice as happy but money-making films are their goal. They only want these $100 million pictures that make $500 million.\" Allen traveled to London, where he made \"Match Point\" (2005), one of his most successful films of the decade, garnering positive reviews. Set in London, it starred Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Scarlett Johansson. It is markedly darker than Allen's first four films with DreamWorks SKG. In \"Match Point\" Allen shifts focus from the intellectual upper class of New York to the moneyed upper class of London. The film earned more than $23 million domestically (more than any of his films in nearly 20 years) and over $62 million in international box office sales. It earned Allen his first Academy Award nomination since 1998, for Best Writing \u2013 Original Screenplay, with directing and writing nominations at the Golden Globes, his first Globe nominations since 1987. In a 2006 interview with \"Premiere Magazine\" he said it was the best film he had ever made.\nAllen reached an agreement to film \"Vicky Cristina Barcelona\" in Avil\u00e9s, Barcelona, and Oviedo, Spain, where shooting started on July 9, 2007. The movie featured Scarlett Johansson, Javier Bardem, Rebecca Hall and Pen\u00e9lope Cruz. The film premiered at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival to rapturous reviews, and became a box office success. \"Vicky Cristina Barcelona\" won Best Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy at the Golden Globe awards. Cruz received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.\nIn April 2008 he began filming \"Whatever Works\", a film aimed more toward older audiences, starring Larry David, Patricia Clarkson, and Evan Rachel Wood. Released in 2009 and described as a dark comedy, it follows the story of a botched suicide attempt turned messy love triangle. Allen wrote \"Whatever Works\" in the 1970s, and David's character was written for Zero Mostel, who died the year \"Annie Hall\" came out. Allen was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001. \"You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger\", filmed in London, stars Antonio Banderas, Josh Brolin, Anthony Hopkins, Anupam Kher, Freida Pinto and Naomi Watts. Filming started in July 2009. It was released theatrically in the U.S. on September 23, 2010, following a Cannes debut in May 2010, and a screening at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 12, 2010.\nAllen announced that his next film would be titled \"Midnight in Paris,\" starring Owen Wilson, Marion Cotillard, Rachel McAdams, Michael Sheen, Corey Stoll, Allison Pill, Tom Hiddleston, Adrien Brody, Kathy Bates, and Carla Bruni, the First Lady of France at the time of production. The film follows a young engaged couple in Paris who see their lives transformed. It debuted at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival on May 12, 2011. Allen said he wanted to \"show the city emotionally\" during the press conference. \"I just wanted it to be the way I saw Paris\u2014Paris through my eyes\", he said. The film was almost universally praised, receiving a 93% on Rotten Tomatoes. \"Midnight in Paris\" won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and became his highest-grossing film, making $151 million worldwide on a $17 million budget.\nOn October 20, 2011, Allen's one-act play \"Honeymoon Motel\" opened on Broadway as part of a larger piece titled \"Relatively Speaking\", with two other one-act plays by Ethan Coen and Elaine May. In February 2012, Allen appeared on a panel at the 92nd Street Y in New York City with moderators Dick Cavett and Annette Insdorf, discussing his films and career. His next film, \"To Rome with Love\" (2012), is a Rome-set comedy starring Jesse Eisenberg, Elliot Page, Alec Baldwin, Penelope Cruz, Greta Gerwig, and Judy Davis. The film is structured in four vignettes featuring dialogue in both Italian and English. It marked Allen's return to acting since his last role in \"Scoop\". Bob Mondello gave it a mixed review, writing, \"\"To Rome with Love\" is just froth\u2014a romantic sampler with some decent jokes and gorgeous Roman backdrops. It goes down easily, but I have to say it's interesting less for what it is than for how it is.\"\nAllen's next film, \"Blue Jasmine\", debuted in July 2013. The film is set in San Francisco and New York, and stars Alec Baldwin, Cate Blanchett, Louis C.K., Andrew Dice Clay, Sally Hawkins, and Peter Sarsgaard. It opened to critical acclaim, with Eric Kohn of \"IndieWire\" calling it \"his most significant movie in years\". The film earned Allen another Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay, and Blanchett received the Academy Award for Best Actress. Allen co-starred with John Turturro in \"Fading Gigolo,\" written and directed by Turturro, which premiered in September 2013. Also in 2013, Allen shot the romantic comedy \"Magic in the Moonlight\" with Emma Stone and Colin Firth in Nice, France. The film is set in the 1920s on the French Riviera. It was a modest financial success, earning $51 million on a $16 million budget. For the BBC, Owen Gleiberman wrote, \"\"Magic in the Moonlight\" is Allen's most gratifyingly airy concoction in a while, but it's also a comedy that insists, in the end, on making an overly rational case for the power of the irrational.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt's really cool to work with a director who's done so much, because he knows exactly what he wants. The fact that he does one shot for an entire scene\u2014[and] this could be a scene with eight people and one to two takes\u2014it gives you a level of confidence... he's very empowering.\n \u2014Blake Lively, on acting in \"Caf\u00e9 Society\", June 2016\nOn March 11, 2014, Allen's musical \"Bullets over Broadway\" opened on Broadway at the St. James Theatre. It was directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman and starred Zach Braff, Nick Cordero, and Betsy Wolfe. The production received mixed reviews, with \"The Hollywood Reporter\" writing, \"this frothy show does provide dazzling art direction and performances, as well as effervescent ensemble numbers.\" Allen received a Tony Award nomination for Best Book of a Musical. The show received six Tony nominations.\nIn July and August 2014, Allen filmed the mystery drama \"Irrational Man\" in Newport, Rhode Island, with Joaquin Phoenix, Emma Stone, Parker Posey and Jamie Blackley. Allen said that this film, as well as the next three he had planned, had the financing and full support of Sony Pictures Classics. Jonathan Romney of \"Film Comment\" gave the film a mixed review, praising Stone's performance but calling the film \"disconcertingly impersonal\u2014all the more so as it overtly carries certain traditional marks of his patented brand, being a light-highbrow comedy of manners, peppered with bookish in-jokes.\"\n2015\u20132019: Streaming projects and fluctuations.\nOn January 14, 2015, Amazon Studios announced a full-season order for a half-hour Amazon Prime Instant Video series that Allen would write and direct, marking the first time he has developed a television show. Allen said of the series, \"I don't know how I got into this. I have no ideas and I'm not sure where to begin. My guess is that Roy Price [the head of Amazon Studios] will regret this.\" At the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, Allen said of his upcoming Amazon show: \"It was a catastrophic mistake. I don't know what I'm doing. I'm floundering. I expect this to be a cosmic embarrassment.\" On September 30, 2016, Amazon Video debuted Allen's first television series production, \"Crisis in Six Scenes\". The series is a comedy set during the 1960s. It focuses on the life of a suburban family after a surprise visitor creates chaos among them. It stars Allen, Elaine May, and Miley Cyrus, with the latter playing a radical hippie fugitive who sells marijuana.\nAllen's next film, \"Caf\u00e9 Society\", starred an ensemble cast, including Jesse Eisenberg, Kristen Stewart, and Blake Lively. Bruce Willis was set to co-star, but was replaced by Steve Carell during filming. The film is distributed by Amazon Studios, and opened the 2016 Cannes Film Festival on May 11, 2016, the third time Allen has opened the festival. Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" gave the film a positive review, writing, \"The film looks ravishing, with shots of New York which recall images in Allen's great work, Manhattan, but however wonderfully composed, there is something almost touristy in both them, and in his evocation of golden age Tinseltown, like his homages to Paris and Rome. Allen brings it all together in his closing moments which conjure something unexpectedly melancholy and shrewdly judged. It has entertainment and charm.\"\nIn September 2016 Allen started filming the drama film \"Wonder Wheel\", set in the 1950s in Coney Island, and starring Kate Winslet, Justin Timberlake, Juno Temple, and Jim Belushi. The film served as the closing night selection at the 55th New York Film Festival on October 15, 2017, and was theatrically released on December 1, 2017, as the first movie self-distributed to theaters by Amazon Studios. The film received mixed reviews, with critics praising Winslet's leading performance. Owen Gleiberman of \"Variety\" wrote, \"\"Wonder Wheel\" isn't a comedy\u2014on the contrary, it often feels like the most earnest kitchen-sink drama that Clifford Odets never wrote. It may or may not turn out to be an awards picture, but it's a good night out, and that's not nothing.\" In 2017, Allen received a standing ovation when he made a rare public appearance at the 45th Annual Life Achievement Tribute award ceremony for Diane Keaton. Before presenting her with the award he spoke about their longtime collaboration and friendship, saying, \"From the minute I met her, she was a great, great inspiration to me. Much of what I have accomplished in my life I owe for sure to her\".\nAllen returned to filming in New York City with the romantic film \"A Rainy Day in New York\", starring Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet, Selena Gomez, Elle Fanning, Jude Law, Diego Luna, Liev Schreiber and Rebecca Hall. The production in New York began in September 2017. During the film's release, Chalamet, Gomez, and Hall announced, in the light of the Me Too movement, that they would donate their salaries to various charities. The film received mixed reviews but earned praise for its performances. In February 2019 it was announced that Amazon Studios had dropped \"A Rainy Day in New York\" and would no longer finance, produce, or distribute films with Allen. He filed a lawsuit for $68 million, alleging Amazon gave \"vague reasons\" to terminate the contract, dropped the film over \"a 25-year old, baseless allegation\", and did not make payments. The case was later settled and dismissed. It was released throughout Europe beginning in July 2019, receiving mixed reviews and grossing $20 million. After over a year's delay, the film was released in the U.S. on October 9, 2020, by MPI Media Group and Signature Entertainment.\nIn May 2019, it was announced that Allen's next film would be titled \"Rifkin's Festival\", and \"Variety magazine\" confirmed that its cast would include Christoph Waltz, Elena Anaya, Louis Garrel, Gina Gershon, Sergi L\u00f3pez, and Wallace Shawn, and that it would be produced by Gravier Productions. The film was produced with Mediapro, an independent Spanish TV-film company. \"Rifkin's Festival\" completed filming in October 2019. On September 18, 2020, it premiered at the San Sebasti\u00e1n International Film Festival. It received mixed reviews, though Jessica Kiang of \"The New York Times\" called it \"to the ravenous captive, like finding an unexpected stash of dessert\".\n2020 to present.\nOn March 2, 2020, it was announced that after shopping the book from publishers it was decided that Grand Central Publishing would release Allen's autobiography, \"Apropos of Nothing\", on April 7, 2020. According to the publisher, the book is a \"comprehensive account of Allen's life, both personal and professional, and describes his work in films, theater, television, nightclubs, and print...Allen also writes of his relationships with family, friends, and the loves of his life.\" The decision to publish the book was criticized by Dylan and Ronan Farrow, the latter of whom cut ties with the publisher. The announcement also incited criticism from employees of the publishers. On March 6, the publisher announced that it had canceled the book's release, saying in part, \"The decision to cancel Mr. Allen's book was a difficult one.\" Hachette's decision also drew criticism from novelist Stephen King, Executive director of PEN America Suzanne Nossel, and others. On March 6, 2020, Manuel Carcassonne of Hachette's French branch, the publishing company Stock, announced it would publish the book if Allen permitted it. On March 23, 2020, Arcade published the memoir.\nIn June 2020, Allen appeared on Alec Baldwin's podcast \"Here's the Thing\" and talked about his career as a standup comedian, comedy writer, and filmmaker, and his life during the COVID-19 pandemic. In September 2022, Allen suggested that he might retire from filmmaking after the release of his next film. In an interview with \"La Vanguardia\", Allen said, \"My idea, in principle, is not to make more movies and focus on writing.\" Allen's publicist later said, \"Woody Allen never said he was retiring, nor did he say he was writing another novel. He said he was thinking about not making films, as making films that go straight or very quickly to streaming platforms is not so enjoyable for him, as he is a great lover of the cinema experience. Currently, he has no intention of retiring and is very excited to be in Paris shooting his new movie, which will be the 50th.\"\nAllen has made 50 feature films to date, with his latest film, \"Coup de chance\" (2023), a domestic thriller set in Paris. The film is Allen's first French-language film. It premiered at the 80th Venice International Film Festival to positive reviews. Chris Vognar of \"Rolling Stone\" called it \"a pretty slight and minor film, but for an 87-year-old American working in a second language, it can't help but seem impressive\". Owen Gleiberman of \"Variety\" called it \"his best since \"Blue Jasmine\"\".\nIn February 2024, it was reported that Allen had expressed interest in starting a new film as soon as summer 2024: \"In a new interview with Spanish filmmaker David Trueba, the 88-year-old Allen confirms that he is currently trying to launch a new film, which could start shooting as early as this summer in Italy.\" Plans for the Italian production were canceled due to lack of funding, and in November Allen announced plans for a film to be shot in Barcelona. This also never materialized. On October 30, 2025, news broke that the community of Madrid, Spain, was giving Allen 1,500,000 euros to make a film there, to be shot in summer 2026. It would be Allen's 51st film.\nIn September 2025, during a 98-minute interview on Honestly with Bari Weiss, Allen seemed content that he had made 50 films and no more. He said he was still an atheist and a naturally worrisome person who actively avoids his watching his films, that he writes daily, and that Manhattan is a metropolitan poem. He said his favorite musician is Sidney Bechet, favorite painter Camille Pissarro, and favorite baseball player Willie Mays.\nCritical reception and commentary.\nIn 1973, Pauline Kael wrote in \"The New Yorker\" that Allen's \"tension between his insecurity and his wit makes us empathize with him\", that he had found a \"nonaggressive way to deal with urban pressures\", and that he \"delivers his zingers without turning into a cynic\".\nTheater.\nWhile best known for his films, Allen has also had a successful theater career, starting as early as 1960, when he wrote sketches for the revue \"From A to Z\". His first great success was \"Don't Drink the Water\", which opened in 1966 and ran for 598 performances on Broadway. His success continued with \"Play It Again, Sam\", which opened in 1969, starring Allen and Diane Keaton. The show played for 453 performances and was nominated for three Tony Awards, although none of the nominations were for Allen's writing or acting.\nIn the 1970s, Allen wrote a number of one-act plays, such as \"God\" and \"Death\", which were published in his 1975 collection \"Without Feathers\". In 1981, Allen's play \"The Floating Light Bulb\" opened on Broadway. It was a critical success and a commercial flop. Despite two Tony Award nominations, a Tony win for the acting of Brian Backer (who won the 1981 Theater World Award and a Drama Desk Award for his work), the play only ran for 62 performances.\nIn 1995, after a long hiatus from the stage, Allen returned to theater with the one-act \"Central Park West\", an installment in an evening of theater, \"Death Defying Acts\", that also included new work by David Mamet and Elaine May.\nFor the next few years, Allen had no direct involvement with the stage, but productions of his work were staged. \"God\" was staged at The Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in Rio de Janeiro, and theatrical adaptations of Allen's films \"Bullets Over Broadway\" and \"September\" were produced in Italy and France, respectively, without Allen's involvement.\nIn 2003, Allen returned to the stage with \"Writer's Block\", an evening of two one-acts, \"Old Saybrook\"&lt;ref name=\"concordtheatricals/1890\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and \"Riverside Drive\",&lt;ref name=\"concordtheatricals/1889\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"wapo/2005/07/01/allen-sex-lies\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; that played Off-Broadway's Atlantic Theatre.&lt;ref name=\"playbill/108992\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The production marked his stage-directing debut and sold out the entire run.\nIn 2004, Allen's first full-length play since 1981, \"A Second Hand Memory\", was directed by Allen and enjoyed an extended run Off-Broadway. In June 2007 it was announced that Allen would make two more creative debuts in the theater, directing a work he did not write and an opera\u2014a reinterpretation of Puccini's \"Gianni Schicchi\" for the Los Angeles Opera\u2014which debuted at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on September 6, 2008. Of his direction of the opera, Allen said, \"I have no idea what I'm doing.\" His production of the opera opened the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy, in June 2009.\nIn October 2011, Allen's one-act play \"Honeymoon Motel\" premiered as one in a series of one-act plays on Broadway titled \"Relatively Speaking\". Also contributing to the series were Elaine May and Ethan Coen; John Turturro directed.\nIt was announced in February 2012 that Allen would adapt \"Bullets over Broadway\" into a Broadway musical. It ran from April 10 to August 24, 2014. The cast included Zach Braff, Nick Cordero and Betsy Wolfe. The show was directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman, known for directing the stage and film productions of Mel Brooks's \"The Producers\". The show drew mixed reviews from critics but received six Tony Award nominations, including one for Allen for Best Book of a Musical.\nOn October 4, 2024, Allen's play \"Brooklyn Story\" premiered in Budapest, Hungary. Written in English, it was translated to and performed in Hungarian. On November 7, 2025, the Central Theater in Budapest premiered another new Allen play, \"Pure Madness\", also in Hungarian. In an interview posted on October 29, 2025, with producer Julian Schlossberg, Allen mentioned having plays also currently being performed in or premiering in Germany, Russia, and France. As of 2025, \"Brooklyn Story\" and \"Pure Madness\" have not had official premieres in the United States.\nJazz band.\nAllen is a passionate fan of jazz, which appears often in the soundtracks to his films. He began playing clarinet as a child and took his stage name from clarinetist Woody Herman. He has performed publicly at least since the late 1960s, including with the Preservation Hall Jazz Band on the soundtrack of \"Sleeper\".\nWoody Allen and his New Orleans Jazz Band have been playing every Monday evening at the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan for many years specializing in New Orleans jazz from the early 20th century. He plays songs by Sidney Bechet, George Lewis, Johnny Dodds, Jimmie Noone, and Louis Armstrong. The documentary film \"Wild Man Blues\" (directed by Barbara Kopple) chronicles a 1996 European tour by Allen and his band, as well as his relationship with Previn. The band released the albums \"The Bunk Project\" (1993) and the soundtrack of \"Wild Man Blues\" (1997). In 2005, Allen, Eddy Davis and Conal Fowkes released the trio album \"Woody With Strings\". In a 2011 review of a concert by Allen's jazz band, critic Kirk Silsbee of the \"Los Angeles Times\" suggested that Allen should be regarded a competent musical hobbyist with a sincere appreciation for early jazz: \"Allen's clarinet won't make anyone forget Sidney Bechet, Barney Bigard or Evan Christopher. His piping tone and strings of staccato notes can't approximate melodic or lyrical phrasing. Still his earnestness and the obvious regard he has for traditional jazz counts for something.\"\nAllen and his band played at the Montreal International Jazz Festival on two consecutive nights in June 2008. For many years he wanted to make a film about the origins of jazz in New Orleans. Tentatively titled \"American Blues\", the film would follow the different careers of Louis Armstrong and Sidney Bechet. Allen stated that the film would cost between $80 and $100\u00a0million and is therefore unlikely to be made.\nInfluence.\nAllen has said that he was enormously influenced by comedians Bob Hope, Groucho Marx, Mort Sahl, Charlie Chaplin, W.C. Fields, playwright George S. Kaufman and filmmakers Ernst Lubitsch and Ingmar Bergman.\nMany comedians have cited Allen as an influence, including Louis C.K., Larry David, Jon Stewart, Chris Rock, Steve Martin, John Mulaney, Bill Hader, Aziz Ansari, Sarah Silverman, Conan O'Brien, Seth MacFarlane, Seth Meyers, Richard Ayoade, Bill Maher, Albert Brooks, John Cleese, Garry Shandling, Bob Odenkirk, Richard Kind, and Mike Schur. Comedic writers such as Simon Rich and Jesse Eisenberg have also cited Allen as a major influence.\nMany filmmakers have also cited Allen as an influence, including Nora Ephron, Wes Anderson, Greta Gerwig, Noah Baumbach, Joachim Trier, Luca Guadagnino, Whit Stillman, Mike Mills, Ira Sachs, Richard Linklater, Charlie Kaufman, Rian Johnson, Nicole Holofcener, Rebecca Miller, Tamara Jenkins, Alex Ross Perry, Greg Mottola, Lynn Shelton, Lena Dunham, Lawrence Michael Levine, Olivier Assayas, the Safdie brothers, and Amy Sherman-Palladino.\nDirectors who admire Allen's work include Quentin Tarantino, who called him \"one of the greatest screenwriters of all time\", as well as Martin Scorsese, who said in \"\", \"Woody's sensibilities of New York City is one of the reasons why I love his work, but they are extremely foreign to me. It's not another world; it's another planet\". Stanley Donen stated he liked Allen's films, Spike Lee has called Allen a \"great, great filmmaker\" and Pedro Almod\u00f3var has said he admires Allen's work. In 2012, directors Mike Leigh, Asghar Farhadi, and Martin McDonagh respectively included \"Radio Days\" (1987), \"Take the Money and Run\" (1969), and \"Manhattan\" among their Top 10 films for \"Sight &amp; Sound\". Other admirers of his work include Olivia Wilde and Jason Reitman, who staged live readings of \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" and \"Manhattan\" respectively. Filmmaker Edgar Wright listed five of Allen's films (\"Take the Money and Run, Bananas, Play It Again, Sam, Sleeper, Annie Hall\") in his list of 100 Favorite Comedy films.\nBill Hader cited Allen's mockumentary films \"Take the Money and Run\" and \"Zelig\" as the biggest inspirations of the IFC series \"Documentary Now!\"\nFilm critics including Roger Ebert and Barry Norman have highly praised Allen's work. In 1980, on \"Sneak Previews\", Siskel and Ebert called Allen and Mel Brooks \"the two most successful comedy directors in the world today\u00a0... America's two funniest filmmakers.\" Pauline Kael wrote of Allen that \"his comic character is enormously appealing to people partly because he's the smart, urban guy who at the same time is intelligent, is vulnerable, and somehow by his intelligence, he triumphs\".\nFavorite films.\nIn 2012, Allen participated in the \"Sight &amp; Sound\" film polls. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Allen's choices, in alphabetical order, were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn his 2020 autobiography \"Apropos of Nothing\" Allen praised Elia Kazan's \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" (1951): &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the movie of \"Streetcar\" is for me total artistic perfection... It's the most perfect confluence of script, performance, and direction I've ever seen. I agree with Richard Schickel, who calls the play perfect. The characters are so perfectly written, every nuance, every instinct, every line of dialogue is the best choice of all those available in the known universe. All the performances are sensational. Vivien Leigh is incomparable, more real and vivid than real people I know. And Marlon Brando was a living poem. He was an actor who came on the scene and changed the history of acting. The magic, the setting, New Orleans, the French Quarter, the rainy humid afternoons, the poker night. Artistic genius, no holds barred.\nFilm activism and preservation.\nIn 1987, Allen joined Ginger Rogers, Sydney Pollack, and Milo\u0161 Forman at a Senate Judiciary committee hearing where they testified against Ted Turner's and other companies' colorizing films without the artists' consent. Only one senator, Patrick Leahy, was present for the testimony. Allen testified:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If directors had their way, we would not let our films be tampered with in any way\u2014broken up for commercial or shortened or colorized. But we've fought the other things without much success, and now colorization\u2014because it's so horrible and preposterous and more acutely noticeable by audiences\u2014is the straw that broke the camel's back... The presumption that colorizers are doing him [the director] a favor and bettering his movie is a transparent attempt to justify the mutilation of art for a few extra dollars.\nAllen also spoke about his decisions to make films in black and white, such as \"Manhattan\", \"Stardust Memories\", \"Broadway Danny Rose\", and \"Zelig\". Film director John Huston appeared in a taped video, and Rogers read a statement by Jimmy Stewart criticizing the colorization of his film \"It's a Wonderful Life\".\nIn 1990, The Film Foundation was founded as a nonprofit film preservation organization that collaborates with film studios to restore prints of old or damaged films to meet the vision of the original filmmaker. Allen was part of the founding and sat on the foundation's original board of directors with Martin Scorsese, Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola, Clint Eastwood, Stanley Kubrick, George Lucas, Sydney Pollack, Robert Redford, and Steven Spielberg.\nWorks.\nTheatrical works.\nIn addition to directing, writing, and acting in films, Allen has written and performed in several Broadway, off-Broadway, and other theatrical productions.\nAwards and honors.\nOver his more than 50-year film career, Allen has received many award nominations. He holds the record for most Academy Award nominations for Best Original Screenplay, with 16 nominations and three wins (\"Annie Hall\", \"Hannah and Her Sisters\", and \"Midnight in Paris\"). Allen has been nominated for Best Director seven times and won for \"Annie Hall\". Three of Allen's films have been nominated for Academy Award for Best Picture, \"Annie Hall\", \"Hannah and Her Sisters\", and \"Midnight in Paris\".\nAllen shuns award ceremonies, citing their subjectivity. His first and only appearance at the Academy Awards was at the 2002 Oscars, where he received a standing ovation. As a New York icon, he had been asked by the Academy to introduce a film montage of clips of New York City in the movies that Nora Ephron compiled to honor the city after the 9/11 attacks.\nAllen has received numerous honors, including an Honorary Golden Palm from the Cannes Film Festival in 2002 and a Career Golden Lion from the Venice International Film Festival in 1995. He also received a BAFTA Fellowship in 1997, a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America and a Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2014. He was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 2010. In 2015, the Writers Guild of America ranked his screenplay for \"Annie Hall\" first on its list of the \"101 Funniest Screenplays\" and included four of his screenplays on its list of the \"101 Greatest Screenplays\". In 2011, PBS televised the film biography \"\" on its series \"American Masters\". \"Annie Hall\" and \"Manhattan\" have been included in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 2004, Comedy Central ranked Allen fourth on a list of the 100 greatest stand-up comedians, while a UK survey ranked Allen the third-greatest comedian.\nPersonal life.\nAllen has been married three times: to Harlene Rosen from 1956 to 1959, Louise Lasser from 1966 to 1970, and Soon-Yi Previn since 1997. He also had a 12-year relationship with actress Mia Farrow and relationships with Stacey Nelkin and Diane Keaton.\nEarly marriages and relationships.\nIn 1956, Allen married Harlene Rosen. He was 20 and she was 17. The marriage lasted until 1959. Rosen, whom Allen called \"the Dread Mrs. Allen\" in his standup act, sued him for defamation as a result of comments he made during a television appearance shortly after their divorce. In his mid-1960s album \"Standup Comic\", Allen said that Rosen had sued him because of a joke he made in an interview. Rosen had been sexually assaulted outside her apartment. According to Allen, the newspapers reported that she had been \"violated\". In the interview, Allen said, \"Knowing my ex-wife, it probably wasn't a moving violation.\" In an interview on \"The Dick Cavett Show\", Allen repeated his comments and said that she \"sued me for a million dollars\".\nIn 1966, Allen married Louise Lasser. They divorced in 1970. Lasser provided voice dubbing in Allen's \"What's Up, Tiger Lily?\" and appeared in three of his other films: \"Take the Money and Run\", \"Bananas\", and \"Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)\". She also appeared briefly in \"Stardust Memories\".\nAccording to the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"Manhattan\" was based on Allen's romantic relationship with actress Stacey Nelkin. Her bit part in \"Annie Hall\" ended up on the cutting room floor, and their relationship reportedly began when she was 17 and a student at Stuyvesant High School in New York. In December 2018 \"The Hollywood Reporter\" interviewed Babi Christina Engelhardt, who said she had an eight-year affair with Allen that began in 1976 when she was 17 years old (they met when she was 16), and that she believes the character of Tracy in \"Manhattan\" is a composite of any number of Allen's presumed other real-life young paramours from that period, not necessarily Nelkin or Engelhardt. When asked, Allen declined to comment.\nDiane Keaton.\nIn 1968, Allen cast Diane Keaton in his Broadway show \"Play It Again, Sam.\" During the run she and Allen became romantically involved. Although they broke up after a year, she continued to star in his films, including \"Sleeper\" as a futuristic poet and \"Love and Death\" as a composite character based on the novels of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. \"Annie Hall\" was very important in Allen's and Keaton's careers. It is said that the role was written for her, as Keaton's birth name was Diane Hall. She then starred in \"Interiors\" as a poet, followed by \"Manhattan\". In 1987, she had a cameo as a nightclub singer in \"Radio Days\", and she was chosen to replace Mia Farrow in \"Manhattan Murder Mystery\" after Allen and Farrow began having problems with their relationship. In total Keaton has starred in eight of Allen's films. As of 2018 Keaton and Allen remained close friends. In a rare public appearance, Allen presented Keaton with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2017.\nMia Farrow.\nAllen and Mia Farrow met in 1979 and began a relationship in 1980; Farrow starred in 13 of Allen's films from 1982 to 1992. Throughout the relationship they lived in separate apartments on opposite sides of Central Park in Manhattan. Farrow had seven children when they met: three biological sons from her marriage to composer Andr\u00e9 Previn, three adopted girls (two Vietnamese and one South Korean, Soon-Yi Previn), and an adopted South Korean boy, Moses Farrow.\nIn 1984, she and Allen tried to conceive a child together; Allen agreed to this on the understanding that he need not be involved in the child's care. When the effort failed, Farrow adopted a baby girl, Dylan Farrow, in July 1985. Allen was not involved in the adoption, but when Dylan arrived he assumed a parental role toward her and began spending more time in Farrow's home. On December 19, 1987, Farrow gave birth to their son Satchel Ronan O'Sullivan Farrow. According to Allen, his intimate relationship with Mia Farrow ceased completely after Satchel's birth and he was asked to return her apartment key; they maintained a working relationship when they filmed a movie, and he regularly visited Moses, Dylan and Satchel, but he and Mia were only \"social companions on those occasions where there'd be a dinner, an event, but after the event she'd go home and I'd go home.\" In 1991, Farrow wanted to adopt another child. According to a 1993 custody hearing, Allen told her he would not object to another adoption so long as she would agree to his adoption of Dylan and Moses; that adoption was finalized in December 1991. Eric Lax, Allen's biographer, wrote in \"The New York Times\" that Allen was \"there before they [the children] wake up in the morning, he sees them during the day and he helps put them to bed at night\".\nSoon-Yi Previn.\nIn 1977, Mia Farrow and Andr\u00e9 Previn adopted Soon-Yi Previn from Seoul, South Korea. She had been abandoned. The Seoul Family Court established a Family Census Register (legal birth document) on her behalf on December 28, 1976, with a presumptive birth date of October 8, 1970. According to Mia Farrow, a bone scan in the U.S. estimated that she was between six and eight years old (\"We're saying seven\") in early 1978, in accordance with the Seoul Family Court's information. According to Previn, her first friendly interaction with Allen took place when she was injured playing soccer during 11th grade and Allen offered to transport her to school. After her injury, she began attending New York Knicks games with Allen in 1990. They attended more games and by 1991 had become closer. In September 1991, she began studies at Drew University in New Jersey.\nIn January 1992, Farrow found nude photographs of Previn in Allen's home. Allen, then 56, told Farrow that he had taken the photos the day before, about two weeks after he first had sex with Previn. Both Farrow and Allen contacted lawyers shortly after the photographs were discovered. Previn was asked to leave summer camp because she was spending too much time taking calls from a \"Mr. Simon\", who turned out to be Allen.\nIn an August 1992 interview with \"Time\" magazine, Allen said, \"I am not Soon-Yi's father or stepfather\", adding: \"I've never even lived with Mia. I've never in my entire life slept at Mia's apartment, and I never even used to go over there until my children came along seven years ago. I never had any family dinners over there. I was not a father to her adopted kids in any sense of the word.\" Saying that Soon-Yi never treated him as a father figure and that he rarely spoke to her before their romantic relationship, Allen seemed to see few or no problems with their relationship.\nOn August 17, 1992, Allen issued a statement saying that he was in love with Previn. Their relationship became public and \"erupted into tabloid headlines and late-night monologues in August 1992\".\nAllen and Previn were married in Venice, Italy, on December 23, 1997. They have two adopted daughters, and live in the Carnegie Hill section of Manhattan's Upper East Side.\nSexual abuse allegation.\nAccording to court testimony, on August 4, 1992, Allen visited the children at Mia Farrow's home in Bridgewater, Connecticut, while she was shopping with a friend. The next day, that friend's babysitter told her employer that she had seen that \"Dylan was sitting on the sofa, and Woody was kneeling on the floor, facing her, with his head in her lap\". When Farrow asked Dylan about it, Dylan allegedly said that Allen had touched Dylan's \"private part\" while they were alone together in the attic. Allen strongly denied the allegation, calling it \"an unconscionable and gruesomely damaging manipulation of innocent children for vindictive and self-serving motives\". He then began proceedings in New York Supreme Court for sole custody of his and Farrow's son Satchel, as well as Dylan and Moses, their two adopted children. In March 1993, a six-month investigation by the Child Sexual Abuse Clinic of Yale-New Haven Hospital concluded that Dylan had not been sexually abused.\nIn June 1993, Judge Elliott Wilk rejected Allen's bid for custody and rejected the allegation of sexual abuse. Wilk said he was less certain than the Yale-New Haven team that there was conclusive evidence that there was no sexual abuse and called Allen's conduct with Dylan \"grossly inappropriate\", although not sexual. In September 1993, the state prosecutor announced that despite having \"probable cause\", he would not pursue charges in order \"to avoid the unjustifiable risk of exposing a child to the rigors and uncertainties of a questionable prosecution\". In October 1993 the New York Child Welfare Agency of the State Department of Social Services closed a 14-month investigation and concluded there was not credible evidence of abuse or maltreatment, and the allegation was unfounded.\nIn 2014, when Allen received a Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement, the issue returned to the forefront of media attention, with Mia Farrow and Ronan Farrow making disparaging remarks about Allen on Twitter. On February 1, 2014, \"New York Times\" journalist Nicholas Kristof, with Dylan's permission, published a column that included excerpts from a letter Dylan had written to Kristof restating the allegation against Allen, and called out fellow actors who have continued to work in his films. Allen responded to the allegation in an open letter, also in \"The New York Times,\" strongly denying it. \"Of course, I did not molest Dylan...No one wants to discourage abuse victims from speaking out, but one must bear in mind that sometimes there are people who are falsely accused and that is also a terribly destructive thing\", he wrote.\nIn 2018, Moses Farrow (who was present at Mia's Bridgewater house during Allen's visit) published a blog post called \"A Son Speaks Out.\" In the post, Moses strenuously denied the abuse allegations, writing, \"given the incredibly inaccurate and misleading attacks on my father, Woody Allen, I feel that I can no longer stay silent as he continues to be condemned for a crime he did not commit.\" He also recounted a series of instances of alleged physical abuse at the hands of Mia Farrow: \"It pains me to recall instances in which I witnessed siblings, some blind or physically disabled, dragged down a flight of stairs to be thrown into a bedroom or a closet, then having the door locked from the outside. [Mia] even shut my brother Thaddeus, paraplegic from polio, in an outdoor shed overnight as punishment for a minor transgression\".\nWorks about Allen.\nFrom 1976 to 1984 Stuart Hample wrote and drew \"Inside Woody Allen\", a comic strip based on Allen's film persona.\nThe 1997 documentary \"Wild Man Blues\", directed by Barbara Kopple, focuses on Allen, and other documentaries featuring Allen include the 2002 cable television documentary \"Woody Allen: A Life in Film\", directed by \"Time\" film critic Richard Schickel, which interlaces interviews of Allen with clips of his films, and the 1986 short film \"Meetin' WA\", in which Allen is interviewed by French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard.\nIn 2003, a life-size bronze statue of Allen was installed in Oviedo, Spain. He had visited the city the previous year to accept a Prince of Asturias Award.\nIn 2011, the PBS series \"American Masters\" co-produced the documentary \"\", directed by Robert B. Weide. New interviews provide insight and backstory with Diane Keaton, Scarlett Johansson, Pen\u00e9lope Cruz, Dianne Wiest, Larry David, Chris Rock, Martin Scorsese, Dick Cavett, and Leonard Maltin, among others.\nEric Lax wrote the book \"Woody Allen: A Biography\".\nIn 2015, David Evanier published \"Woody: The Biography\", which was billed as the first new biography of Allen in over a decade.\nIn early March 2020, Grand Central Publishing, a division of Hachette Book Group, announced that it would publish Allen's memoir, \"Apropos of Nothing\", on April 7, 2020. Days later, after employee walkouts, parent company Hachette announced that the title was canceled and rights had reverted to Allen. On March 23, 2020, Skyhorse Publishing announced that it had acquired and released \"Apropos of Nothing\" through its Arcade imprint.\nIn February 2021, HBO released Kirby Dick's and Amy Ziering's four-part documentary \"Allen v. Farrow\", which explores the sexual abuse allegations against Allen. The series drew largely positive reviews from critics. Lorraine Ali of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that it \"makes a compelling argument that Allen got away with the unthinkable thanks to his fame, money, and revered standing in the world of film\u2014and that a little girl never received justice.\" Rachel Brodsky wrote in \"The Independent\" that the \"documentary will sound the death knell for Woody Allen's career.\" Hadley Freeman in \"The Guardian\" wrote that the series \"sets itself up as an investigation but much more resembles PR, as biased and partial as a political candidate's advert vilifying an opponent in election season.\" A statement on behalf of Allen and Previn denounced the documentary as \"a hatchet job riddled with falsehoods\" and said that they were approached two months before it was aired on HBO and \"given only a matter of days 'to respond.' Of course, they declined to do so.\" The filmmakers said they gave Allen and Previn two weeks to comment, which is \"more than ample time by journalistic standards.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32902", "revid": "11368244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32902", "title": "Wim Wenders", "text": "German filmmaker (born 1945)\nWim Wenders (; born Ernst Wilhelm Wenders; 14 August 1945) is a German filmmaker and photographer, who is a major figure in New German Cinema. Among the honors he has received are prizes from the Cannes, Venice, and Berlin film festivals. He has also received a BAFTA Award and been nominated for three Academy Awards and a Grammy Award.\nWenders made his feature film debut with \"Summer in the City\" (1970). He earned critical acclaim for directing the films \"Alice in the Cities\" (1974), \"The Wrong Move\" (1975), and \"Kings of the Road\" (1976), later known as the \"Road Movie trilogy\". Wenders won the BAFTA Award for Best Direction and the Palme d'Or for \"Paris, Texas\" (1984) and the Cannes Film Festival Best Director Award for \"Wings of Desire\" (1987). His other notable films include \"The American Friend\" (1977), \"Faraway, So Close!\" (1993), and \"Perfect Days\" (2023).\nWenders has received three nominations for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature: for \"Buena Vista Social Club\" (1999), \"Pina\" (2011), and \"The Salt of the Earth\" (2014). He received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for \"Willie Nelson at the Teatro\" (1998). He is also known for directing the documentaries \"Tokyo-Ga\" (1985), \"The Soul of a Man\" (2003), \"\" (2018), and \"Anselm\" (2023).\nWenders formerly served as the president of the European Film Academy from 1996\u20132020. He also earned an Honorary Golden Bear in 2015. He is an active photographer, emphasizing images of desolate landscapes. He is considered an auteur director.\nEarly life and education.\nWenders was born in D\u00fcsseldorf into a traditionally Catholic family. His father, Heinrich Wenders, was a surgeon. The Dutch name \"Wim\" is a shortened version of the baptismal name \"Wilhelm\". As a boy, Wenders took unaccompanied trips to Amsterdam to visit the Rijksmuseum. He graduated from high school in Oberhausen in the Ruhr area. He then studied medicine at the University of Freiburg (1963\u201364) and philosophy at the University of Dusseldorf (1964\u201365), but dropped out and moved to Paris in October 1966 in order to become a painter. He failed his entry test at France's national film school, IDHEC (now La F\u00e9mis), and instead became an engraver at Johnny Friedlaender's studio in Montparnasse. During this time he became fascinated with cinema, and saw up to five movies a day at the local movie theater.\nSet on making his obsession his life's work, he returned to Germany in 1967 to work in the D\u00fcsseldorf office of United Artists. That fall, he entered the University of Television and Film Munich (HFF). Between 1967 and 1970, while at the HFF, he also worked as a film critic for \"FilmKritik\", the Munich daily newspaper \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\", \"Twen\" magazine, and \"Der Spiegel\".\nWenders completed several short films before graduating from the Hochschule with a 16mm black-and-white film, \"Summer in the City\" (1970), his feature directorial debut.\nCareer.\n1970\u20131976: Film debut and early work.\nWenders's career began in the late 1960s, the New German Cinema era. Much of the distinctive cinematography in his movies is the result of a long-term collaboration with Dutch cinematographer Robby M\u00fcller. Wenders made his directorial film debut with \"Summer in the City\" (1970), his graduation project at the University of Television and Film Munich, which he attended from 1967 to 1970. Shot in 16 mm black-and-white by M\u00fcller, the movie exhibited many of Wenders's later trademark themes of aimless searching, running from invisible demons, and persistent wandering toward an indeterminate goal. Protagonist Hans (Zischler) is released from prison, and after searching through seedy West German streets and bars, he visits an old friend in Berlin.\nWenders then directed \"The Goalkeeper's Fear of the Penalty\", titled \"The Goalie's Anxiety at the Penalty Kick\" in the United States. The film was adapted from Peter Handke's 1970 short novel. He then directed the period drama \"The Scarlet Letter\" (1973), adapted from Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1850 novel of the same name. From 1974 to 1976 Wender directed the Road Movie trilogy. The first film in the trilogy was \"Alice in the Cities\" (1974), which was shot in 16mm. The last two films are \"The Wrong Move\" (1975) and \"Kings of the Road\" (1976), the latter of which won the FIPRESCI Prize at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival.\n1977\u20131987: Breakthrough and acclaim.\nIn 1977 Wenders gained prominence for directing the neo-noir \"The American Friend\", starring Dennis Hopper and Bruno Ganz. The film is adapted from the Patricia Highsmith 1974 novel \"Ripley's Game\". J. Hoberman of \"The New York Times\" has compared the film to Martin Scorsese's \"Taxi Driver\", writing, \"Like \"Taxi Driver\", \"The American Friend\" was a new sort of movie-movie\u2014sleekly brooding, voluptuously alienated and saturated with cinephilia.\"\nWenders earned critical acclaim for his road drama \"Paris, Texas\" (1984), starring Harry Dean Stanton, Nastassja Kinski and Dean Stockwell. The film premiered at the 1984 Cannes Film Festival, where it won the Palme d'Or. Critic Roger Ebert wrote of the film, \"[it's] a movie with the kind of passion and willingness to experiment that was more common fifteen years ago than it is now. It has more links with films like \"Five Easy Pieces\" and \"Easy Rider\" and \"Midnight Cowboy\" than with the slick arcade games that are the box-office winners of the 1980s. It is true, deep, and brilliant\".\nWenders then directed the romance fantasy \"Wings of Desire\" (1987), starring Bruno Ganz and Peter Falk. It premiered at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival, where Wenders won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director. Peter Handke co-wrote the screenplay. West Germany submitted \"Wings of Desire\" for consideration for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, a bid supported by its distribution company. It was not nominated; the academy seldom recognized West German cinema. The film was one of the most acclaimed films of the year, with many critics adding it on their top 10 lists.\n1991\u20132010: Career fluctuations.\nIn 1991 Wenders directed the science fiction adventure drama \"Until the End of the World\", starring William Hurt, Solveig Dommartin, Max Von Sydow and Jeanne Moreau. The film has been released in several editions, ranging in length from 158 to 287 minutes, with the longer versions receiving mixed reviews. In 1993 he directed \"Faraway, So Close!\", a sequel to \"Wings of Desire\". Actors Otto Sander, Bruno Ganz and Peter Falk reprised their roles as angels who have become human. The film also stars Nastassja Kinski, Willem Dafoe and Heinz R\u00fchmann, in his last film role. It received critical acclaim, premiering at the 1993 Cannes Film Festival, where it earned the Grand Prix. The next year, he directed \"Lisbon Story\", which screened at Un Certain Regard at the 1994 Cannes Film Festival. In 1995 he directed both \"A Trick of Light\" and the anthology film \"Lumi\u00e8re and Company\".\nIn 1997, Wenders directed the American drama film \"The End of Violence\", starring Bill Pullman, Andie MacDowell, and Gabriel Byrne. The film received negative reviews and performed poorly at the box office after its debut at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. Like many other of Wenders's American movies, it was shot in multiple locations, including the Griffith Observatory and the Santa Monica Pier. Wenders has directed several highly acclaimed documentaries, including \"Willie Nelson at the Teatro\", a documentary about the recording sessions of \"Teatro\" (1998). The next year he directed \"Buena Vista Social Club\", about the music of Cuba. It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. In 2002, he directed a documentary about the German rock group BAP called \"\" (A lot has happened).\n2011\u2013present: Resurgence with documentaries.\nWenders has directed music videos for groups such as U2 and Talking Heads, including \"Stay (Faraway, So Close!)\" and \"Sax and Violins\". His television commercials include a UK advertisement for Carling Premier Canadian beer. Wenders's book \"Emotion Pictures\", a collection of diary essays written as a film student, was adapted and broadcast as a series of plays on BBC Radio 3, featuring Peter Capaldi as Wenders, with Gina McKee, Saskia Reeves, Dennis Hopper, Harry Dean Stanton and Ricky Tomlinson, dramatized by Neil Cargill.\nWenders also directed a documentary-style film on the Skladanowsky brothers, known in English as \"A Trick of the Light\". The Skladanowsky brothers were inventing \"moving pictures\" when several others like the Lumi\u00e8re brothers and William Friese-Greene were doing the same. In 2011, Wenders was selected to stage the 2013 cycle of Richard Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" at the Bayreuth Festival. The project fell through when he insisted on filming in 3-D, which the Wagner family found too costly and disruptive. In 2012, while promoting his 3-D dance film \"Pina\", Wenders told the blog that he had begun work on a new 3-D documentary about architecture. He also said he would only work in 3-D from then on. Wenders had admired the dance choreographer Pina Bausch since 1985, but only with the advent of digital 3-D cinema did he decide that he could sufficiently capture her work on screen.\nIn 2015, Wenders collaborated with artist/journalist and longtime friend Melinda Camber Porter on a documentary feature about his body of work, \"Wim Wenders \u2013 Visions on Film\". Porter died before it was finished, and the film remains incomplete. Wenders is a member of the advisory board of World Cinema Foundation. The project was founded by Martin Scorsese and aims to find and reconstruct world cinema films that have been neglected. As of 2015 he served as a Jury Member for the digital studio Filmaka, a platform for undiscovered filmmakers to show their work to industry professionals.\nIn June 2017, Wenders stage-directed Georges Bizet's opera \"Les P\u00eacheurs de perles\", starring Olga Peretyatko and Francesco Demuro and conducted by Daniel Barenboim at the Berlin State Opera (Staatsoper). In a 2018 interview, he said his favorite movie of all time was his film about Pope Francis, and that his entire career had been building up to it. His admiration for Francis is profound; he said he felt Francis is doing his best in a world full of calamities. He also said that, though raised Catholic, he had converted to Protestantism years earlier.\nIn 2019 Wenders acted as executive producer for his former assistant director Luca Lucchesi's documentary \"A Black Jesus\", which has similar themes to \"Pope Francis: A Man of His Word.\" The film explores the role of religion in communal identity and how this can create or dissolve differences in a small Sicilian town during the height of the refugee crisis. Lucchesi noted that Wenders pushed the film to be more symbolic and philosophical, saying that Wenders wanted the film to have a \"universal fairy-tale aspect\" and to represent \"Europe in a nutshell\".\nIn 2025, Wenders made a short film called \"The Keys to Freedom\" in Reims, France. In the film, Wenders tours the Museum of the Surrender, where General Eisenhower gave the liberated city's keys to the mayor in 1945, and comments \"These are the keys to the freedom of the world\". Wenders told \"The New York Times\" that Europeans can no longer assume American protection, adding that young people take freedom for granted, not realizing they may soon need to defend it.\nPhotography.\nWenders has worked with photographic images of desolate landscapes and themes of memory, time, loss, nostalgia and movement. He began his long-running project \"Pictures from the Surface of the Earth\" in the early 1980s and pursued it for 20 years. The initial photographic series was titled \"Written in the West\" and was produced while Wenders criss-crossed the American West in preparation for his film \"Paris, Texas\" (1984). It became the starting point for a nomadic journey across the globe, including Germany, Australia, Cuba, Israel and Japan, to take photographs capturing the essence of a moment, place or space.\nPersonal life.\nWenders lives and works in Berlin with his wife, Donata. He has lived in Berlin since the mid-1970s. He is an ecumenical Christian; as a teenager he wished to become a Catholic priest. He supports German football club Borussia Dortmund.\nIn 2009, Wenders signed a petition in support of director Roman Polanski, who had been detained while traveling to a film festival in relation to his 1977 sexual abuse charges, which the petition argued would undermine the tradition of film festivals as a place for works to be shown \"freely and safely\" and argued that arresting filmmakers traveling to neutral countries could open the door to \"actions of which no-one can know the effects.\"\nFrom 1979 to 1981, Wenders was married to the American actress and singer-songwriter Ronee Blakley.\nFilmography.\nFilm.\nShort film\n Feature film \nDocumentary works.\nShort film\nFilm\nTV movies\nTV series\nTelevision.\nTV shorts\nLegacy and honors.\nWenders has been awarded honorary doctorates by the Sorbonne in Paris in 1989, the University of Fribourg (Switzerland) in 1995, and the Universit\u00e9 Catholique de Louvain, Belgium, in 2005. The Wim Wenders Foundation was established in D\u00fcsseldorf in 2012. It provides a framework to bring together his cinematic, photographic, artistic and literary works in his native country and make them permanently accessible to the public. In 2016, he received the Gro\u00dfer Kulturpreis of the Sparkassen Culture-Foundation Rhineland.\nExhibitions.\n1986\u20131992\n1993\u20131995\n2004\n2006\n2011\n2012\n2014\n2015\n2016\n 2017/2018\nInstallation art.\n 2019 \n 2020 \n 2022 \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32905", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32905", "title": "West Virginia", "text": "U.S. state\nWest Virginia is a state in the Southern and Mid-Atlantic regions of the United States. Mountainous, it is bordered by Pennsylvania and Maryland to the northeast, Virginia to the southeast, Kentucky to the southwest, and Ohio to the northwest. West Virginia is the 10th-smallest state by area and ranks as the 12th-least populous state, with a population of 1,769,979 residents. The capital and most populous city is Charleston with a population of 49,055.\nWest Virginia was admitted to the Union on June 20, 1863, and was a key border state during the American Civil War. It separated from Virginia and was one of two states (along with Nevada) admitted to the Union during the Civil War. Some of its residents held slaves, but most were propertied farmers, and the delegates provided for the gradual abolition of slavery in the new state constitution. The state legislature abolished slavery in the state, and at the same time ratified the 13th Amendment abolishing slavery nationally on February 3, 1865.\nWest Virginia's northern panhandle extends adjacent to Pennsylvania and Ohio to form a tristate area, with Wheeling, Weirton, and Morgantown just across the border from the Pittsburgh metropolitan area. Huntington in the southwest is close to Ohio and Kentucky, while Martinsburg and Harpers Ferry in the eastern panhandle region are considered part of the Washington metropolitan area, between Maryland and Virginia. West Virginia is often included in several U.S. geographical regions, including the Mid-Atlantic, the Upland South, and the Southeastern United States. It is the only state entirely within the area served by the Appalachian Regional Commission; the area is commonly defined as \"Appalachia\".\nThe state is noted for its mountains and rolling hills, its historically significant coal mining and logging industries, and its political and labor history. It is also known for its tourism and a wide range of outdoor recreational opportunities, including skiing, whitewater rafting, fishing, hiking, backpacking, mountain biking, rock climbing, and hunting. From the Great Depression to the 1990s, the state voted heavily for the Democratic Party due to its tradition of union-based politics. Since then, the state has become heavily Republican, and is considered a \"deep red\" state at the federal level. West Virginia consistently ranks among the lowest U.S. states in terms of health outcomes, life expectancy, education, and economic factors.\nHistory.\nMany ancient manmade earthen mounds from various prehistoric mound builder cultures survive in West Virginia, especially in the areas of present-day Moundsville, South Charleston, and Romney. Artifacts uncovered in these give evidence of village societies with a tribal trade system culture that crafted cold-worked copper pieces.\nIn the 1670s, during the Beaver Wars, the powerful Iroquois, five allied nations based in present-day New York and Pennsylvania, drove out other Native American tribes from the region to reserve the upper Ohio Valley as a hunting ground. Siouan language tribes, such as the Moneton, had previously been among the earliest recorded in the area. Conflicts with European settlers resulted in various displaced Native tribes settling in West Virginia, where they were known as \"Mingo\", meaning \"remote affiliates of the Iroquois Confederacy\".\nThe area now identified as West Virginia was contested territory among Anglo-Americans as well, with the colonies of Pennsylvania and Virginia claiming territorial rights under their colonial charters to this area before the American Revolutionary War. Some speculative land companies, such as the Vandalia Company, the Ohio Company and the Indiana Company, tried but failed to legitimize their claims to land in parts of West Virginia and present-day Kentucky. This rivalry resulted in some settlers petitioning the Continental Congress to create a new territory called Westsylvania. With the federal settlement of the Pennsylvania and Virginia border dispute, creating Kentucky County, Virginia, Kentuckians \"were satisfied [...] and the inhabitants of a large part of West Virginia were grateful.\"\nThe British Crown considered the area of West Virginia part of its Virginia Colony from 1607 to 1776. The United States considered this area the western part of the state of Virginia (commonly called \"Trans-Allegheny Virginia\") from 1776 to 1863, before West Virginia's formation. Its residents were discontented for years with their position in Virginia, as the government was dominated by the planter elite of the Tidewater and Piedmont areas. The legislature had electoral malapportionment, based on the counting of slaves toward regional populations, and western white residents were underrepresented in the state legislature. More subsistence and established farmers lived in the west, and they were generally less supportive of slavery, although many counties were divided on their support. Residents of that area became more sharply divided after the planter elite of eastern Virginia voted to secede from the Union during the Civil War.\nResidents of the western and northern counties set up a separate government under Francis Pierpont in 1861, which they called the Restored Government. Most voted to separate from Virginia, and the new state was admitted to the Union in 1863. In 1864 a state constitutional convention drafted a constitution, which was ratified by the legislature without putting it to popular vote. West Virginia abolished slavery by a gradual process and temporarily disenfranchised those who had fought for the Confederacy or held Confederate office.\nWest Virginia's history has been profoundly affected by its mountainous terrain, numerous and vast river valleys, and rich natural resources. These were all factors driving its economy and the lifestyles of its residents, who tended to live in many small, relatively isolated communities in the mountain valleys.\nPrehistory.\nA 2010 analysis of a local stalagmite revealed that Native Americans were burning forests to clear land as early as 100BCE. Some regional late-prehistoric Eastern Woodland tribes were more involved in hunting and fishing, practicing the Eastern Agricultural Complex gardening method which used fire to clear out underbrush from certain wooded areas. Another group progressed to the more time-consuming, advanced companion crop fields method of gardening. Also continuing from the ancient Indigenous people of the state, they cultivated tobacco through to early historic times. It was used in numerous social and religious rituals.\n\"Maize (corn) did not make a substantial contribution to the diet until after 1150 BP\", to quote Mills (OSU 2003). Eventually, tribal villages began depending on corn to feed their turkey flocks, as Kanawha Fort Ancients practiced bird husbandry. The local Natives made cornbread and a flat rye bread called \"bannock\" as they emerged from the protohistoric era. A horizon extending from a little before the early 18th century is sometimes called the acculturating \"Fireside Cabin culture\". Trading posts were established by European traders along the Potomac and James rivers.\nTribes that inhabited West Virginia as of 1600 were the Siouan Monongahela Culture to the north, the Fort Ancient culture along the Ohio River from the Monongahela to Kentucky and extending an unknown distance inland, and the Eastern Siouan Tutelo and Moneton tribes in the southeast. There was also the Iroquoian Susquehannock in the region approximately east of the Monongahela River and north of the Monongahela National Forest, a possible tribe called the Senandoa, or Shenandoah, in the Shenandoah Valley and the easternmost tip of the state may have been home to the Manahoac people. The Monongahela may have been the same as a people known as the Calicua, or Cali. The following may have also all been the same tribe\u2014Moneton, Moheton, Senandoa, Tomahitan.\nDuring the Beaver Wars, other tribes moved into the region. The Iroquoian Tiontatecaga (also Little Mingo, Guyandotte) seem to have split off from the Petun after they were defeated by the Iroquois. They eventually settled somewhere between the Kanawha and Little Kanawha Rivers. During the 1750s, when the Mingo Seneca seceded from the Iroquois and returned to the Ohio River Valley, they contend that this tribe merged with them. The Shawnee arrived as well; though primarily stationed within former Monongahela territory approximately until 1750, they extended their influence throughout the Ohio River region. They were West Virginia's last Native tribe and were driven out by the United States during the Shawnee Wars (1811\u20131813). The Erie, who were chased out of Ohio around 1655, are now believed to be the same as the Westo, who invaded as far as South Carolina before being destroyed in the 1680s. If so, their path would have brought them through West Virginia. The historical movement of the Tutelo and carbon dating of the Fort Ancients seem to correspond with the given period of 1655\u20131670 as the time of their removal. The Susquehannocks were original participants in the Beaver Wars but were cut off from the Ohio River by the Iroquois around 1630 and found themselves in dire straits. Suffering from disease and constant warfare and unable to provide for themselves financially, they began to collapse and moved further and further east, to the Susquehanna River of Eastern Pennsylvania. The Manahoac were probably forced out in the 1680s when the Iroquois began to invade Virginia. The Siouan tribes there moved into North Carolina and later returned as one tribe, known as the Eastern Blackfoot, or Christannas.\nThe Westo did not secure the territory they conquered. Even before they were gone, displaced natives from the south flooded into freshly conquered regions and took them over. These became known as the Shattaras, or West Virginia Cherokees. They took in and merged with the Monetons, who began to call themselves the Mohetons. The Calicua also began to call themselves Cherokees soon after, showing an apparent further merger. These Shattaras were closely related to the tribes that formed to the south in the aftermath of the Westo\u2014the Yuchi and Cherokee. From 1715 to 1717, the Yamasee War sprang up. The Senandoa allegedly sided with the Yuchi and were destroyed by Yamasee allies. Therefore, if the Senandoa were the same tribe as the Moneton, this would mean the collapse of Shattara-Moneton culture. Another tribe that appeared in the region was the Canaragay, or Kanawha. It later migrated to Maryland and merged into colonial culture.\nEuropean exploration and settlement.\nIn 1671, General Abraham Wood, at the direction of Royal Governor William Berkeley of the Virginia Colony, sent a party from Fort Henry led by Thomas Batts and Robert Fallam to survey this territory. They were the first Europeans recorded as discovering Kanawha Falls. Some sources state that Governor Alexander Spotswood's 1716 Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition (for which the state's Golden Horseshoe Competition for 8th graders is named) had penetrated as far as Pendleton County, but modern historians interpret the original accounts of the excursion as suggesting that none of the expedition's horsemen ventured much farther west of the Blue Ridge Mountains than Harrisonburg, Virginia. John Van Metre, a Native trader, penetrated into the northern portion in 1725. The same year, German settlers from Pennsylvania founded New Mecklenburg, the present Shepherdstown, on the Potomac River, and others followed.\nKing Charles II of England, in 1661, granted to a company of gentlemen the land between the Potomac and Rappahannock rivers, known as the Northern Neck. Thomas Fairfax, 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ultimately took possession of this grant, and in 1746 a stone was erected at the source of the North Branch Potomac River to mark his grant's western limit. George Washington surveyed a considerable part of this land between 1748 and 1751. His diary recorded that there were already many squatters, largely of German origin, along the South Branch Potomac River.\nChristopher Gist, a surveyor in the employ of the first Ohio Company, which was composed chiefly of Virginians, explored the country along the Ohio River north of the mouth of the Kanawha River between 1751 and 1752. The company sought to have a 14th colony established with the name \"Vandalia\". Many settlers crossed the mountains after 1750, though they were hindered by Native American resistance. Few Native Americans lived permanently within the state's present limits, but the region was a common hunting ground, crossed by many trails. During the French and Indian War (the North American front of the Seven Years' War in Europe),Native allies of the French nearly destroyed the scattered British settlements.\nShortly before the American Revolutionary War, in 1774 Crown Governor of Virginia John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, led a force over the mountains. A body of militia under then-Colonel Andrew Lewis dealt the Shawnee Natives, under Hokoleskwa (or \"Cornstalk\"), a crushing blow during the Battle of Point Pleasant at the junction of the Kanawha and the Ohio rivers. At the Treaty of Camp Charlotte concluding Dunmore's War, Cornstalk agreed to recognize the Ohio River as the new boundary with the \"Long Knives\". But by 1776 the Shawnee returned to war, joining the Chickamauga, a band of Cherokee known for the area where they lived. Native American attacks on settlers continued until after the American Revolutionary War. During the war, the settlers in western Virginia were generally active Whigs; many served in the Continental Army. Claypool's Rebellion of 1780\u20131781, in which a group of men refused to pay taxes to the Continental Army, showed war-weariness in what became West Virginia.\nTrans-Allegheny Virginia.\nSocial conditions in western Virginia were entirely unlike those in the eastern part. The population was not homogeneous, as a considerable part of the immigration came by way of Pennsylvania and included Germans, Protestant Scotch-Irish, and settlers from states farther north. Counties in the east and south were settled mostly by eastern Virginians. During the American Revolution, the movement to create a state beyond the Alleghenies was revived and a petition for the establishment of \"Westsylvania\" was presented to Congress, on the grounds that the mountains presented an almost impassable barrier to the east. The rugged terrain made slavery unprofitable, and time only increased the social, political, economic, and cultural differences (\"see\" Tuckahoes and Cohees) between Virginia's two sections.\nIn 1829, a constitutional convention met in Richmond to consider reforms to Virginia's outdated constitution. Philip Doddridge of Brooke County championed the cause of western Virginians who sought a more democratic frame of government, but western reforms were rejected by leaders from east of the Alleghenies who \"clung to political power in an effort to preserve their plantation lifestyles dependent on enslaving blacks\". Virginia leaders maintained a property qualification for suffrage, effectively disenfranchising poorer farmers in the west whose families did much of the farm work themselves. In addition, the 1829\u201330 convention gave slaveholding counties the benefit of three-fifths of their slave population in apportioning the state's representation in the U.S. House of Representatives. As a result, every county west of the Alleghenies except one voted to reject the constitution, which nevertheless passed because of eastern support. The eastern planter elite's failure to make constitutional reforms exacerbated existing east\u2013west sectionalism in Virginia and contributed to its division.\nThe Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1850\u201351, the Reform Convention, addressed a number of issues important to western Virginians. It extended the vote to all white males 21 years or older. The governor, lieutenant governor, the judiciary, sheriffs, and other county officers were to be elected by public vote. The General Assembly's composition was changed. Representation in the House of Delegates was apportioned based on the census of 1850, counting whites only. The Senate representation was arbitrarily fixed at 50 seats, with the west receiving 20 senators and the east 30. This was made acceptable to the west by a provision that required the General Assembly to reapportion representation based on the white population in 1865, or else put the matter to a public referendum. But the east also gave itself a tax advantage in requiring a property tax at true and actual value, except for slaves. Slaves under age 12 were not taxed and slaves over that age were taxed at only $300, a fraction of their true value, but small farmers had all their assets, animals, and land taxed at full value. Despite this tax and the lack of internal improvements in the west, the vote was 75,748 for and 11,063 against the new constitution. Most of the opposition came from delegates from eastern counties, who did not like the compromises made for the west.\nGiven these differences, many in the west had long contemplated a separate state. In particular, men such as lawyer Francis H. Pierpont from Fairmont had long chafed under the Tidewater and Piedmont slaveholders' political dominance. In addition to differences over slavery, he and allies felt the Virginia government ignored and refused to spend funds on needed internal improvements in the west, such as turnpikes and railroads.\nSeparation from Virginia.\nWest Virginia was the only state in the Union to separate from a Confederate state (Virginia) during the Civil War. In Richmond on April 17, 1861, the Virginia Secession Convention of 1861 voted to secede from the Union, but of the 49 delegates from the northwestern corner (which ultimately became West Virginia) only 17 voted in favor of the Ordinance of Secession, while 30 voted against (with two abstentions). Almost immediately after that vote, a mass meeting at Clarksburg recommended that each county in northwestern Virginia send delegates to a convention to meet in Wheeling on May 13, 1861. When this First Wheeling Convention met, 425 delegates from 25 counties were present, though more than one-third of the delegates were from the northern panhandle area. Soon there was a division of sentiment.\nSome delegates led by pro-Union slaveowner John S. Carlile favored the immediate formation of a new state, while others led by Waitman Willey argued that, as Virginia's secession had not yet been passed by the required referendum (as happened on May 23), such action would constitute revolution against the United States. The convention decided that if Virginians adopted the secession ordinance (of which there was little doubt), another convention including the members-elect of the legislature would meet in Wheeling in June 1861. On May 23, 1861, secession was ratified by a large majority in Virginia as a whole, but in the western counties 34,677 voted against and 19,121 voted for the ordinance.\nThe Second Wheeling Convention met as agreed on June 11 and declared that, since the Secession Convention had been called without popular consent, all its acts were void and all who adhered to it had vacated their offices. The Wheeling Conventions, and the delegates themselves, were never actually elected by public ballot to act on behalf of western Virginia. Of its 103 members, 33 had been elected to the Virginia General Assembly on May 23. This included some hold-over state senators whose four-year terms had begun in 1859, and some who vacated their offices to convene in Wheeling. Other members \"were chosen even more irregularly\u2014some in mass meetings, others by county committee, and still others were seemingly self-appointed\". An act for the reorganization of the government was passed on June 19. The next day, convention delegates chose Francis H. Pierpont as governor of Virginia and elected other officers to a rival state government and two U.S. senators (Willey and Carlile) to replace secessionists before adjourning. The federal government promptly recognized the new government and seated the two new senators. Thus there were two state governments in Virginia: one pledging allegiance to the United States and one to the Confederacy.\nThe second Wheeling Convention had recessed until August 6, then reassembled on August 20 and called for a popular vote on the formation of a new state and for a convention to frame a constitution if the vote were favorable. In the October 24, 1861, election, 18,408 votes were cast for the new state and 781 against. The election results were questioned since the Union army then occupied the area and Union troops were stationed at many of the polls to prevent Confederate sympathizers from voting. This was also election day for local offices, and elections were also held in camps of Confederate soldiers, who elected rival state officials, such as Robert E. Cowan. Most pro-statehood votes came from 16 counties around the northern panhandle. Over 50,000 votes had been cast on the Ordinance of Secession, yet the vote on statehood garnered little more than 19,000. In Ohio County, home to Wheeling, only about a fourth of the registered voters cast votes. In most of what would become West Virginia, there was no vote at all, as two-thirds of the territory of West Virginia had voted for secession, and county officers remained loyal to Richmond. Votes recorded from pro-secession counties were mostly cast elsewhere by Unionist refugees from these counties.\nDespite that controversy, delegates (including many Methodist ministers) met to write a constitution for the new state, beginning on November 26, 1861. During that constitutional convention, a Mr. Lamb of Ohio County and a Mr. Carskadon claimed that in Hampshire County, out of 195 votes only 39 were cast by citizens of the state; the rest were cast illegally by Union soldiers. One of the key figures was Gordon Battelle, who also represented Ohio County, and who proposed resolutions to establish public schools, as well as to limit the movement of slaves into the new state, and to gradually abolish slavery. The education proposal succeeded, but the convention tabled the slavery proposals before finishing its work on February 18, 1862. The new constitution was more closely modeled on Ohio's than Virginia's, adopting a township model of government rather than the \"courthouse cliques\" of Virginia which Carlile criticized, and a compromise demanded by the Kanawha region (Charleston lawyers Benjamin Smith and Brown) allowed counties and municipalities to vote subsidies for railroads or other improvement organizations. The resulting instrument was ratified (18,162 for and 514 against) on April 11, 1862.\nOn May 13, 1862, the state legislature of the reorganized government approved the formation of the new state. An application for admission to the Union was made to Congress, introduced by Senator Waitman Willey of the Restored Government of Virginia. Carlile sought to sabotage the bill, first trying to expand the new state's boundaries to include the Shenandoah Valley, and then to defeat the Willey amendment at home. On December 31, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln approved an enabling act admitting West Virginia on the condition that a provision for the gradual abolition of slavery be inserted in its constitution (as Battelle had urged in the \"Wheeling Intelligencer\" and also written to Lincoln). While many felt West Virginia's admission as a state was both illegal and unconstitutional, Lincoln issued his \"Opinion on the Admission of West Virginia\" finding that \"the body which consents to the admission of West Virginia is the Legislature of Virginia\", and that its admission was therefore both constitutional and expedient.\nThe convention was reconvened on February 12, 1863, and the abolition demand of the federal enabling act was met. The revised constitution was adopted on March 26, 1863, and on April 20, 1863, Lincoln issued a proclamation admitting the state 60 days later on June 20, 1863. Meanwhile, officers for the new state were chosen, while Pierpont moved his pro-Union Virginia capital to Union-occupied Alexandria, where he asserted and exercised jurisdiction over all the remaining Virginia counties within the federal lines.\nThe question of the constitutionality of the formation of the new state was later brought before the Supreme Court of the United States in \"Virginia v. West Virginia.\" Berkeley and Jefferson counties, lying on the Potomac east of the mountains, voted in favor of annexation to West Virginia in 1863, with the consent of Virginia's reorganized government.\nMany voters of the strongly pro-secessionist counties were absent in the Confederate Army when the vote was taken and refused to acknowledge the transfer when they returned. The Virginia General Assembly repealed the act of secession and in 1866 brought suit against West Virginia asking the court to declare the counties part of Virginia, which would have made West Virginia's admission as a state unconstitutional. Meanwhile, on March 10, 1866, Congress passed a joint resolution recognizing the transfer. The Supreme Court decided in West Virginia's favor in 1870.\nClaims by Maryland.\nThe original charters for Maryland and Virginia were silent as to which branch of the upper Potomac was the boundary. This was settled by the 1785 Mount Vernon Conference. Nevertheless, when West Virginia seceded from Virginia, Maryland claimed West Virginia land north of the South Branch (all of Mineral and Grant Counties and parts of Hampshire, Hardy, Tucker and Pendleton Counties). The Supreme Court rejected these claims in two separate decisions in 1910.\nIn the Civil War.\nDuring the Civil War, Union General George B. McClellan's forces gained possession of the greater part of the territory in the summer of 1861, culminating at the Battle of Rich Mountain, and Union control was never again seriously threatened. In 1863, General John D. Imboden, with 5,000 Confederates, raided a considerable portion of the state and burned Pierpont's library, although Willey escaped their grasp. Bands of guerrillas burned and plundered in some sections, and were not entirely suppressed until the war ended. The eastern panhandle counties were more affected by the war, with military control of the area repeatedly changing hands.\nThe area that became West Virginia actually furnished about an equal number of soldiers to the Union and Confederate armies, about 22,000\u201325,000 each. In 1865, the Wheeling government found it necessary to strip voting rights from returning Confederates in order to retain control. James Ferguson, who proposed the law, said if it was not enacted he would lose the election by 500 votes. Confederates' property might also be confiscated, and in 1866 a constitutional amendment disfranchising all who had given aid and comfort to the Confederacy was adopted. The addition of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution caused a reaction. The Democratic party secured control in 1870, and in 1871 the constitutional amendment of 1866 was abrogated. Republicans had taken the first steps toward this change in 1870. On August 22, 1872, an entirely new constitution was adopted.\nBeginning in Reconstruction, and for several decades thereafter, the two states disputed the new state's share of the prewar Virginia government's debts, which had mostly been incurred to finance public infrastructure improvements, such as canals, roads, and railroads under the Virginia Board of Public Works. Virginians\u2014led by former Confederate general William Mahone\u2014formed a political coalition based upon this: the Readjuster Party. West Virginia's first constitution provided for the assumption of a part of the Virginia debt, but negotiations opened by Virginia in 1870 were fruitless, and in 1871 Virginia funded two-thirds of the debt and arbitrarily assigned the remainder to West Virginia. The issue was finally settled in 1915, when the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that West Virginia owed Virginia $12,393,929.50. The final installment of this sum was paid in 1939.\nDevelopment of natural resources.\nAfter Reconstruction, the new 35th state benefited from the development of its mineral resources more than any other single economic activity.\nSaltpeter caves had been employed throughout Appalachia for munitions; the border between West Virginia and Virginia includes the \"Saltpeter Trail\", a string of limestone caverns containing rich deposits of calcium nitrate which were rendered and sold to the government. The trail stretched from Pendleton County to the western terminus of the route in the town of Union, Monroe County. Nearly half of these caves are on the West Virginia side, including Organ Cave and Haynes Cave. In the late 18th century, saltpeter miners in Haynes Cave found large animal bones in the deposits. These were sent by a local historian and frontier soldier Colonel John Stuart to Thomas Jefferson. The bones were named \"Megalonyx jeffersonii\", or great-claw, and became known as Jefferson's three-toed sloth. It was declared the official state fossil of West Virginia in 2008. The West Virginia official state rock is bituminous coal, and the official state gemstone is silicified Mississippian fossil Lithostrotionella coral.\nThe limestone also produced a useful quarry industry. Usually small, and softer, high-calcium seams were burned to produce industrial lime. This lime was used for agricultural and construction purposes; for many years a specific portion of the C &amp; O Railroad carried limestone rock to Clifton Forge, Virginia as an industrial flux.\nSalt mining had been underway since the 18th century, though it had largely played out by the time of the American Civil War, when the red salt of Kanawha County was a valued commodity of first Confederate, and later Union, forces. In the years following, more sophisticated mining methods would restore West Virginia's role as a major producer of salt.\nHowever, in the second half of the 19th century, there was an even greater treasure not yet developed: bituminous coal. It would fuel much of the Industrial Revolution in the U.S. and the steamships of many of the world's navies.\nThe residents (both Native Americans and early European settlers) had long known of the underlying coal, and that it could be used for heating and fuel. However, for a long time, \"personal\" or artisanal mining was the only practical development. After the War, with the new railroads came a practical method to transport large quantities of coal to expanding U.S. and export markets. As the anthracite mines of northwestern New Jersey and Pennsylvania began to play out during this same time period, investors and industrialists focused new interest in West Virginia. Geologists such as Dr. David T. Ansted surveyed potential coal fields and invested in land and early mining projects.\nThe completion of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway (C&amp;O) across the state to the new city of Huntington on the Ohio River in 1872 opened access to the New River Coal Field. Soon, the C&amp;O was building its huge coal pier at Newport News, Virginia, on the large harbor of Hampton Roads. In 1881, the new Philadelphia-based owners of the former Atlantic, Mississippi and Ohio Railroad (AM&amp;O), which stretched across Virginia's southern tier from Norfolk, had sights clearly set on West Virginia, where the owners had large landholdings. Their railroad was renamed Norfolk and Western (N&amp;W), and a new railroad city was developed at Roanoke to handle planned expansion. After its new president Frederick J. Kimball and a small party journeyed by horseback and saw firsthand the rich bituminous coal seam, which Kimball's wife named \"Pocahontas\", the N&amp;W redirected its planned westward expansion to reach it. Soon, the N&amp;W was also shipping from new coal piers at Hampton Roads.\nIn 1889, in the southern part of the state, along the Norfolk and Western rail lines, the important coal center of Bluefield, West Virginia, was founded. The \"capital\" of the Pocahontas coalfield, this city would remain the largest city in the southern portion of the state for several decades. It shares its name with a sister city, Bluefield, in Virginia.\nIn the northern portion of the state and elsewhere, the older Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&amp;O) and other lines also expanded to take advantage of coal opportunities. The B&amp;O developed coal piers in Baltimore and at several points on the Great Lakes. Other significant rail carriers of coal were the Western Maryland Railway (WM), Southern Railway (SOU), and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad (L&amp;N).\nParticularly notable was a latecomer, the Virginian Railway (VGN). By 1900, only the most rugged terrain of southern West Virginia was any distance from the existing railroads and mining activity. Within this area west of the New River Coalfield in Raleigh and Wyoming counties lay the Winding Gulf Coalfield, later promoted as the \"Billion Dollar Coalfield\".\nA prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Dr. Ansted was William Nelson Page (1854\u20131932), a civil engineer and mining manager in Fayette County. Former West Virginia governor William A. MacCorkle described him as a man who knew the land \"as a farmer knows a field\". Beginning in 1898, Page teamed with northern and European-based investors to take advantage of the undeveloped area. They acquired large tracts of land in the area, and Page began the Deepwater Railway, a short-line railroad chartered to stretch between the C&amp;O at its line along the Kanawha River and the N&amp;W at Matoaka\u2014a distance of about .\nAlthough the Deepwater plan should have provided a competitive shipping market via either railroad, leaders of the two large railroads did not appreciate the scheme. In secret collusion, each declined to negotiate favorable rates with Page, nor did they offer to purchase his railroad, as they had many other short-lines. However, if the C&amp;O and N&amp;W presidents thought they could thus kill the Page project, they were to be proved mistaken. One of the silent partner investors Page had enlisted was millionaire industrialist Henry Huttleston Rogers, a principal in John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Trust and an old hand at developing natural resources and transportation. A master at competitive \"warfare\", Henry Rogers did not like to lose in his endeavors and also had \"deep pockets\".\nInstead of giving up, Page (and Rogers) quietly planned and then built their tracks all the way east across Virginia, using Rogers' private fortune to finance the $40\u00a0million cost. When the renamed Virginian Railway (VGN) was completed in 1909, no fewer than three railroads were shipping ever-increasing volumes of coal to export from Hampton Roads. West Virginia coal was also in high demand at Great Lakes ports. The VGN and the N&amp;W ultimately became parts of the modern Norfolk Southern system, and the VGN's well-engineered 20th-century tracks continue to offer a favorable gradient to Hampton Roads.\nAs coal mining and related work became major employment activities in the state, there was considerable labor strife as working conditions, safety issues and economic concerns arose. Even in the 21st century, mining safety and ecological concerns are still challenging to the state whose coal continues to power electrical generating plants in many other states.\nCoal is not the only valuable mineral found in West Virginia, as the state was the site of the 1928 discovery of the 34.48 carat (6.896 g) Jones Diamond.\nGeography.\nLocated in the Appalachian Mountains, West Virginia covers an area of , with of land and of water, making it the 41st-largest state in the United States. West Virginia borders Pennsylvania and Maryland in the northeast, Virginia in the southeast, Ohio in the northwest, and Kentucky in the southwest. Its longest border is with Virginia at , followed by Ohio at , Maryland at , Pennsylvania at , and Kentucky at .\nGeology and terrain.\nWest Virginia is located entirely within the Appalachian Region, and the state is almost entirely mountainous, giving the reason for the nickname \"The Mountain State\" and the motto \"Montani Semper Liberi\" (\"Mountaineers are always free\"). The elevations and ruggedness drop near large rivers like the Ohio River or Shenandoah River. About 75% of the state is within the Cumberland Plateau and Allegheny Plateau regions. Though the relief is not high, the plateau region is extremely rugged in most areas. The average elevation of West Virginia is approximately above sea level, which is the highest of any U.S. state east of the Mississippi River.\nOn the eastern state line with Virginia, high peaks in the Monongahela National Forest region give rise to an island of colder climate and ecosystems similar to those of northern New England and eastern Canada. The highest point in the state is atop Spruce Knob, at , and is covered in a boreal forest of dense spruce trees at altitudes above . Spruce Knob lies within the Monongahela National Forest and is a part of the Spruce Knob\u2013Seneca Rocks National Recreation Area. A total of six wilderness areas can also be found within the forest. Outside the forest to the south, the New River Gorge is a canyon deep, carved by the New River. The National Park Service manages a portion of the gorge and river that has been designated as the New River Gorge National Park and Preserve.\nOther areas under protection and management include:\nMost of West Virginia lies within the Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests ecoregion, while the higher elevations along the eastern border and in the panhandle lie within the Appalachian\u2013Blue Ridge forests. The native vegetation for most of the state was originally mixed hardwood forest of oak, chestnut, maple, beech, and white pine, with willow and American sycamore along the state's waterways. Many of the areas are rich in biodiversity and scenic beauty, a fact appreciated by native West Virginians, who refer to their home as \"Almost Heaven\" (from the song \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" by John Denver). Before the song, it was known as \"The Cog State\" (Coal, Oil, and Gas) or \"The Mountain State\".\nThe underlying rock strata are Paleozoic Era sandstones, shales, bituminous coal beds, and limestones laid down in near-shore environments. The sandstones and shales were derived from sediments eroded from former mountains to the east, then deposited in a shallow inland sea to the west. The limestones were derived from biomineralizing marine organisms such as calcareous algae, brachiopods, and crinoids. Coals were formed in coastal swamp environments, and deltaic environments formed near the mouths of ancient rivers. Sea level rose and fell many times during the Carboniferous Period (Mississippian and Pennsylvanian Subperiods), yielding a variety of rock strata that dominate the bedrock today. The Appalachian Mountains, which are a major influence on the present-day geography of West Virginia, formed more than three hundred million years ago.\nThe State Fossil of West Virginia is the giant ground sloth \"Megalonyx jeffersonii,\" which lived during the Pleistocene Epoch (the most recent \"Ice Age\"). The genus was described by Thomas Jefferson in 1799 from remains collected in Haynes Cave, Monroe County, West Virginia. In 1799, that area was considered to belong to the western part of the State of Virginia. \"Megalonyx\" was the first genus of fossil vertebrate animal named from the United States.\nUnlike Vermont, West Virginia has no navigable access either to the Great Lakes or to the Atlantic Ocean.[\"\"]\nClimate.\nThe climate of West Virginia is generally a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\", except \"Dfb\" at the higher elevations) with warm to hot, humid summers and chilly winters, increasing in severity with elevation. Some southern highland areas also have a mountain temperate climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\") where winter temperatures are more moderate and summer temperatures are somewhat cooler. However, the weather is subject in all parts of the state to change. The hardiness zones range from zone 5b in the central Appalachian Mountains to zone 7a in the warmest parts of the lowest elevations.\nIn the eastern panhandle and the Ohio River valley, temperatures are warm enough to see and grow subtropical plants such as southern magnolia (\"Magnolia grandiflora\"), crepe myrtle, \"Albizia julibrissin\", American sweetgum and even the occasional needle palm and sabal minor. These plants do not thrive as well in other parts of the state. The eastern prickly pear grows well in many portions of the state.\nAverage January temperatures range from around 26\u00a0\u00b0F (\u22124\u00a0\u00b0C) near the Cheat River to 41\u00a0\u00b0F (5\u00a0\u00b0C) along sections of the border with Kentucky. July averages range from 67\u00a0\u00b0F (19\u00a0\u00b0C) along the North Branch Potomac River to 76\u00a0\u00b0F (24\u00a0\u00b0C) in the western part of the state. It is cooler in the mountains than in the lower sections of the state. The highest recorded temperature in the state is at Martinsburg on July 10, 1936, and the lowest recorded temperature in the state is at Lewisburg on December 30, 1917.\nAnnual precipitation ranges from less than in the lower eastern section to more than in higher parts of the Allegheny Front. Valleys in the east have lower rainfall because the Allegheny mountain ridges to the west create a partial rain shadow. Slightly more than half the rainfall occurs from April to September. Dense fogs are common in many valleys of the Kanawha section, especially the Tygart Valley. West Virginia is also one of the cloudiest states in the nation, with the cities of Elkins and Beckley ranking 9th and 10th in the U.S. respectively for the number of cloudy days per year (over 210). In addition to persistent cloudy skies caused by the damming of moisture by the Alleghenies, West Virginia also experiences some of the most frequent precipitation in the nation, with Snowshoe averaging nearly 200 days a year with either rain or snow. Snow usually lasts only a few days in the lower sections but may persist for weeks in the higher mountain areas. An average of of snow falls annually in Charleston, although during the winter of 1995\u20131996 more than three times that amount fell as several cities in the state established new records for snowfall. Average snowfall in the Allegheny Highlands can range up to per year. Severe weather is somewhat less prevalent in West Virginia than in most other eastern states, and it ranks among the least tornado-prone states east of the Rockies.\nMajor cities.\nThere are 232 incorporated municipalities in West Virginia. Charleston is the state's capital and most populous city; the Charleston metropolitan area has approximately 200,000 residents. The Huntington\u2013Ashland metropolitan area is anchored by Huntington, the state's second-most populous city. Other metro areas in the state include Morgantown, Wheeling, Weirton, Beckley, and Parkersburg\u2013Vienna. Other metropolitan areas that contain cities in West Virginia, but are primarily in other states include Cumberland, Maryland; Hagerstown, Maryland; Washington, D.C.; and Winchester, Virginia. Another six cities function as the centers of micropolitan statistical areas, which are predominantly more rural: Bluefield, Clarksburg, Elkins, Fairmont, Logan, and Point Pleasant.\nOriginally, the state capital was located in Wheeling, from 1863 to 1870. It was then moved to Charleston, a more central city, from 1870 to 1875, when it returned to Wheeling. In 1885, the capitol burned down and it was moved back to Charleston that year, where a vote was held to determine the permanent capital between Charleston, Clarksburg, and Martinsburg. Charleston was selected, and it has remained the capital since.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, West Virginia's population was 1,793,716, a 3.2% decrease from the 2010 United States census. West Virginia's center of population is in Gassaway.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 1,375 homeless people in West Virginia.\nAs of 2019, West Virginia has an estimated population of 1,792,147, which is a decrease of 10,025 (0.55%) from the prior year and a decrease of 47,162 (2.55%) since the previous census. This includes a natural decrease of 3,296 (108,292 births minus 111,588 deaths) and an increase from net migration of 14,209 into the state. West Virginia is the least populous southeastern state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 3,691, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 10,518.\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for West Virginia's immigrants were Mexico, China, India, the Philippines and Germany. Only 1.6% of the state's residents were foreign-born, placing West Virginia last among the 50 states in that statistic. It also has the lowest percentage of residents who speak a language other than English at home (2.6%).\nThe five largest ancestry groups in West Virginia according to the American Community Survey are: 22% American, 17% English, 13% German, 10% Irish, and 4% Italian.\nLarge numbers of people of German ancestry are present in the northeastern counties of the state. People of English ancestry are present throughout the entire state. Many West Virginians who self-identify as Irish are actually Scots-Irish Protestants. African Americans are concentrated in Metro Valley in the vicinity of Charleston and Huntington. African Americans also live in the New River/Greenbrier Valley. The state also has a significant Serbian population. Most of the Serbs came to West Virginia in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to work in the coal mines. There are also small numbers of Hispanics, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans in West Virginia. There is also a Romani community in West Virginia. There are also Melungeons in the state.\nAs of the 2010 census, 16% of West Virginia's residents are 65 or older, ranking second in the country, only behind Florida, which sits at 17%.\nThere were 20,928 births in 2006. Of these, 19,757 (94.40% of the births, 95.19% of the population) were to non-Hispanic whites. There were 22 births to Native American (0.11% of the births and 0.54% of the population), 177 births to Asians (0.85% of the births and 0.68% of the population), 219 births to Hispanics (1.05% of the births and 0.88% of the population) and 753 births to blacks and others (3.60% of the births and 3.56% of the population). The county with the highest percentage of residents under 18 is Berkeley County with 23.5% and Gilmer County with the lowest percentage at 15.3%.\n\"Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number. Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one Hispanic group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.\"\nLanguages.\nIn 2010 97.67% (1,697,042) of West Virginia residents aged 5 years or older spoke English as their primary language. 2.33% of residents spoke a native language other than English.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeveral surveys of West Virginians' religious affiliation have been made in recent years, including in 2008 by the American Religion Identity Survey, and in 2010 by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. The Pew survey results admit to a 6.5% margin of error, while the ARIS survey says \"estimates are subject to larger sampling errors in states with small populations.\" A characteristic of religion in Appalachian communities is the abundance of independent, non-affiliated churches, which \"remain unnoted and uncounted in any census of church life in the United States\". This sometimes leads to the belief that these communities are \"unchurched\".\nThe largest denomination as of 2010, according to Association of Religion Data Archives, was the United Methodist Church with 136,000 members in 1,200 congregations. The second-largest Protestant church was the American Baptist Churches USA, with 88,000 members and 381 congregations. The Southern Baptist church had 44,000 members and 232 congregations. The Churches of Christ had 22,000 members and 287 congregations. The Presbyterian Church (USA) had 200 congregations and 20,000 members. By the 2020 ARDA study, non-denominational Protestantism became the largest Christian group, with 152,518 adherents.\nA 2015 survey by the Pew Research Center found that West Virginia was the seventh-most \"highly religious\" state in the nation. A 2020 survey by the Public Religion Research Institute found that 69% of the adult population was Christian, reflecting a slight decrease since the Pew Research Center's 2015 survey. In 2020, a survey of nearly 1,900 West Virginians reported that 78.6% were Christian and 16.2% were unaffiliated. In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute estimated 67% of the state was Christian (53% Protestant, 11% Catholic, 2% Jehovah's Witness, and 1% Mormon), 28% unaffiliated, 3% New Age, and 2% Buddhist.\nEconomy.\nAccording to the World Bank, West Virginia's economy would nominally be the world's 69th-largest, behind Luxembourg and ahead of Bulgaria. The state has a projected nominal GDP of $85.434\u00a0billion in 2009 according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis report as of 2021, and a real GDP of $71.343\u00a0billion. The state's real GDP growth of 1.3% in 2021 was the 8th-best in the country.\nWhile per capita income fell 2.6% nationally in 2009, West Virginia's grew at 1.8%. Through the first half of 2010, exports from West Virginia topped $3\u00a0billion, growing 39.5% over the same period from the previous year and ahead of the national average by 15.7%.\n\"Forbes\" ranked Morgantown as the 10th-best small city in the nation to conduct business in 2010. The city is also home to West Virginia University, the 95th-best public university, according to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in 2011. The proportion of West Virginia's adult population with a bachelor's degree is the lowest in the U.S., at 17.3%.\nThe net corporate income tax rate is 6.5% while business costs are 13% below the national average.\nThe U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis reported that in 2014 West Virginia's economy grew twice as fast as the next fastest-growing state east of the Mississippi River, ranking third alongside Wyoming and just behind North Dakota and Texas among the fastest-growing states.\nTourism.\nTourism contributed $4.27\u00a0billion to the state's economy and employed 44,400 people in 2010, making it one of the state's largest industries. Many tourists, especially in the eastern mountains, are drawn to the region's notable opportunities for outdoor recreation. Canaan Valley is popular for winter sports, Seneca Rocks is one of the premier rock climbing destinations in the eastern U.S., the New River Gorge/Fayetteville area draws rock climbers as well as whitewater rafting enthusiasts, and the Monongahela National Forest is popular with hikers, backpackers, hunters, and anglers.\nAlso drawing tourism to the state is the West Virginia State Park &amp; State Forest system, which comprises 45 units covering 164,000 acres. In 2021, over 9 million people visited a West Virginia State Park, the highest number on record. This is partly due to a recent $151 million improvement project that has seen improvements at every park and forest.\nIn addition to such outdoor recreation opportunities, the state offers a number of historic and cultural attractions. Harpers Ferry National Historical Park is a historic town situated at the confluence of the Shenandoah and Potomac rivers. Harpers Ferry was the site of John Brown's 1859 raid on the U.S. Armory and Arsenal. Located at the approximate midpoint of the Appalachian Trail, Harpers Ferry is the base of the Appalachian Trail Conservancy.\nThe Greenbrier hotel and resort, originally built in 1778, has long been considered a premier hotel, frequented by numerous world leaders and U.S. presidents over the years.\nWest Virginia is the site of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, which features the Green Bank Telescope. For the 1963 Centennial of the State, it hosted two high school graduate delegates from each of the 50 States at the National Youth Science Camp near Bartow, and has continued this tradition ever since. The main building of Weston State Hospital is the largest hand-cut sandstone building in the western hemisphere, second worldwide only to the Kremlin in Moscow. Tours of the building, which is a National Historic Landmark and part of the National Civil War Trail, are offered seasonally and by appointment year-round. West Virginia has numerous popular festivals throughout the year.\nEnergy.\nOne of the major resources in West Virginia's economy is coal. According to the Energy Information Administration, West Virginia is a top coal producer in the United States, second only to Wyoming. West Virginia is located in the heart of the Marcellus Shale Natural Gas Bed, which stretches from Tennessee north to New York in the middle of Appalachia.\nAs of 2017, the coal industry accounted for 2% of state employment. Nearly all the electricity generated in West Virginia is from coal-fired power plants. West Virginia produces a surplus of electricity and leads the nation in net interstate electricity exports. Farming is also practiced in West Virginia, but on a limited basis because of the mountainous terrain over much of the state.\nAn assessment from 2012 estimated that West Virginia had the potential to generate 8,627 GWh/year from 2,772 MW of 100-meter wind turbines, and 60,000 GWh from 40,000 MW of photovoltaics, including 3,810 MW of rooftop photovoltaics. This was based on then-existing technologies and apparently was based on some assumed requirements for the economic performance of the respective resources.\nTaxes.\nWest Virginia personal income tax is based on federal adjusted gross income (not taxable income), as modified by specific items in West Virginia law. Citizens are taxed within five income brackets, which range from 3.0% to 6.5%. The state's consumer sales tax is levied at 6% on most products except for non-prepared foods.\nWest Virginia counties administer and collect property taxes, although property tax rates reflect levies for state government, county governments, county boards of education and municipalities. Counties may also impose a hotel occupancy tax on lodging places not located within the city limits of any municipality that levies such a tax. Municipalities may levy license and gross receipts taxes on businesses located within the city limits and a hotel occupancy tax on lodging places in the city. Although the Department of Tax and Revenue plays a major role in the administration of this tax, less than half of one percent of the property tax collected goes to state government.\nThe primary beneficiaries of the property tax are county boards of education. Property taxes are paid to the sheriff of each of the state's 55 counties. Each county and municipality can impose its own rates of property taxation within the limits set by the West Virginia Constitution. The West Virginia legislature sets the rate of tax of county boards of education. This rate is used by all county boards of education statewide. However, the total tax rate for county boards of education may differ from county to county because of excess levies. The Department of Tax and Revenue supervises and otherwise assists counties and municipalities in their work of assessment and tax rate determination. The total tax rate is a combination of the tax levies from four state taxing authorities: state, county, schools and municipal. This total tax rate varies for each of the four classes of property, which consists of personal, real and intangible properties. Property is assessed according to its use, location and value as of July 1. WV Assessments has a free searchable database of West Virginia real estate tax assessments, covering current and past years. All property is reappraised every three years; annual adjustments are made to assessments for property with a change of value. West Virginia does not impose an inheritance tax. Because of the phase-out of the federal estate tax credit, West Virginia's estate tax is not imposed on estates of persons who died on or after January 1, 2005.\nLargest private employers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuality of life.\nEconomy.\nWest Virginia coal exports declined 40% in 2013\u2014a loss of $2.9\u00a0billion and overall total exports declined 26%. West Virginia ranked last in the Gallup Economic Index for the fourth year running. West Virginia's score was \u221244, or a full 17 points lower than the average of \u221227 for the other states in the bottom ten. West Virginia ranked 48th in the CNBC \"Top States for Business 2013\" based on measures of competitiveness such as economy, workforce and cost of living\u2014ranking among the bottom five states for the last six years running. West Virginia ranked 49th in the 2014 State New Economy Index and has ranked in the bottom three states since 1999. West Virginia ranked last or next-to-last in critical indicators such as Workforce Education, Entrepreneurial Activity, High-Tech Jobs, and Scientists and Engineers.\nEmployment.\nIn 2012, West Virginia's gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 3.3%. The state issued a report highlighting the state's GDP as indicating a fast-growing economy, but did not address employment indicators. In 2009\u20132013, the U.S. real GDP increased 9.6% and total employment increased 3.9%. In West Virginia during the same time period, its real GDP increased about 11%, while total employment decreased by 1,000 jobs from 746,000 to 745,000.\nIn 2013, West Virginia ranked last in the nation with an employment-to-population ratio of only 50%, compared to the national average of 59%. The state lost 5,600 jobs in its labor force in four critical economic sectors: construction (1,900), manufacturing (1,100), retail (1,800), and education (800), while gaining just 400 in mining and logging. The state's Civilian Labor Force dropped by 15,100.\nWages and poverty.\nPersonal income growth in West Virginia during 2013 was only 1.5%\u2014the lowest in the nation\u2014and about half the national average (2.6%). Overall income growth in West Virginia in the last thirty years has been only 13%\u2014about a third of the national average (37%). Wages of the impoverished bottom 1% income earners decreased by 3%, compared to the national average, which increased 19%.\nWest Virginia's poverty rate is one of the highest in the nation. 2017 estimates indicate that 19% of the state's population lives in poverty, exceeding the national average of 13%.\nPopulation.\nUnited Van Lines 37th Annual Migration Study showed in 2013 that 60% more people moved out of West Virginia than moved in. West Virginia's population is expected to decline by more than 19,000 residents by 2030, and West Virginia lost one of its three seats in the United States House of Representatives in the 2020 census. West Virginia is the only state where death rates exceed birth rates. During 2010\u20132013, about 21,000 babies per year were born in West Virginia, but over these three years West Virginia had 3,000 more deaths than births.\nFamily.\nGallup-Healthways annual \"State of American Well-Being\" rankings reports that 1,261 concerned West Virginians rated themselves as \"suffering\" in categories such as Quality of Life, Physical Health, and Access to Basic Needs. Overall, West Virginia citizens rated themselves as being more miserable than people in all other states\u2014for five years running. In addition, the Gallup Well-Being Index for 2013 ranked Charleston, the state capital, and Huntington last and next-to-last out of 189 U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas.\nThe Annie E. Casey Foundation's National Index of Children's Progress ranked West Virginia 43rd in the nation for all kids, and last for white kids. The Annie E. Casey Foundation's 2013 KIDS COUNT Data Book also ranked West Virginia's education system 47th in the nation for the second straight year. Charleston, West Virginia has the worst divorce rate among 100 cities in the nation. Stephen Smith, the executive director of the West Virginia Healthy Kids and Families Coalition, said poor employment prospects are to blame: \"The pressure to make a good living puts strain on a marriage, and right now it is infinitely harder to make a living here than it was 40 years ago.\"\nHealth.\nUnited Health Foundation's \"America's Health Rankings\" for 2013 found that Americans are making considerable progress in key health measures. West Virginia, however, ranked either last or second-to-last in twenty categories, including cancer, child immunization, diabetes, disabilities, drug deaths, teeth loss, low birth weight, missed work days due to health, prescription drug overdose, preventable hospitalizations, and senior clinical care. Wisconsin Population Health Institute annual \"Health Rankings\" for 2012 showed West Virginia spends $9,671 per capita on health care annually. El Salvador spends just $467, yet both have the same life expectancy. In 2012, according to the Census Bureau, West Virginia was the only state where death rates exceed birth rates. During 2010\u20132013, about 21,000 babies per year were born in West Virginia, but there were 24,000 deaths. In demographics, this is called a \"net mortality society\".\nThe National Center for Health Statistics says national birth rates for teenagers are at historic lows\u2014during 2007\u20132010, teen birth rates fell 17% nationally. West Virginia, however, ranked last with a 3% increase in birth rates for teenagers. A study by West Virginia's Marshall University showed that 19% of babies born in the state have evidence of drug or alcohol exposure. This is several times the national rate, where studies show that about 5.9% of pregnant women in the U.S. use illicit drugs, and about 8.5% consume any alcohol. An Institute for Health Policy Research study determined that mortality rates in Appalachia are correlated with coal production. In twenty West Virginia coal counties mining more than a million tons of coal per year and having a total population of 850,000, there are about 10,100 deaths per year, with 1,400 of those statistically attributed to deaths from heart, respiratory and kidney disease from living in an Appalachian coal county.\nIn 2015, McDowell County had the highest rate of drug-induced deaths of any county in the United States, with a rate of 141 deaths per 100,000 people. Four of the five counties with the highest rates of drug-induced deaths are in West Virginia (McDowell, Wyoming, Cabell and Raleigh Counties). In 2022, West Virginia had the highest drug overdose death rate of any US state, at 80.9 per 100,000 people.\nAmerican environmental attorney Robert Bilott exposed how DuPont had been knowingly polluting water with perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in Parkersburg, West Virginia, since the 1980s. This battle with DuPont is depicted in the film \"Dark Waters\".\nLife expectancy.\nThe residents of West Virginia have a lower life expectancy than the national average. In 2014 life expectancy for both sexes in the state was 76.0 years compared to 79.1 years for the United States as a whole. In 2014, males in West Virginia lived an average of 73.6 years compared to a national average of 76.7 years and females lived an average of 77.5 years compared to a national average of 81.5 years. Male life expectancy in West Virginia between 1980 and 2014 increased by 4.7 years, compared to a national average of a 6.7-year increase. Life expectancy for females in West Virginia between 1980 and 2014 increased by 1.7 years, compared to a national average of a 4.0-year increase. Life expectancy for both sexes is among the lowest of all states.\nLife expectancies in 2014 for both sexes in West Virginia counties ranged from a low of 70.3 years in McDowell County to a high of 79.3 years in Pendleton County. McDowell and several other West Virginia counties are among the counties in the U.S. with the lowest life expectancies.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe West Virginia Legislature is bicameral. It consists of the House of Delegates and the Senate, both housed in the West Virginia State Capitol. It is a citizen's legislature, meaning that legislative office is not a full-time occupation, but rather a part-time position. Consequently, the legislators often hold full-time jobs in their community of residence.\nTypically, the legislature is in session for 60 days between January and early April. The final day of the regular session ends in a bewildering fury of last-minute legislation to meet a constitutionally imposed midnight deadline. During the remainder of the year, monthly interim sessions are held in preparation for the regular session. Legislators also gather periodically for 'special' sessions when called by the governor.\nThe governor, elected every four years on the same day as the U.S. presidential election, is sworn in during the following January. Governors of West Virginia can serve two consecutive terms but must sit out a term before serving a third term in office. The title of Lieutenant Governor is assigned by statute to the senate president. West Virginia's current governor is Patrick Morrisey.\nWest Virginia's highest court is the Supreme Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia is the busiest appellate court of its type in the United States. West Virginia is one of 11 states with a single appellate court. The state constitution allows for the creation of an intermediate court of appeals, but the Legislature has never created one. The Supreme Court is made up of five justices, elected in nonpartisan elections to 12-year terms. For the purpose of courts of general jurisdiction, the state is divided into 31 judicial circuits. Each circuit is made up of one or more counties. Circuit judges are elected in non-partisan elections to serve eight-year terms.\nWest Virginia is an alcoholic beverage control state, but unlike most such states, it does not operate retail outlets, having exited that business in 1990. It retains a monopoly on wholesaling of distilled spirits only. West Virginia is one of 27 states that do not have a death penalty, and it was the only state in the southeastern United States to have abolished it until 2021, when Virginia did so as well.\nPolitics.\nWest Virginia is regarded as a heavily Republican, \"deep red\" state at the federal level. Since 2000, West Virginians have supported the Republican candidate in every presidential election, nearly always by increasing margins. The 2008 presidential election was the last to date in which the Democratic nominee won any of the state's counties.\nIn the 2024 presidential election, Republican Donald Trump won all of the state's counties and 69.97% of the vote, the highest percentage any party has won in the state's history. West Virginia was Trump's best performance in 2016.\nAt the state level, West Virginia's politics were largely dominated by the Democratic Party from the Great Depression through the 2000s. This was a legacy of West Virginia's very strong tradition of union membership. After the 2014 midterm elections Democrats controlled the governorship, the majority of statewide offices, and one U.S. Senate seat, while Republicans held one U.S. Senate seat, all three of the state's U.S. House seats, and a majority in both houses of the West Virginia Legislature. In the 2016 elections, the Republicans held on to their seats and made gains in the State Senate and gained three statewide offices.\nEvangelical Christians comprised 52% of the state's voters in 2008. A poll in 2005 showed that 53% of West Virginia voters are anti-abortion, the seventh highest in the country. A 2014 poll by Pew Research found that 35% of West Virginians supported legal abortion in \"all or most cases\" while 58% wanted it to be banned \"in all or most cases\".\nA September 2011 Public Policy Polling survey found that 19% of West Virginia voters thought same-sex marriage should be legal, while 71% thought it should be illegal and 10% were not sure. A separate question on the same survey found that 43% of West Virginia voters supported the legal recognition of same-sex couples, with 17% supporting same-sex marriage, 26% supporting civil unions but not marriage, 54% favoring no legal recognition and 3% not sure. In 2008, 58% favored troop withdrawal from Iraq while just 32% wanted troops to remain. On fiscal policy in 2008, 52% said raising taxes on the wealthier individuals would benefit the economy, while 45% disagreed.\nIn a 2020 study, West Virginia was ranked as the 16th hardest state for citizens to vote in.\nTransportation.\nHighways form the backbone of transportation systems in West Virginia, with over of public roads in the state. Airports, railroads, and rivers complete the commercial transportation modes for West Virginia. Commercial air travel is facilitated by airports in Charleston, Huntington, Morgantown, Beckley, Lewisburg, Clarksburg, and Parkersburg. All but Charleston and Huntington are subsidized by the federal Department of Transportation's Essential Air Service program. The cities of Charleston, Huntington, Beckley, Wheeling, Morgantown, Clarksburg, Parkersburg and Fairmont have bus-based public transit systems.\nWest Virginia University in Morgantown boasts the PRT (personal rapid transit) system, the state's only single-rail public transit system. Developed by Boeing, the WVU School of Engineering and the Department of Transportation, it was a model for low-capacity light transport designed for smaller cities. Recreational transportation opportunities abound in West Virginia, including hiking trails, rail trails, ATV off-road trails, white water rafting rivers, and two tourist railroads, the Cass Scenic Railroad and the Potomac Eagle Scenic Railroad.\nRail lines in the state used to be more prevalent, but many lines have been discontinued because of increased automobile traffic. Many old tracks have been converted to rail trails for recreational use, although the coal-producing areas still have railroads running at near capacity. Amtrak's \"Cardinal\" roughly parallels I-64's path through the state. MARC trains serve commuters to Washington, D.C. in the eastern panhandle. In 2006 Norfolk Southern along with the West Virginia and U.S. Government approved a plan to modify many of the rail tunnels in West Virginia, especially in the southern half of the state, to allow for double-stacked cars (see inter-modal freight). This is expected to also help bring economic growth to the southern half of the state. An Intermodal Freight Facility is located at Prichard, just south of Huntington.\nBecause of the mountainous nature of the entire state, West Virginia has several notable tunnels and bridges. The most famous of these is the New River Gorge Bridge, which was at a time the longest steel single-arch bridge in the world with a 3,031-foot (924 m) span. The bridge is also pictured on the West Virginia State quarter. The Fort Steuben Bridge (Weirton-Steubenville Bridge) was at the time of its construction one of only three cable-stayed steel girder trusses in the United States. \"The Veterans Memorial Bridge was designed to handle traffic from the Fort Steuben Bridge as well as its own traffic load\", to quote the \"Weirton Daily Times\" newspaper. The 80-year-old Fort Steuben Bridge (Weirton-Steubenville Bridge) was permanently closed on January 8, 2009. The Wheeling Suspension Bridge was the first bridge built across the Ohio River in 1849 and for a time was the longest suspension bridge in the world. It is still the oldest vehicular suspension bridge in the United States still in use.\nRoads.\nWest Virginia is crossed by seven Interstate Highways. I-64 enters the state near White Sulphur Springs in the mountainous east, and exits for Kentucky in the west, near Huntington. I-77 enters from Virginia in the south, near Bluefield. It runs north past Parkersburg before it crosses into Ohio. I-64 and I-77 between Charleston and Beckley are merged as toll road known as the West Virginia Turnpike, which continues as I-77 alone from Beckley to Princeton. It was constructed beginning in 1952 as a two-lane road, but rebuilt beginning in 1974 to Interstate standards. Today almost nothing of the original construction remains. I-68's western terminus is in Morgantown. From there it runs east into Maryland. At the I-68 terminus in Morgantown, it meets I-79, which enters from Pennsylvania and runs through the state to its southern terminus in Charleston. I-70 briefly runs through West Virginia, crossing the northern panhandle through Wheeling, while I-470 is a bypass of Wheeling (making Wheeling among the smallest cities with an interstate bypass). I-81 also briefly runs in West Virginia through the eastern panhandle where it goes through Martinsburg.\nThe interstates are supplemented by roads constructed under the Appalachian Corridor system. Four Corridors are complete. Corridor D, carrying US 50, runs from the Ohio River, and I-77, at Parkersburg to I-79 at Clarksburg. Corridor G, carrying US 119, runs from Charleston to the Kentucky border at Williamson. Corridor L, carrying US 19, runs from the Turnpike at Beckley to I-79 near Sutton (and provides a shortcut of about and bypasses Charleston's urban traffic for travelers heading to and from Florida). Corridor Q, carrying US 460, runs through Mercer County, entering the state from Giles County, Virginia and then reentering Virginia at Tazewell County.\nWork continues on the long-delayed Corridor H, which will carry US 48 from Weston to the Virginia line near Wardensville. As of 2018, a section from Weston to Kerens just past Elkins, and another section from Wardensville to Davis are complete. Other projects under development are a four-lane upgrade of US 35 from Scott Depot to the Ohio River at Point Pleasant, which is about two-thirds complete; a four-lane upgrade of WV 10 from Logan to Man and then of WV 80 from Man to Gilbert, which is about half completed; and four-lane upgrades to US 52 from Bluefield to Williamson, known as the \"King Coal Highway\" and from Williamson to Huntington, known as the \"Tolsia Highway\" which are many years from completion. A project known as the \"Coalfields Expressway\" is also ongoing, and will carry US 121 from Beckley west across Raleigh, Wyoming, and McDowell counties, entering Virginia near Bishop.\nEducation.\nWest Virginia is one of the lowest-scoring U.S. states for education. According to The National Assessment of Educational Progress, it is significantly below the national average in mathematics, reading, writing, and science. The surrounding states of Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, Ohio, and Pennsylvania score higher than or equal to the national average.\nColleges and universities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nWest \"by God\" Virginia.\nWest Virginia is often called \"West 'by God' Virginia.\" The term first appeared on online-accessible publications in 1926, when students at the University of Virginia wrote an article in the Virginia Spectator claiming that West \"by God\" Virginia women could consume corn liquor on its own, without having to mix it with other liquids. A 1939 academic article by Harold Wentworth of the WVU History department had a footnote claiming that the term originated from when a native West Virginian, annoyed at being called a Virginian, claimed that he instead hailed from \"West 'by God' Virginia.\"\nSports.\nWest Virginia is home to college sports teams from two schools\u2014West Virginia and Marshall\u2014that play in NCAA DivisionI. West Virginia is also home to several professional minor league baseball, football, hockey, and other sports teams.\nMusic.\nAppalachian music.\nWest Virginia's folk heritage is a part of the Appalachian folk music tradition, and includes styles of fiddling, ballad singing, and other styles that draw on Scots-Irish music. Camp Washington-Carver, a Mountain Cultural Arts Center located at Clifftop in Fayette County, hosts an annual Appalachian String Band Festival. The Capitol Complex in Charleston hosts The Vandalia Gathering, where traditional Appalachian musicians compete in contests and play in impromptu jam sessions and evening concerts over the weekend. The Augusta Heritage Center sponsored by Davis &amp; Elkins College in Elkins in Randolph County produces the annual Augusta Heritage Festival, which includes intensive week-long workshops in the summer that help preserve Appalachian heritage and traditions.\nClassical music.\nThe West Virginia Symphony Orchestra was founded in 1939, as the \"Charleston Civic Orchestra\", before becoming the \"Charleston Symphony Orchestra\" in 1943. The first conductor was William R. Wiant, followed by the conductor Antonio Modarelli, who was written about in the November 7, 1949 \"Time Magazine\" for his composition of the \"River Saga\", a six-section program piece about the Kanawha River according to the \"Charleston Gazette\"'s November 6, 1999, photo essay, \"Snapshots of the 20th Century\". Before coming to Charleston, Modarelli had conducted the Wheeling Symphony Orchestra and the Philadelphia Orchestra, according to the orchestra's website.\nThe Pulitzer Prize-winning 20th-century composer George Crumb was born in Charleston and earned his bachelor's degree there before moving outside the state. There had also been a series of operatic-style concerts performed in Wheeling during mid-century as well.\nMusical innovation.\nThe West Virginia Cultural Center in Charleston is home to the West Virginia Department of Arts, Culture and History, which helps underwrite and coordinate a large number of musical activities. The center is also home to \"Mountain Stage\", an internationally broadcast live-performance music radio program established in 1983 which is carried by many affiliates of National Public Radio. The program also travels to other venues in the state such as the West Virginia University Creative Arts Center in Morgantown.\nThe center hosts concerts sponsored by the Friends of Old Time Music and Dance, which brings an assortment of acoustic roots music to West Virginians. The center also hosts the West Virginia Dance Festival, which features classical and modern dance.\nHuntington's historic Keith-Albee Theatre, built by brothers A.B. and S.J. Hyman, was originally opened to the public on May 7, 1928, and hosts a variety of performing arts and music attractions. The theatre was eventually gifted to Marshall University and is currently going through renovation to restore it to its original splendor.\nEvery summer Elkins hosts the Augusta Heritage Festival, which brings folk musicians from around the world. The town of Glenville has long been home to the annual West Virginia State Folk Festival.\nThe Mountaineer Opera House in Milton hosts a variety of musical acts.\nJohn Denver's hit song \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" describes the experience of driving through West Virginia. The song mentions the Shenandoah River and the Blue Ridge Mountains, both features traversing the easternmost extremity of the state's \"eastern panhandle\", in Jefferson County. On March 8, 2014, West Virginia Governor Earl Ray Tomblin signed House Concurrent Resolution 40 naming \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" the fourth official state song of West Virginia.\nSymphony Sunday is an annual event hosted by the West Virginia Symphony Orchestra held in June. It is a day full of music by community groups, food, and family fun, culminating in a free performance by the West Virginia Symphony Orchestra with a fireworks display following. The event began in 1982 and is held on the front lawn of the University of Charleston.\nThe Daily Mail Kanawha County Majorette and Band Festival is West Virginia's longest-running music festival. It is for the eight public high schools in Kanawha County. The festival began in 1947. It is held at the University of Charleston Stadium at Laidley Field in downtown Charleston.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32908", "revid": "37227364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32908", "title": "Warsaw", "text": "Capital and largest city of Poland\nWarsaw, officially the Capital City of Warsaw, is the capital and largest city of Poland. The metropolis stands on the River Vistula in east-central Poland. Its population is officially estimated at 1.86\u00a0million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 3.27\u00a0million residents, which makes Warsaw the 6th most-populous city in the European Union. The city area measures and comprises 18 districts, while the metropolitan area covers . Warsaw is classified as an alpha global city, a major political, economic and cultural hub, and the country's seat of government. It is also the capital of the Masovian Voivodeship.\nWarsaw traces its origins to a small fishing town in Masovia. The city rose to prominence in the late 16th century, when Sigismund III decided to move the Polish capital and his royal court from Krak\u00f3w. Warsaw surpassed Gda\u0144sk as Poland's most populous city by the 18th century. It served as the capital of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until 1795, and subsequently as the seat of Napoleon's Duchy of Warsaw. The 19th century and its Industrial Revolution brought a demographic boom, which made it one of the largest and most densely populated cities in Europe. Known then for its elegant architecture and boulevards, Warsaw was bombed and besieged at the start of World War II in 1939. Much of the historic city was destroyed and its diverse population decimated by the Ghetto Uprising in 1943, the general Warsaw Uprising in 1944, and systematic razing.\nWarsaw is served by three international airports, the busiest being Warsaw Chopin, as well as Warsaw Modlin and Warsaw Radom Airport. Major public transport services operating in the city include the Warsaw Metro, buses, commuter rail service and an extensive tram network. The city is a significant economic centre for the region, with the Warsaw Stock Exchange being the largest in Central and Eastern Europe. It is the base for Frontex, the European Union agency for external border security, and ODIHR, one of the principal institutions of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Warsaw has one of Europe's highest concentrations of skyscrapers, and the Varso Tower is the tallest building in the European Union.\nThe city's primary educational and cultural institutions comprise the University of Warsaw, the Warsaw University of Technology, the SGH Warsaw School of Economics, the Chopin University of Music, the Polish Academy of Sciences, the National Philharmonic Orchestra, the National Museum, and the Warsaw Grand Theatre, which is among the largest in Europe. The reconstructed Old Town, which represents a variety of European architectural styles, was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1980. Other landmarks include the Royal Castle, Sigismund's Column, the Wilan\u00f3w Palace, the Palace on the Isle, St. John's Archcathedral, Main Market Square, and numerous churches and mansions along the Royal Route. Warsaw is a green capital, with around a quarter of the city's area occupied by parks. In sports, the city is home to Legia and Polonia sports clubs and hosts the annual Warsaw Marathon.\nToponymy and names.\nWarsaw's name in the Polish language is . Other previous spellings of the name may have included: , , or . The exact origin and meaning of the name is uncertain and has not been fully determined. Originally, Warszawa was the name of a small fishing settlement on the banks of the Vistula river. One hypothesis states that means \"belonging to Warsz\", being a shortened form of the masculine Old Polish name Warcis\u0142aw, which etymologically is linked with Wroc\u0142aw. However the ending -awa is unusual for a large city; the names of Polish cities derived from personal names usually end in -\u00f3w/owo/ew/ewo (e.g. Piotrk\u00f3w, Adam\u00f3w).\nFolk etymology attributes the city name to Wars and Sawa. There are several versions of the legend with their appearance. According to one version, Sawa was a mermaid living in the Vistula with whom fisherman Wars fell in love. The official city name in full is (\"The Capital City of Warsaw\").\nA native or resident of Warsaw is known as a \"Varsovian\" \u2013 in Polish , (male); (female); , and (plural).\nHistory.\n1300\u20131800.\nThe first fortified settlements on the site of today's Warsaw were located in Br\u00f3dno (9th/10th century) and Jazd\u00f3w (12th/13th century). After Jazd\u00f3w was raided by nearby clans and dukes, a new fortified settlement was established on the site of a small fishing village called \"Warszowa\". The Prince of P\u0142ock, Boles\u0142aw II of Masovia, established the modern-day city in about 1300 and the first historical document attesting to the existence of a castellany dates to 1313. With the completion of St John's Cathedral in 1390, Warsaw became one of the seats of the Dukes of Masovia and was officially made capital of the Masovian Duchy in 1413. The economy then predominantly rested on craftsmanship or trade, and the town housed approximately 4,500 people at the time.\nDuring the 15th century, the population migrated and spread beyond the northern city wall into a newly formed self-governing precinct called New Town. The existing older settlement became eventually known as the Old Town. Both possessed their own town charter and independent councils. The aim of establishing a separate district was to accommodate new incomers or \"undesirables\" who were not permitted to settle in Old Town, particularly Jews. Social and financial disparities between the classes in the two precincts led to a minor revolt in 1525. Following the sudden death of Janusz III and the extinction of the local ducal line, Masovia was incorporated into the Kingdom of Poland in 1526. Bona Sforza, wife of Sigismund I of Poland, was widely accused of poisoning the duke to uphold Polish rule over Warsaw.\nIn 1529, Warsaw for the first time became the seat of a General Sejm and held that privilege permanently from 1569. The city's rising importance encouraged the construction of a new set of defenses, including the landmark Barbican. Renowned Italian architects were brought to Warsaw to reshape the Royal Castle, the streets and the marketplace, resulting in the Old Town's early Italianate appearance. In 1573, the city gave its name to the Warsaw Confederation which formally established religious freedom in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Due to its central location between the capitals of the Commonwealth's two component parts, Poland and Lithuania, which were Krak\u00f3w and Vilnius respectively, Warsaw became the capital of the Commonwealth and the Polish Crown when Sigismund III Vasa transferred his royal court in 1596. In the subsequent years the town significantly expanded to the south and westwards. Several private independent districts (\"jurydyka\") were the property of aristocrats and the gentry, which they ruled by their own laws. Between 1655 and 1658 the city was besieged and pillaged by the Swedish, Brandenburgian and Transylvanian forces. The conduct of the Great Northern War (1700\u20131721) also forced Warsaw to pay heavy tributes to the invading armies.\nThe reign of Augustus II, Augustus III and Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski was a time of great development for Warsaw, which turned into an early-capitalist city. The Saxon monarchs employed many German architects, sculptors and engineers, who added elements to the city in a style parallel with Dresden, chiefly the Saxon Axis, while Poniatowski boosted the native Polish architectural and artisanal scene. The year 1727 marked the opening of the Saxon Garden in Warsaw, the first publicly accessible park. The Za\u0142uski Library, the first Polish public library and the largest at the time, was founded in 1747. Stanis\u0142aw II Augustus, who remodelled the interior of the Royal Castle, also made Warsaw a centre of culture and the arts. He extended the Royal Baths Park and ordered the construction or refurbishment of numerous palaces, mansions and richly decorated tenements. This earned Warsaw the nickname \"Paris of the North\". Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski created the first state theater in Warsaw, invested in the Royal Baths Park and created the (), a large infrastructural undertaking.\nWarsaw remained the capital of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until 1795 when it was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in the third and final partition of Poland; it subsequently became the capital of the province of South Prussia. During this time, Louis XVIII of France spent his exile in Warsaw under the pseudonym \"Comte de Lille\".\n1800\u20131939.\nWarsaw was made the capital of a newly created French client state, known as the Duchy of Warsaw, after a portion of Poland's territory was liberated from Prussia, Russia and Austria by Napoleon in 1806. Following Napoleon's defeat and exile, the 1815 Congress of Vienna assigned Warsaw to Congress Poland, a constitutional monarchy within the easternmost sector (or partition) under a personal union with Imperial Russia. The Royal University of Warsaw was established in 1816.\nWith the violation of the Polish constitution, the 1830 November Uprising broke out against foreign influence. The Polish-Russian war of 1831 ended in the uprising's defeat and in the curtailment of Congress Poland's autonomy. On 27 February 1861, a Warsaw crowd protesting against Russian control over Congress Poland was fired upon by Russian troops. Five people were killed. The Underground Polish National Government resided in Warsaw during the January Uprising in 1863\u201364.\nWarsaw flourished throughout the 19th century under Mayor Sokrates Starynkiewicz (1875\u201392), who was appointed by Alexander III. Under Starynkiewicz Warsaw saw its first water and sewer systems designed and built by the English engineer William Lindley and his son, William Heerlein Lindley, as well as the expansion and modernisation of trams, street lighting, and gas infrastructure. Between 1850 and 1882, the population grew by 134% to 383,000 as a result of rapid urbanisation and industrialisation. Many migrated from surrounding rural Masovian towns and villages to the city for employment opportunities. The western borough of Wola was transformed from an agricultural periphery occupied mostly by small farms and windmills (mills being the namesake of Wola's central neighbourhood M\u0142yn\u00f3w) to an industrial and manufacturing centre. Metallurgical, textile and glassware factories were commonplace, with chimneys dominating the westernmost skyline.\nLike London, Warsaw's population was subjected to income segmentation. Gentrification of inner suburbs forced poorer residents to move across the river into Praga or Powi\u015ble and Solec districts, similar to the East End of London and London Docklands. Poorer religious and ethnic minorities, such as the Jews, settled in the crowded parts of northern Warsaw, in Muran\u00f3w. The Imperial Census of 1897 recorded 626,000 people living in Warsaw, making it the third-largest city of the Empire after St. Petersburg and Moscow as well as the largest city in the region. Grand architectural complexes and structures were also erected in the city centre, including the Warsaw Philharmonic, the Church of the Holiest Saviour and tenements along Marsza\u0142kowska Street.\nDuring World War I, Warsaw was occupied by Germany from 4 August 1915 until November 1918. The Armistice of 11 November 1918 concluded that defeated Germany is to withdraw from all foreign areas, which included Warsaw. Germany did so, and underground leader J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski returned to Warsaw on the same day which marked the beginning of the Second Polish Republic, the first truly sovereign Polish state after 1795. In the course of the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919\u20131921), the 1920 Battle of Warsaw was fought on the eastern outskirts of the city. Poland successfully defended the capital, stopped the brunt of the Bolshevik Red Army and temporarily halted the \"export of the communist revolution\" to other parts of Europe.\nThe interwar period (1918\u20131939) was a time of major development in the city's infrastructure. New modernist housing estates were built in Mokot\u00f3w to de-clutter the densely populated inner suburbs. In 1921, Warsaw's total area was estimated at only with 1 million inhabitants\u2013over 8,000 people/km2 made Warsaw more densely populated than contemporary London. The \u015arednicowy Bridge was constructed for railway (1921\u20131931), connecting both parts of the city across the Vistula. Warszawa G\u0142\u00f3wna railway station (1932\u20131939) was not completed due to the outbreak of the Second World War.\nStefan Starzy\u0144ski was the Mayor of Warsaw between 1934 and 1939.\nWorld War II.\nAfter the German Invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 started World War II, Warsaw was defended until 27 September. Central Poland, including Warsaw, came under the rule of the General Government, a German Nazi colonial administration. All higher education institutions were immediately closed and Warsaw's entire Jewish population \u2013 several hundred thousand, some 30% of the city\u00a0\u2013 were herded into the Warsaw Ghetto. In July 1942, the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto began to be deported en masse to the Aktion Reinhard extermination camps, particularly Treblinka. The city would become the centre of urban resistance to Nazi rule in occupied Europe. When the order came to annihilate the ghetto as part of Hitler's \"Final Solution\" on 19 April 1943, Jewish fighters launched the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Despite being heavily outgunned and outnumbered, the ghetto held out for almost a month. When the fighting ended, almost all survivors were massacred, with only a few managing to escape or hide.\nBy July 1944, the Red Army was deep into Polish territory and pursuing the Nazis toward Warsaw. The Polish government-in-exile in London gave orders to the underground Home Army (AK) to try to seize control of Warsaw before the Red Army arrived. Thus, on 1 August 1944, as the Red Army was nearing the city, the Warsaw Uprising began. The armed struggle, planned to last 48 hours, was partially successful, however, it went on for 63 days. Eventually, the Home Army fighters and civilians assisting them were forced to capitulate. They were transported to PoW camps in Germany, while the entire civilian population was expelled. Polish civilian deaths are estimated at between 150,000 and 200,000.\nHitler, ignoring the agreed terms of the capitulation, ordered the entire city to be razed to the ground and the library and museum collections taken to Germany or burned. Monuments and government buildings were blown up by special German troops known as \"Verbrennungs- und Vernichtungskommando\" (\"Burning and Destruction Detachments\"). About 85% of the city was destroyed, including the historic Old Town and the Royal Castle.\nOn 17 January 1945\u00a0\u2013 after the beginning of the Vistula\u2013Oder Offensive of the Red Army\u00a0\u2013 Soviet troops and Polish troops of the First Polish Army entered the ruins of Warsaw, and liberated Warsaw's suburbs from German occupation. The city was swiftly freed by the Soviet Army, which rapidly advanced towards \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, as German forces regrouped at a more westward position.\n1945\u20131989.\nIn 1945, after the bombings, revolts, fighting, and demolition had ended, most of Warsaw lay in ruins. The area of the former ghetto was razed to the ground, with only a sea of rubble remaining. The immense destruction prompted a temporary transfer of the new government and its officials to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, which became the transitional seat of power. Nevertheless, Warsaw officially resumed its role as the capital of Poland and the country's centre of political and economic life.\nAfter World War II, the \"Bricks for Warsaw\" campaign was initiated and large prefabricated housing projects were erected in Warsaw to address the major housing shortage. Plattenbau-styled apartment buildings were seen as a solution to avoid Warsaw's former density problem and to create more green spaces. Some of the buildings from the 19th century that had survived in a reasonably reconstructible form were nonetheless demolished in the 1950s and 1960s, like the Kronenberg Palace. The \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie (central) region's urban system was completely reshaped; former cobblestone streets were asphalted and significantly widened for traffic use. Many notable streets such as G\u0119sia, Nalewki and Wielka disappeared as a result of these changes and some were split in half due to the construction of Plac Defilad (Parade Square), one of the largest of its kind in Europe.\nMuch of the central district was also designated for future skyscrapers. The 237-metre Palace of Culture and Science resembling New York's Empire State Building was built as a gift from the Soviet Union. Warsaw's urban landscape is one of modern and contemporary architecture. Despite wartime destruction and post-war remodelling, many of the historic streets, buildings, and churches were restored to their original form.\nJohn Paul II's visits to his native country in 1979 and 1983 brought support to the budding \"Solidarity\" movement and encouraged the growing anti-communist fervor there. In 1979, less than a year after becoming pope, John Paul celebrated Mass in Victory Square in Warsaw and ended his sermon with a call to \"renew the face\" of Poland. These words were meaningful for Varsovians and Poles who understood them as the incentive for liberal-democratic reforms.\n1989\u2013present.\nIn 1995, the Warsaw Metro opened with a single line. A second line was opened in March 2015. On 28 September 2022, three new Warsaw metro stations were opened, increasing the number of Warsaw Metro stations to 36 and its length to 38.3 kilometers. In February 2023, Warsaw's mayor, Rafa\u0142 Trzaskowski, announced plans to more than double the size of the city's metro system by 2050.\nWith the entry of Poland into the European Union in 2004,[ [update]] Warsaw is experiencing a large economic boom. The opening fixture of UEFA Euro 2012 took place in Warsaw and the city also hosted the 2013 United Nations Climate Change Conference and the 2016 NATO Summit. As of August 2022, Warsaw had received around 180,000 refugees from Ukraine, because of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. The amount means a tenth of the Polish capital's population of 1.8 million \u2014 the second-largest single group of Ukrainian refugees.\nGeography.\nLocation and topography.\nWarsaw lies in east-central Poland about from the Carpathian Mountains and about from the Baltic Sea, east of Berlin, Germany. The city straddles the Vistula River. It is located in the heartland of the Masovian Plain, and its average elevation is above sea level. The highest point on the West side of the city lies at a height of (\"Redutowa\" bus depot, district of Wola), on the East side\u00a0\u2013 (\"Grosz\u00f3wka\" estate, district of Weso\u0142a, by the eastern border). The lowest point lies at a height (at the right bank of the Vistula, by the eastern border of Warsaw). There are some hills (mostly artificial) located within the confines of the city\u00a0\u2013 e.g. Warsaw Uprising Hill () and Szcz\u0119\u015bliwice hill (\u00a0\u2013 the highest point of Warsaw in general).\nWarsaw is located on two main geomorphologic formations: the plain moraine plateau and the Vistula Valley with its asymmetrical pattern of different terraces. The Vistula River is the specific axis of Warsaw, which divides the city into two parts, left and right. The left one is situated both on the moraine plateau ( above Vistula level) and on the Vistula terraces (max. above Vistula level). The significant element of the relief, in this part of Warsaw, is the edge of moraine plateau called Warsaw Escarpment. It is high in the Old Town and Central district and about in the north and south of Warsaw. It goes through the city and plays an important role as a landmark.\nThe plain moraine plateau has only a few natural and artificial ponds and also groups of clay pits. The pattern of the Vistula terraces is asymmetrical. The left side consists mainly of two levels: the highest one contains former flooded terraces and the lowest one is the floodplain terrace. The contemporary flooded terrace still has visible valleys and ground depressions with water systems coming from the old Vistula\u00a0\u2013 riverbed. They consist of still quite natural streams and lakes as well as the pattern of drainage ditches. The right side of Warsaw has a different pattern of geomorphological forms. There are several levels of the Vistula plain terraces (flooded as well as formerly flooded), and only a small part is a not-so-visible moraine escarpment. Aeolian sand with a number of dunes parted by peat swamps or small ponds cover the highest terrace. These are mainly forested areas (pine forest).\nClimate.\nWarsaw experiences an oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb)\" or humid continental (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb)\" climate, depending on the isotherm used; although the city used to be humid continental regardless of isotherm prior to the recent effect of climate change and the city's urban heat island. Meanwhile, by the genetic climate classification of Wincenty Oko\u0142owicz, it has a temperate \"fusion\" climate, with both oceanic and continental features.\nThe city has cold, sometimes snowy, cloudy winters, and warm, relatively sunny but frequently stormy summers. Spring and autumn can be unpredictable, highly prone to sudden weather changes; however, temperatures are usually mild, especially around May and September. The daily average temperature ranges between in January and in July and the mean year temperature is . Temperatures may reach in the summer, although the effects of hot weather are usually offset by relatively low dew points and large diurnal temperature differences. Warsaw is Europe's sixth driest major city (driest in Central Europe), with yearly rainfall averaging , the wettest month being July.\nCityscape.\nUrbanism and architecture.\nWarsaw's long and eclectic history left a noticeable mark on its architecture and urban form. Unlike most Polish cities, Warsaw's cityscape is dominated by contemporary architecture, with functionalist and modern edifices. Nonetheless, built heritage is still present in the Old Town and the southern part of the central district. Warsaw is among the European cities with the highest number of skyscrapers in Europe and is home to European Union's tallest building. Skyscrapers are mostly centered around the \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie district, with many located in the commercial district of Wola. A concentric zone pattern emerged within the last decades; the majority of Warsaw's residents live outside the commercial city centre and commute by metro, bus or tram. Residential property in the central neighbourhoods is often reserved for commercial activity or temporary (tourist, student) accommodation. The nearest residential zones are predominantly located on the outskirts of the inner borough, in Ochota, Mokot\u00f3w and \u017boliborz or along the Vistula in Powi\u015ble.\nA seat of Polish monarchs since the end of the 16th century, Warsaw remained a small city with only privately owned palaces, mansions, villas and several streets of townhouses designed by the finest German, Italian and Dutch architects, among them Tylman van Gameren, Andreas Schl\u00fcter, Jakub Fontana, and Enrico Marconi. The buildings situated in the vicinity of the Warsaw Old Town represent nearly every European architectural style and historical period. Warsaw has excellent examples of architecture from the Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and Neoclassical periods, all of which are located within walking distance of the centre. This architectural richness has led to Warsaw being described by some commentators as either Paris of the East or Paris of the North.\nGothic architecture is represented in the majestic churches, burgher houses and fortifications. The most significant buildings are St John's Cathedral (1390), a typical Masovian Brick Gothic example; St Mary's Church (1411); the Burbach townhouse (14th century); Gunpowder Tower (after 1379); and Royal Castle's \"Curia Maior\" (1407\u20131410). The most notable examples of Renaissance architecture in the city are the house of the Baryczko merchant family (1562), a building called \"The Negro\" (early 17th century), and Salwator tenement (1632), all situated on the Old Market Place. Noteworthy examples of Mannerism are the Royal Castle (1596\u20131619) and the Jesuit Church (1609\u20131626). Elements of Baroque architecture appeared at the turn of the 17th century with artists from the royal court circle, and with the construction of St. Hyacinth's Church and Sigismund's Column. The Counter-Reformation enforced the Baroque style, as exemplified by the Church of St. Anthony of Padua, the Carmelite Church and the Holy Cross Church. The most significant secular building of this style is the Wilan\u00f3w Palace, erected for John III Sobieski. The late Baroque era was the epoch of the Saxon Kings (1697\u20131763). The Saxon Axis and the Visitationist Church date from this period.\nThe Neoclassical architecture began to be favoured in the second half of the 18th century thanks to King Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski. The best-known architect who worked in Warsaw at the time was Domenico Merlini. Significant buildings from this period include the Rabbit House, Holy Trinity Church, and the fa\u00e7ade of St. Anne's Church. Neoclassicism dominated the cityscape of Warsaw throughout the 19th century and its revival affected all aspects of architecture; the most notable examples being the Great Theater, Bank Square, Warsaw Society of Friends of Sciences (Staszic Palace), St. Alexander's Church, the Belweder, and the tenements at Nowy \u015awiat Street. The Saxon Palace underwent a complete reconstruction, where the central body of the building was demolished and replaced by a monumental 11-bay colonnade. The turn of the 20th century also precipitated the Art Nouveau and Neo-Renaissance movements in secular buildings.\nAfter Poland regained its independence in 1918, national historicism became dominant and Art Deco forms also began appearing. The formation of state structures necessitated office space leading to the construction of monumental public buildings, including the buildings of the Sejm and the Senate, the Ministry of Religious Affairs and Public Education, the Ministry of Public Works, the National Museum, the State Geological Institute, the Domestic Economy Bank, the Supreme Audit Office, and the campus of the Warsaw School of Economics. New districts were also established in \u017boliborz, Ochota, and Mokot\u00f3w, often designed around a central square with radiating streets (Narutowicz Square, Wilson Square). Examples of new large urban projects are the Lubecki colonies in Ochota.\nExceptional examples of bourgeois architecture of the later periods were not restored by the communist authorities after the war or were remodelled. Notable examples of post-war architecture include the Palace of Culture and Science, a Stalinist skyscraper based on the Empire State Building in New York. The Constitution Square, with its monumental socialist realist forms, was modelled on the grand squares of Paris, London, Moscow and Rome. Italianate tuscan-styled colonnades based on those at Piazza della Repubblica in Rome were also erected on Saviour Square. Contemporary architecture in Warsaw is represented by the Metropolitan Office Building at Pilsudski Square and Varso tower, both by Norman Foster, Warsaw University Library (BUW) by Marek Budzy\u0144ski and Zbigniew Badowski, featuring a garden on its roof and view of the Vistula River, Rondo 1 office building by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, Z\u0142ota 44 residential skyscraper by Daniel Libeskind, Museum of the History of Polish Jews by Rainer Mahlam\u00e4ki and the Golden Terraces comprising seven overlapping domes mixed-use retail and business centre.\nLandmarks.\nAlthough contemporary Warsaw is a fairly young city compared to other European capitals, it has numerous tourist attractions and architectural monuments dating back centuries. Apart from the Warsaw Old Town area, reconstructed after World War II, each borough has something to offer. Among the most notable landmarks of the Old Town are the Royal Castle, Sigismund's Column, Market Square, and the Barbican.\nFurther south is the so-called Royal Route, with many historical churches, Baroque and Classicist palaces, most notably the Presidential Palace, and the University of Warsaw campus. The former royal residence of King John III Sobieski at Wilan\u00f3w is notable for its Baroque architecture and eloquent palatial garden.\nIn many places in the city the Jewish culture and history resonates down through time. Among them the most notable are the Jewish theater, the No\u017cyk Synagogue, Janusz Korczak's Orphanage and the picturesque Pr\u00f3\u017cna Street. The tragic pages of Warsaw's history are commemorated in places such as the Monument to the Ghetto Heroes, the Umschlagplatz, fragments of the ghetto wall on Sienna Street and a mound in memory of the Jewish Combat Organization.\nMany places commemorate the heroic history of Warsaw such as Pawiak, a German Gestapo prison now occupied by a Mausoleum of Memory of Martyrdom and a museum. The Warsaw Citadel, a 19th-century fortification built after the defeat of the November Uprising, was a place of martyrdom for the Poles. Another important monument, the statue of Little Insurrectionist located at the ramparts of the Old Town, commemorates the children who served as messengers and frontline troops in the Warsaw Uprising, while the Warsaw Uprising Monument by Wincenty Ku\u0107ma was erected in memory of the largest insurrection of World War II.\nIn Warsaw there are many places connected with the life and work of Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin who was born near the city in \u017belazowa Wola. The heart of the Polish composer is sealed inside Warsaw's Holy Cross Church. During the summer time the Chopin Statue in \u0141azienki Park is a place where pianists give concerts to the park audience.\nAlso many references to Marie Curie, her work and her family can be found in Warsaw; Curie's birthplace at the Warsaw New Town, the working places where she did her first scientific works and the Radium Institute at Wawelska Street for the research and the treatment of which she founded in 1925.\nCemeteries.\nThe oldest necropolis in Warsaw is Stare Pow\u0105zki, established in 1790. It is one of Poland's national necropolises.\nThe cemetery covers an area of 43 ha. On the day of consecration of the Pow\u0105zki Cemetery, the foundation stone was laid for the construction of the church of Saint Charles Borromeo, designed by the royal architect Domenico Merlini. Catacombs were intended to be a prestigious resting place intended mainly for the nobles, such as Micha\u0142 Poniatowski, Hugo Ko\u0142\u0142\u0105taj, Micha\u0142 Kazimierz Ogi\u0144ski. Over a million people are buried at Stare Pow\u0105zki. In the Avenue of Merit there are the graves of insurgents and soldiers, independence activists, writers, poets, scientists, artists and thinkers. The nearby Pow\u0105zki Military Cemetery was established in 1912 for soldiers stationed in Warsaw. After World War II, the cemetery became a burial place for people associated with the Polish People's Republic - politicians, officials and military personnel.\nThe complex of non-Roman Catholic cemeteries consists of Evangelical\u2013Augsburg Cemetery, Evangelical Reformed Cemetery, Jewish Cemetery, Orthodox Cemetery and Muslim Tatar Cemetery. Other significant Warsaw necropolises are: Br\u00f3dno Cemetery Warsaw Insurgents Cemetery, S\u0142u\u017cew Old Cemetery, S\u0142u\u017cew New Cemetery. There are two large municipal cemeteries in the city \u2013 Northern Communal Cemetery and Southern Communal Cemetery.\nMemorials.\nThe city's symbol is the mermaid placed in the capital's coat of arms. There are three mermaid monuments in Warsaw: one on the banks of the Vistula, the second on the Old Town Square, and the third in Praga-Po\u0142udnie. The oldest monument in Warsaw is the Sigismund's Column. It was built in 1644 according to the design of the Italians: Augustine Locci and Constantin Tencall. The King of Poland Sigismund III Vasa stands on a 22-meter high tower, holding a cross and a sword in his hand. The monument was destroyed and rebuilt many times.\nMany monuments commemorate heroic and tragic moments in the history of Poland and Warsaw. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier located in Pi\u0142sudski Square was built on the initiative of General W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski in the arcades of the Saxon Palace. In 1925, the ashes of the unknown soldier who died during the defense of Lviv were placed under the colonnade, then urns with soil from 24 battlefields were buried here. Among the monuments related to the World War II are Nike Monument that commemorates the heroes of Warsaw from 1939 to 1945, Monument to the Polish Underground State and Home Army, Monument to the Little Insurrectionist and Warsaw Uprising Monument in front of the Supreme Court building at Krasi\u0144ski Square. Monument to the Ghetto Heroes commemorates the\u00a0Warsaw Ghetto Uprising\u00a0of 1943.\nIn 1929, a monument to Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin was constructed in the Royal \u0141azienki Park. Every summer at its foot classical music concerts featuring world-famous pianists take place. Other important monuments are: Adam Mickiewicz Monument, Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko Monument, Marie Curie Monument, Prince J\u00f3zef Poniatowski Monument, Nicolaus Copernicus Monument, Stefan Starzy\u0144ski Monument, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski Monument, Janusz Korczak Monument.\nFlora and fauna.\nGreen space covers almost a quarter of Warsaw's total area. These range from small neighborhood parks and green spaces along streets or in courtyards, to tree-lined avenues, large historic parks, nature conservation areas and urban forests at the fringe of the city. There are as many as 82 parks in the city; the oldest ones were once part of representative palaces and include the Saxon and Krasi\u0144ski Gardens, \u0141azienki Park (Royal Baths Park) and Wilan\u00f3w Palace Parkland.\nThe Saxon Garden, covering an area of 15.5 ha, formally served as a royal garden to the now nonexistent Saxon Palace. In 1727, it was made into one of the world's first public parks and later remodelled in the forest-like English style. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is situated at the east end of the park near the central fountain, on Pi\u0142sudski Square. With its benches, flower carpets and a central pond, the Krasi\u0144ski Palace Garden was once a notable strolling destination for most Varsovians. The \u0141azienki Park covers an area of 76 ha and its unique character and history is reflected in the landscape architecture (pavilions, sculptures, bridges, water cascades) and vegetation (domestic and foreign species of trees and shrubs). The presence of peacocks, pheasants and squirrels at \u0141azienki attracts tourists and locals. The Wilan\u00f3w Palace Parkland on the outskirts of Warsaw traces it history to the second half of the 17th century and covers an area of 43 ha. Its French-styled alleys corresponds to the ancient, Baroque forms of the palace.\nThe Botanical Garden and the University Library rooftop garden host an extensive collection of rare domestic and foreign plants, while a palm house in the New Orangery displays plants of subtropics from all over the world. Mokot\u00f3w Field (once a racetrack), Ujazd\u00f3w Park and Skaryszewski Park are also located within the city borders. The oldest park in the Praga borough was established between 1865 and 1871.\nThe flora of Warsaw may be considered very rich in species on city standards. This is mainly due to the location of Warsaw within the border region of several big floral regions comprising substantial proportions of close-to-wilderness areas (natural forests, wetlands along the Vistula) as well as arable land, meadows and forests. The nearby Kampinos Nature Reserve is the last remaining part of the Masovian Primeval Forest and is protected by law. The Kabaty Woods are by the southern city border and are visited by the residents of southern boroughs such as Ursyn\u00f3w. There are 13 natural reserves in the vicinity and just from Warsaw, the environment features a perfectly preserved ecosystem with a habitat of animals like the otter, beavers and hundreds of bird species. There are also several lakes in Warsaw\u00a0\u2013 mainly the oxbow lakes at Czerniak\u00f3w and Kamionek.\nThe Warsaw Zoo covers an area of . There are about 5,000 animals representing nearly 500 species. Although officially created in 1928, it traces back its roots to 17th century private menageries, often open to the public.\nDemographics.\nDemographically, Warsaw was the most diverse city in Poland. Prior to World War II, Warsaw hosted the world's second largest Jewish population after New York \u2013 approximately 30 percent of the city's total population in the late 1930s. In 1933, 833,500 out of 1,178,914 people declared Polish as their mother tongue. There was also a notable German community. The ethnic composition of contemporary Warsaw is incomparable to the diversity that existed for nearly 300 years. Most of the modern-day population growth is based on internal migration and urbanisation. In the 2021 census, 98.78% of Warsaw residents identified themselves as Polish, 0.46% as Ukrainian, 0.31% as Belarusian and 0.21% as Jewish.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1939, approximately 1,300,000 people resided in Warsaw; by 1945 the population had dropped to 420,000. During the first years after the war, the population growth rate was high and the city soon began to suffer from the lack of flats and dwellings to house new incomers. The first remedial measure was the enlargement of Warsaw's total area (1951)\u00a0\u2013 however the city authorities were still forced to introduce limitations; only the spouses and children of permanent residents as well as some persons of public importance (renowned specialists, artists, engineers) were permitted to stay. This negatively affected the image of an average Warsaw citizen, who was perceived as more privileged than those migrating from rural areas, towns or other cities. While all restrictions on residency registration were scrapped in 1990, the negative opinion of Varsovians in some form continues to this day.\nWarsaw metropolitan area is an example of the development of a strongly polarized region. The capital, along with its immediate surroundings, concentrates over half of the demographic potential of the Masovian Voivodeship, 2/3 of residents with higher education, and 3/4 of larger economic entities employing more than 50 workers.\nCurrent demographic development trends are as follows:\nIn the coming years, an increase in the city's population is predicted, with migration being the main factor determining the state and structure of Warsaw's population, including mainly internal (national) and external (foreign) influx. Changes in the population are not uniform for the entire Warsaw and in the division into districts, the predicted demographic changes will have a varied course. A decrease in population is forecasted in some central districts (Praga-P\u00f3\u0142noc, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie) and an increase in other districts.\nImmigrant population.\nIn 2019, it was estimated that 40,000 people living in Warsaw were foreign-born. Of those, Ukrainians, Vietnamese, Belarusians, and Russians were the most prominent groups. After Russia's aggression against Ukraine, over 1.1 million refugees from Ukraine passed through Warsaw, and at the beginning of March 2022, approximately 40,000 people applied for help every day. According to official data, over 104,000 of Ukrainian citizens who arrived in the first days after the outbreak of the war still reside in the city, including 17,000 young people and children attending urban educational institutions. Due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the immigrant population has increased significantly to about 340,000.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThroughout its existence, Warsaw had been a multi-cultural and multi-religious city. According to the 1901 census, out of 711,988 inhabitants 56.2% were Catholics, 35.7% Jews, 5% Greek Orthodox Christians and 2.8% Protestants. Eight years later, in 1909, there were 281,754 Jews (36.9%), 18,189 Protestants (2.4%) and 2,818 Mariavites (0.4%). This led to construction of hundreds of places of religious worship in all parts of the town. Most of them were destroyed in the aftermath of the Warsaw Uprising in 1944. After the war, the new communist authorities of Poland discouraged church construction and only a small number were rebuilt.\nThe archdiocese of Warsaw and the Diocese of Warsaw-Praga are the two ecclesiastical districts active in the city which serve the large Roman Catholic population of 1.4 million. The Lutheran Diocese of Warsaw is one of six in Poland; its main house of worship is the Holy Trinity Church from 1782, one of Warsaw's most important and historic landmarks. The Evangelical Reformed Parish (Calvinist) is leading the Polish Reformed Church. The main tserkva of the Orthodox Christians is Praga's Cathedral of St. Mary Magdalene from 1869. The is one of eight in the country; Chief Rabbi of Poland Michael Schudrich resides in the city. There are also 3 active synagogues, one of which is the pre-war No\u017cyk Synagogue designated for Orthodox Jews. An Islamic Cultural Centre in Ochota and a small mosque in Wilan\u00f3w serve the Muslims.\nThere are several Marian shrines in the city, including: sanctuary of the Gracious Mother of God with her image crowned in 1651 in the presence of King John Casimir. Another patron of the city is Blessed W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Gielni\u00f3w, bernardine from the St. Anne's Church. The greatest cult is that of St. Andrew Bobola, patron of the metropolis of Warsaw, whose relics are in the sanctuary of St. Andrew Bobola in Mokot\u00f3w.\nGovernment and politics.\nAs the capital of Poland, Warsaw is the political centre of the country. Almost all central government institutions are located there, including the Chancellery of the President, both houses of the Polish Parliament (the lower house called Sejm and the upper house called Senate), the Chancellery of the Prime Minister, the Constitutional Tribunal, the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Administrative Court. Warsaw is also host to many major international organizations, including Frontex and the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (the oldest and principal institution of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe).\nThe city is represented in the parliament by 20 members of Sejm (out of 460) and 4 senators (out of 100). In addition, Warsaw together with its metropolitan area elects 6 MEPs (Members of the European Parliament) out of 705.\nMunicipal government.\nThe first city mayor of Warsaw was Jan Andrzej Menich (1695\u20131696). The municipal self-government existed in Warsaw until World War II and was restored in 1990 (during the communist times, the National City Council\u00a0\u2013 \"Miejska Rada Narodowa\"\u00a0\u2013 governed in Warsaw). Since 1990, the structure of city government has been modified several times. Between 1975 and 1990 the Warsaw city mayors simultaneously led the Warsaw Voivodeship. In the years 1990\u20131994, the city mayor of Warsaw was elected by the city council.\nA controversial reform was introduced in 1994, which transformed the city into a loose municipal union of several gminas, dominated by one of them, the gmina Centrum encompassing the entire inner city. During this period, the mayor of gmina Centrum who was elected by its council was automatically designated as the city mayor of Warsaw, in spite of representing only a fraction of the population of the city. The city was becoming increasingly unmanageable, especially after the administrative reform of Poland in 1999 which further complicated the local government structure of Warsaw. In 2002, the new \"Warsaw Act\" of the Polish parliament restored Warsaw as a single urban gmina with the status of a city with powiat rights, led by a unified local government. At the same time, a significant reform was implemented in all Polish municipal governments, introducing direct elections of the w\u00f3jt/town mayor/city mayor in all Polish gminas. The first city mayor of Warsaw elected according to these rules was Lech Kaczy\u0144ski, who however resigned ahead of term when he was elected President of Polish Republic in 2005.\nWarsaw has thereafter remained an urban gmina with the status of a city with powiat rights. Legislative power in Warsaw is vested in a unicameral Warsaw City Council (\"Rada Miasta\"), which comprises 60 members. Council members are elected directly every five years (since 2018 election). Like most legislative bodies, the city council divides itself into committees which have the oversight of various functions of the city government. The city mayor exercises the executive power in the city, being the superior of all unelected municipal- or county-level officials and other employees and supervising all subsidiary entities of the city. The incumbent city mayor of Warsaw is Rafa\u0142 Trzaskowski.\nThe \"Warsaw Act\" imposes a mandatory division into 18 auxiliary units called \"dzielnica\" (district) on the city. In spite of remaining an integral part of the city as an entity, the districts have a degree of autonomy legally guaranteed through a form of an own local self-government exercising some powers devolved by law from the city. They have the duty to assist the city mayor and the City Council in their tasks, such as supervising some municipal companies, city-owned property or schools. Each of the 18 city districts has an own council (\"rada dzielnicy\") which elects an executive board (\"zarz\u0105d dzielnicy\") headed by a district mayor (\"burmistrz dzielnicy\"), the latter elected by the council among several candidates nominated by the city mayor of Warsaw among the council's members.\nDistricts.\nBia\u0142o\u0142\u0119ka\nBielany\nBemowo\n\u017boliborz\nPraga-P\u00f3\u0142noc\nTarg\u00f3wek\n\u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie\nWola\nOchota\nW\u0142ochy\nUrsus\nMokot\u00f3w\nWawer\nPraga-Po\u0142udnie\nRembert\u00f3w\nWeso\u0142a\nUrsyn\u00f3w\nWilan\u00f3w\nAs a result, Warsaw has thereafter continued as an urban gmina holding status of a city with powiat rights, divided into 18 districts (\"dzielnica\"), auxiliary municipal units established within the city as an entity as its integral parts, though with some limited powers devolved from the city to their own local self-governments. Each of the districts is customarily subdivided into several neighbourhoods lacking any meaningful legal or administrative powers. The central district of \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie includes the two founding neighbourhoods of the city, called the Old Town (\"Stare Miasto\") and the New Town (\"Nowe Miasto\").\nEconomy.\nWarsaw is the leading economic and financial hub of the Visegr\u00e1d Group and the Three Seas Initiative. In 2021, the city's gross metropolitan product (GDP) was estimated at \u20ac100 billion, which places Warsaw 20th among the metropolitan areas in the European Union with largest GDP. Warsaw generates almost 1/5 of the Polish GDP and the country's national income. In 2020, Warsaw was classified as a global city, because Warsaw is a major global city that links economic regions into the world economy.\nWarsaw's city centre (\u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie) and commercial Wola district are home not only to many national institutions and government agencies, but also to many domestic and international companies. Warsaw's ever-growing business community has been noticed globally, regionally, and nationally. In 2019 Warsaw was one of the top destinations for foreign investors in Europe.\nThe average monthly gross salary in the enterprise sector in the last quarter of 2022 amounted to 8,104 PLN and was 404 PLN higher than the average in the Masovian Voivodeship and as much as 1,450 PLN higher than in Poland. The highest gross salary was received by employees working in the information and communication section (11,701.47 PLN). There are 525,475 registered business entities in Warsaw, most of them in the districts of \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie, Mokot\u00f3w, Wola and Praga-Po\u0142udnie, 1.1 million people work in the enterprise sector. Warsaw has a well-developed office base, the office space is 6.27 million m2. The largest office buildings are Varso (63,800 m2), Warsaw Spire (60 000 m2), Forest Tower (51,500 m2) and P180 (32,000 m2), the largest projects under construction are The Bridge (47,000 m2) and Skyliner II (38,000 m2). The space resources of shopping centers in the Warsaw agglomeration in amount to over 1.7 million m2.\nIn October 2019 Warsaw's unemployment rate was 1.3%, the lowest in the country. Shopping and consumerism is an important component of Warsaw's economy. The retail streets in Warsaw are New World Street (\"Nowy \u015awiat\") along with Krakowskie Przedmie\u015bcie. These streets and their neighboring areas host many luxury stores and popular restaurants. However, most retailers choose to operate in the central shopping centres and malls such as Z\u0142ote Tarasy-Golden Terraces, Galeria Mokot\u00f3w and Westfield Arkadia. Luxury goods as well as designer labels can be found in the Vitkac Department Store and around Frascati.\nWarsaw Stock Exchange.\nWarsaw's first stock exchange was established in 1817 and continued trading until World War II. It was re-established in April 1991, following the end of a communist planned economy and the reintroduction of a free-market economy. Today, the Warsaw Stock Exchange (WSE) is, according to many indicators, the largest market in the region, with 433 companies listed and total capitalisation of 1 trillion PLN as of 26 November 2020. From 1991 until 2000, the stock exchange was, ironically, located in the building previously used as the headquarters of the communist Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR).\nIndustry.\nThe most prominent industries and industrial sectors include high-tech, electrotechnical, chemical, cosmetic, construction, food processing, printing, metallurgy, machinery and clothing. The majority of production plants and facilities are concentrated within the WOP Warsaw Industrial Precinct (\"Warszawski Okr\u0119g Przemys\u0142owy\") which is situated around the city's peripheral localities such as Praga, Pruszk\u00f3w, Sochaczew, Piaseczno, Marki and \u017byrard\u00f3w. Warsaw has developed a particularly strong retail market/sector, representing around 13% of the total retail stock in the country.\nFollowing World War II, the authorities decided that the city will be transformed into a major centre for heavy industry and manufacturing. As a result, numerous large factories and production facilities were built in and around the city. Among the largest were \"Huta Warszawa\" steel works, now arcelor), the Ursus SA, and the Fabryka Samochod\u00f3w Osobowych (FSO) car factory. The now-defunct FSO, established in 1951, was once Warsaw's most successful corporation. Notable vehicles assembled there over the decades include the FSO Warszawa, FSO Syrena, Polski Fiat 125p and the FSO Polonez. In 1995, the factory was purchased by the South Korean car manufacturer Daewoo, which assembled its models in Warsaw for the European market.\nTourism.\nThe estimated number of tourist arrivals to Warsaw in 2022 was over 9 million. Most tourists came from the United Kingdom (347,000), Germany (321,000), the United States (206,000) and France (145,000). Additionally, Warsaw was visited by 5.8 million one-day tourists, giving a total of over 14.8 million tourists in 2022. The above data does not include Ukrainian citizens who came to Warsaw in connection with the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The accommodation base consists of 1,010 hotels offering over 56,000 beds. The estimated contribution of the tourism economy to Warsaw's GDP is 12.9 billion PLN, and the tourism industry employs 87,703 people.\n144,220 people used Warsaw Tourist Lines in 2022 - almost 14,000 more than previous year. In the summer, Warsaw residents and tourists could use ferries across the Vistula, a ship to Serock, bus and tram lines operated with historic rolling stock, and a narrow-gauge railway. The most popular attraction among tourists was the Royal \u0141azienki Museum, which was visited by 5,265,110 tourists.\nWarsaw is an important center for conferences and congresses. The Warsaw Convention Bureau collected information on 9,000 events in 2022, which gathered a total of 1,240,467 participants in Warsaw.\nMedia and film.\nWarsaw is the media centre of Poland, and the location of the main headquarters of TVP and other numerous local and national TV and radio stations, such as Polskie Radio (Polish Radio), TVN, Polsat, TV4, TV Puls, Canal+ Poland, Cyfra+ and MTV Poland. Warsaw also has a sizable movie and television industry. The city houses several movie companies and studios.\nSince May 1661 the first Polish newspaper, the \"Polish Ordinary Mercury\", was printed in Warsaw. The city is also the printing capital of Poland with a wide variety of domestic and foreign periodicals expressing diverse views, and domestic newspapers are extremely competitive. \"Rzeczpospolita\", and \"Dziennik Polska-Europa-\u015awiat\", Poland's large nationwide daily newspapers, have their headquarters in Warsaw.\nSince World War II, Warsaw has been the most important centre of film production in Poland. Among the movie companies are TOR, Czo\u0142\u00f3wka, Zebra and Kadr which is behind several international movie productions. The city itself has featured in numerous movies, both Polish and foreign, for example: \"Kana\u0142\" and \"Korczak\" by Andrzej Wajda and \"The Decalogue\" by Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski, also including Oscar winner \"The Pianist\" by Roman Pola\u0144ski. It is also home to the National Film Archive, which, since 1955, has been collecting and preserving Polish film culture.\nEducation.\nWarsaw holds some of the finest institutions of higher education in Poland. It is home to four major universities and over 62 smaller schools of higher education. The overall number of students of all grades of education in Warsaw is almost 500,000 (29.2% of the city population; 2002). The number of university students is over 280,000. Most of the reputable universities are public, but in recent years there has also been an upsurge in the number of private universities.\nThe University of Warsaw was established in 1816, when the partitions of Poland separated Warsaw from the oldest and most influential Polish academic center, in Krak\u00f3w. The university is the largest in the country, and often regarded as one of the most prestigious, with international recognition in mathematics and science. Warsaw University of Technology is the second academic school of technology in the country, and one of the largest in East-Central Europe. Other institutions for higher education include the Medical University of Warsaw, the largest medical school in Poland and one of the most prestigious; the National Defence University, the highest military academic institution in Poland; the Fryderyk Chopin University of Music, the oldest and largest music school in Poland and one of the largest in Europe; the Warsaw School of Economics, the oldest and most renowned economic university in the country; the Warsaw University of Life Sciences, the largest agricultural university, founded in 1818; and the SWPS University, the first private secular university in the country.\nWarsaw has numerous libraries, many of which contain vast collections of historic documents. The most important library in terms of historic document collections is the National Library of Poland. The library holds 8.2\u00a0million volumes in its collection. Formed in 1928, it sees itself as a successor to the Za\u0142uski Library, the biggest in Poland and one of the first and biggest libraries in the world.\nAnother important library \u2013 the University Library, founded in 1816, is home to over two million items. The building was designed by architects Marek Budzy\u0144ski and Zbigniew Badowski and opened on 15 December 1999. It is surrounded by green. The University Library garden, designed by Irena Bajerska, was opened on 12 June 2002. It is one of the largest roof gardens in Europe with an area of more than , and plants covering . As the university garden it is open to the public every day.\nTransport.\nWarsaw is a considerable transport hub linking Western, Central and Eastern Europe. The city has a good network of buses and a continuously expanding perpendicular metro running north to south and east to west. The tram system is one of the biggest in Europe, with a total length of . As a result of increased foreign investment, economic growth and EU funding, the city has undertaken the construction of new roads, flyovers and bridges. The supervising body is the City Roads Authority (ZDM \u2013 \"Zarz\u0105d Dr\u00f3g Miejskich\").\nPublic transport.\nThe first section of the Warsaw Metro was opened in 1995 initially with a total of 11 stations. As of 2024, it has 39 stations running a distance of approximately .\nPublic transport also extends to light rail Warszawska Kolej Dojazdowa line, urban railway Szybka Kolej Miejska, regional rail Koleje Mazowieckie (Mazovian Railways), and bicycle sharing systems (Veturilo). The buses, trams, urban railway and Metro are managed by the Public Transport Authority and are collectively known as Warsaw Public Transport.\nThe table presents statistics on public transport in Warsaw.\nRoads.\nWarsaw lacks a complete ring road system and most traffic goes directly through the city centre, leading to the eleventh highest level of congestion in Europe. The Warsaw ring road has been planned to consist of four express roads: S2 (south), S8 (north-west) and S17 (east). S8, S2 and a small section of S17 are open. Additionally, the S2 and S8 have a concurrency with the S7 and the S2 has a short concurrency with the S8. A second ring road consisting of the A50 motorway (south) and S50 expressway (north) is also planned but it is unknown when construction will start.\nThe A2 motorway opened in June 2012, stretches west from Warsaw and is a direct motorway connection with \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Pozna\u0144 and ultimately with Berlin.\nAviation.\nThe city has three international airports: Warsaw Chopin Airport, located just from the city centre, Warsaw-Radom Airport, located south of Warsaw, which serves mainly low-cost and charter operations and finally Warsaw-Modlin Airport, located to the north, opened in July 2012. \nWarsaw Chopin Airport is the busiest airport in Poland with 21.3 million passengers in 2024 handling approximately 40% of the country's total air passenger traffic. The airport is a central hub for LOT Polish Airlines as well as a base for Enter Air and Wizz Air. There are 50 air operations performed at the airport per hour. London, Frankfurt, Paris, and Amsterdam are the busiest international connections, while Krak\u00f3w, Wroc\u0142aw, and Gda\u0144sk are the most popular domestic ones. The complex contains 45 passenger gates, 27 of which are equipped with jetways. A rail link has been added to connect the city with the airport in 2012.\nRail.\nLong distance and intercity trains are operated by Polish State Railways (PKP). There are also some suburban bus lines run by private operators. Bus service covers the entire city, with approximately 256 routes totalling above , and with some 1,700 vehicles.\nThe main railway station is Warszawa Centralna serving both domestic traffic to almost every major city in Poland, and international connections. There are also five other major railway stations and a number of smaller suburban stations.\nCulture.\nMusic and theatre.\nThanks to numerous musical venues, including the \"Teatr Wielki\", the Polish National Opera, the Chamber Opera, the National Philharmonic Hall and the National Theatre, as well as the Roma and Buffo music theatres and the Congress Hall in the Palace of Culture and Science, Warsaw hosts many events and festivals. Among the events worth particular attention are: the International Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin Piano Competition, the International Contemporary Music Festival Warsaw Autumn, the Jazz Jamboree, Warsaw Summer Jazz Days, the International Stanis\u0142aw Moniuszko Vocal Competition, the Mozart Festival, and the Festival of Old Music.\nWarsaw is also considered one of the European hubs of underground electronic music with a very attractive house and techno music scene.\nWarsaw is home to over 30 major theatres spread throughout the city, including the National Theatre (founded in 1765) and the Grand Theatre (established 1778).\nWarsaw also attracts many young and off-stream directors and performers who add to the city's theatrical culture. Their productions may be viewed mostly in smaller theatres and \"Houses of Culture\" (\"Domy Kultury\"), mostly outside \"\u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie\" (Central Warsaw). Warsaw hosts the International Theatrical Meetings.\nFrom 1833 to the outbreak of World War II, Plac Teatralny \"(Theatre Square)\" was the country's cultural hub and home to the various theatres. Plac Teatralny and its environs was the venue for numerous parades, celebrations of state holidays, carnival balls and concerts.\nThe main building housed the Great Theatre from 1833 to 1834, the Rozmaito\u015bci Theatre from 1836 to 1924 and then the National Theatre, the Reduta Theatre from 1919 to 1924, and from 1928 to 1939\u00a0\u2013 the Nowy Theatre, which staged productions of contemporary poetical drama, including those directed by Leon Schiller.\nNearby, in Ogr\u00f3d Saski (the Saxon Garden), the Summer Theatre was in operation from 1870 to 1939, and in the inter-war period, the theatre complex also included Momus, Warsaw's first literary cabaret, and Leon Schiller's musical theatre Melodram. The Wojciech Bogus\u0142awski Theatre (1922\u201326) was the best example of \"Polish monumental theatre\". From the mid-1930s, the Great Theatre building housed the Upati Institute of Dramatic Arts\u00a0\u2013 the first state-run academy of dramatic art, with an acting department and a stage directing department.\nMuseums and art galleries.\nThere are over 60 museums and galleries in Warsaw which are accessible to the public. Among the positions are the world's first Museum of Posters boasting one of the largest collections of art posters in the world, and the Museum of the History of Polish Jews. Among the most prestigious ones are the National Museum with a collection of works whose origin ranges in time from antiquity until the present epoch as well as one of the best collections of paintings in the country including some paintings from Adolf Hitler's private collection, and the Museum of the Polish Army whose set portrays the history of arms.\nThe collections of \u0141azienki and Wilan\u00f3w palaces focus on the paintings of the \"old masters\", as do those of the Royal Castle which displays the Lanckoro\u0144ski Collection including two paintings by Rembrandt. The Palace in Natolin, a former rural residence of Duke Czartoryski, is another venue with its interiors and park accessible to tourists.\nThe famous Copernicus Science Centre is an interactive science museum containing over 450 exhibits, enabling visitors to carry out experiments and discover the laws of science for themselves. Warsaw does not have a natural history museum. Yet, it hosts small museums of Evolution and the Earth, which play a similar role.\nHolding Poland's largest private collection of art, the Carroll Porczy\u0144ski Collection Museum displays works from such varied artists as Paris Bordone, Cornelis van Haarlem, Jos\u00e9 de Ribera, William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, and Vincent van Gogh along with some copies of masterpieces of European painting.\nA fine tribute to the fall of Warsaw and history of Poland can be found in the Warsaw Uprising Museum and in the Katy\u0144 Museum which preserves the memory of that crime. The Warsaw Uprising Museum also operates a rare preserved and operating historic stereoscopic theatre, the Warsaw Fotoplastikon. The Museum of Independence preserves patriotic and political objects connected with Poland's struggles for independence. Dating back to 1936 the Warsaw Historical Museum contains 60 rooms which host a permanent exhibition of the history of Warsaw from its origins until today.\nThe 17th century Royal Ujazd\u00f3w Castle houses the Centre for Contemporary Art, with some permanent and temporary exhibitions, concerts, shows and creative workshops. The Centre realizes about 500 projects a year. The Zach\u0119ta National Gallery of Art, the oldest exhibition site in Warsaw, with a tradition stretching back to the mid-19th century organises exhibitions of modern art by Polish and International Artists and promotes art in many other ways. Since 2011, Warsaw Gallery Weekend is held on the last weekend of September.\n28 September 2023 the opening of the new building of the Museum of Polish History located at the Warsaw Citadel took place.\nThe city also possesses some oddities such as the Neon Museum, the Museum of Caricature, the Museum of John Paul II and Primate Wyszy\u0144ski, the Legia Warsaw Museum, and a Motorisation Museum in Otr\u0119busy.\nCuisine and food.\nWarsaw's culinary tradition was shaped by its once multicultural population; its cuisine is distinct from that of other cities and towns in Poland. Strong Jewish and French influences were cultivated over the years, in particular herring, consomm\u00e9, bagels, aspic and French meringue-based pastries or cakes. Traditional Varsovian food is hearty and includes a tripe soup for entr\u00e9e, a pyza dumpling for main and the iconic wuzetka (voo-zetka) chocolate cream pie for dessert. Crayfish and fish in gelatin were the classical dishes in Warsaw's restaurants throughout the 1920s and the 1930s.\nMuch like Paris or Vienna, Warsaw once possessed a prominent caf\u00e9 culture which dated back to the early 18th century, and the city's cafeterias were a place for socializing. The historic Wedel Chocolate Lounge on Szpitalna Street remains one of the most renowned spots for social gatherings. Cafeterias, confectioneries and patisseries such as Caff\u00e8 Nero, Costa Coffee and Starbucks are predominantly found along the Royal Route on New World Street. Thousands of Warsaw's residents also flock annually to the pastry workshops (\"p\u0105czkarnia\") to buy p\u0105czki doughnuts on Fat Thursday.\nRestaurants offering authentic Polish cuisine are concentrated around the Old Town district. Various spit cakes of Czech or Hungarian origin (k\u00fcrt\u0151skal\u00e1cs and trdeln\u00edk) are also sold primarily in the Old Town. Hala Koszyki is a popular meeting place in Warsaw noted for its food hall.\nIn the 20th century, Warsaw was famed for its state-owned milk bars (\"bar mleczny\") which offered cheap fast food in the form of home dinners. Examples of dishes popularized by these canteens include tomato soup, schnitzels, frikadeller, mizeria salad and many others. Contemporary fast food giants like McDonald's, KFC, Subway and Burger King are the successors to milk bars, though some reemerged in recent years due to widespread nostalgia.\nGourmet and haute cuisine establishments are situated in the vicinity of the downtown area or in the Frascati neighbourhood. Thirteen Varsovian restaurants were appreciated by the Michelin Guide, with two receiving a Michelin star in 2019.\nIn 2021, National Geographic named Warsaw one of the top cities for vegans in Europe. \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie Po\u0142udniowe (Southern Downtown) and its \"hipster food culture\" was singled out as the epicenter.\nEvents.\nSeveral commemorative events take place every year, notably the Orange Warsaw Festival featuring music concerts. One of the more popular events is the procession of the Three Wise Men (in Polish known as the Three Kings) on Epiphany, shortly after the New Year. Paper crowns are usually worn by spectators throughout the day. The event, which runs along the Royal Route, is attended by Warsaw's highest officials and by the Polish president who resides nearby.\nGatherings of thousands of people on the banks of the Vistula on Midsummer's Night for a festival called Wianki (Polish for \"Wreaths\") have also become a tradition and a yearly event in the programme of cultural events in Warsaw. The festival traces its roots to a peaceful pagan ritual where maidens would float their wreaths of herbs on the water to predict when they would be married, and to whom. By the 19th century this tradition had become a festive event, and it continues today. The city council organize concerts and other events. Each Midsummer's Eve, apart from the official floating of wreaths, jumping over fires, and looking for the fern flower, there are musical performances, dignitaries' speeches, fairs and fireworks by the river bank.\nWarsaw Multimedia Fountain Park is located in an enchanting place, near the Old Town and the Vistula. The 'Water \u2013 Light \u2013 Sound' multimedia shows take place each Friday and Saturday from May until September at 9.30\u00a0pm (May and \u2013 9 October pm). On other weekdays, the shows do not include lasers and sound.\nThe Warsaw Film festival, an annual festival that takes place every October. Films are usually screened in their original language with Polish subtitles and participating cinemas include Kinoteka (Palace of Science and Culture), Multikino at Golden Terraces and Kultura. Over 100 films are shown throughout the festival, and awards are given to the best and most popular films.\nWarsaw Mermaid.\nThe mermaid (\"syrenka\") is Warsaw's symbol and can be found on statues throughout the city and on the city's coat of arms. This imagery has been in use since at least the mid-14th century. The oldest existing armed seal of Warsaw is from the year 1390, consisting of a round seal bordered with the Latin inscription \"Sigilium Civitatis Varsoviensis\" (Seal of the city of Warsaw). City records as far back as 1609 document the use of a crude form of a sea monster with a female upper body and holding a sword in its claws. In 1653 the poet Zygmunt Laukowski asks the question:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatcenter\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:center; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nThe Mermaid Statue stands in the very centre of Old Town Square, surrounded by a fountain. Due to vandalism, the original statue had been moved to the grounds of the Museum of Warsaw \u2013 the statue in the square is a copy.\nThis is not the only mermaid in Warsaw. Another is located on the bank of the Vistula River near \u015awi\u0119tokrzyski Bridge and another on Karowa Street.\nThe origin of the legendary figure is not fully known. The best-known legend, by Artur Oppman, is that long ago two of Triton's daughters set out on a journey through the depths of the oceans and seas. One of them decided to stay on the coast of Denmark and can be seen sitting at the entrance to the port of Copenhagen. The second mermaid reached the mouth of the Vistula River and plunged into its waters. She stopped to rest on a sandy beach by the village of Warszowa, where fishermen came to admire her beauty and listen to her beautiful voice. A greedy merchant also heard her songs; he followed the fishermen and captured the mermaid.\nAnother legend says that a mermaid once swam to Warsaw from the Baltic Sea for the love of the Griffin, the ancient defender of the city, who was killed in a struggle against the Swedish invasions of the 17th century. The mermaid, wishing to avenge his death, took the position of defender of Warsaw, becoming the symbol of the city.\nEvery member of the Queen's Royal Hussars of the UK's light cavalry wears the \"Maid of Warsaw\", the crest of the City of Warsaw, on the left sleeve of his No. 2 (Service) Dress. Members of 651 Squadron Army Air Corps of the United Kingdom also wear the \"Maid of Warsaw\" on the left sleeve of their No. 2 (Service) Dress.\nSports.\nOn 9 April 2008, the Mayor of Warsaw, Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz, obtained from the mayor of Stuttgart Wolfgang Schuster a challenge award\u00a0\u2013 a commemorative plaque awarded to Warsaw as the European capital of Sport in 2008.\nThe Kazimierz G\u00f3rski National Stadium, a 58,580-seat-capacity football (soccer) stadium, replaced Warsaw's recently demolished 10th-Anniversary Stadium. The National Stadium hosted the opening match, two group matches, a quarter-final, and a semi-final of UEFA Euro 2012.\nThere are many sports centres in the city as well. Most of these facilities are swimming pools and sports halls, many of them built by the municipality in the past several years. The main indoor venue is Hala Torwar, used for a variety of indoor sports (it was a venue for the 2009 EuroBasket but it is also used as an indoor skating rink). There is also an open-air skating rink (Stegny) and a horse racetrack (S\u0142u\u017cewiec).\nThe best of the city's swimming centres is at Wodny Park Warszawianka, south of the centre at Merliniego Street, where there's an Olympic-sized pool as well as water slides and children's areas.\nAmong the Varsovian football teams, the most recognisable is Legia Warsaw\u00a0\u2013 the army club with a nationwide following play at the Polish Army Stadium, just southeast of the centre at \u0141azienkowska Street. Established in 1916, they have won the country's championship fifteen times (most recently in 2021) and won the Polish Cup nineteen times. In the 1995\u201396 UEFA Champions League season, they reached the quarter-finals, where they lost to Greek club Panathinaikos.\nTheir local rivals, Polonia Warsaw, have significantly fewer supporters, yet they managed to win the country's championship two times (in 1946 and 2000) and won the cup twice as well. Polonia's home venue is located at Konwiktorska Street, a ten-minute walk north from the Old Town. Polonia was relegated from the country's top flight in 2013 because of their disastrous financial situation. They are now playing in the first league (2nd tier in Poland).\nLegia Warsaw's basketball team was one of the country's best teams in 50s and 60s. They are now participating in PLK, the highest-tier level of the Polish basketball.\nFamous people.\nOne of the most famous people born in Warsaw was Maria Sk\u0142odowska-Curie, who achieved international recognition for her research on radioactivity and was the first female recipient of the Nobel Prize. Famous musicians include W\u0142adys\u0142aw Szpilman, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin and Witold Lutos\u0142awski. Though Chopin was born in the village of \u017belazowa Wola, about from Warsaw, he moved to the city with his family when he was seven months old. Casimir Pulaski, a Polish general and hero of the American Revolutionary War, was born here in 1745. Other important people, who lived in Warsaw (although were not born here) are also Rosa Luxemburg and L. L. Zamenhof.\nBenzion Netanyahu (1910-2012), who was born Benzion Mileikowsky in Warsaw, was a Polish-born Israeli encyclopedist, historian, and medievalist. He is the father of the 9th and current prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu.\nTamara de Lempicka was a famous artist born in Warsaw. She was born Maria G\u00f3rska in Warsaw to wealthy parents and in 1916 married a Polish lawyer Tadeusz \u0141empicki. Better than anyone else she represented the art deco style in painting and art. Another notable artist born in the city was Wojciech Fangor. He was associated with Op art and Color field movements and recognized as a key figure in the history of Polish postwar abstract art. Nathan Alterman, the Israeli poet, was born in Warsaw.\nOther notable individuals from Warsaw include Samuel Goldwyn, the founder of Goldwyn Pictures, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot, physicist Joseph Rotblat, biochemist Casimir Funk, Moshe Prywes, an Israeli physician who was the first President of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, and I. L. Peretz, one of the three founding fathers of modern Yiddish literature. Warsaw was the beloved city of Isaac Bashevis Singer, which he described in many of his novels: \"Warsaw has just now been destroyed. No one will ever see the Warsaw I knew. Let me just write about it. Let this Warsaw not disappear forever\", he wrote. Notable sportspeople born in Warsaw include footballers Robert Lewandowski and Wojciech Szcz\u0119sny as well as tennis player Iga \u015awi\u0105tek.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nWarsaw is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer twin towns:\nPartnership and friendship.\nWarsaw also cooperates with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer partner cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32917", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32917", "title": "Walt Disney", "text": "American animator, producer and entrepreneur (1901\u20131966)\nWalter Elias Disney ( ; December 5, 1901\u00a0\u2013 December 15, 1966) was an American animator, film producer, voice actor, and entrepreneur. A pioneer of the American animation industry, he introduced several developments in the production of cartoons. As a film producer, he holds the record for most Academy Awards won (22) and nominations (59) by an individual. He was presented with two Golden Globe Special Achievement Awards and an Emmy Award, among other honors. Several of his films are included in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress and have also been named as some of the greatest films ever by the American Film Institute.\nBorn in Chicago in 1901 and raised largely in Missouri, Disney developed an early interest in drawing. He took art classes as a boy and took a job as a commercial illustrator at the age of 18. He moved to California in the early 1920s and set up the Disney Brothers Studio (now the Walt Disney Company) with his brother Roy. With Ub Iwerks, he developed the character Mickey Mouse in 1928, his first highly popular success; he also provided the voice for his creation in the early years. As the studio grew, he became more adventurous, introducing synchronized sound, full-color three-strip Technicolor, feature-length cartoons and technical developments in cameras. The results, seen in features such as \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (1937), \"Pinocchio\", \"Fantasia\" (both 1940), \"Dumbo\" (1941), and \"Bambi\" (1942), furthered the development of animated film. New animated and live-action films followed after World War II, including \"Cinderella\" (1950), \"Sleeping Beauty\" (1959), and \"Mary Poppins\" (1964), the last of which received five Academy Awards.\nIn the 1950s, Disney expanded into the theme park industry, and in July 1955 he opened Disneyland in Anaheim, California. To fund the project he diversified into television programs, such as \"Walt Disney's Disneyland\" and \"The Mickey Mouse Club\". He was also involved in planning the 1959 Moscow Fair, the 1960 Winter Olympics, and the 1964 New York World's Fair. In 1965, he began development of another theme park, Disney World, the heart of which was to be a new type of city, the \"Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow\" (EPCOT). Disney was a heavy smoker throughout his life and died of lung cancer in 1966 before either the park or the EPCOT project were completed.\nDisney was a shy, self-deprecating and insecure man in private but adopted a warm and outgoing public persona. He had high standards and high expectations of those with whom he worked. Although there have been accusations that he was racist or antisemitic, they have been contradicted by many who knew him. The historiography of Disney has taken a variety of perspectives, ranging from views of him as a purveyor of homely patriotic values to being a representative of American cultural imperialism. Widely considered to be one of the most influential cultural figures of the 20th century, Disney remains an important presence in the history of animation and in the cultural history of the United States, where he is acknowledged as a national cultural icon. His film work continues to be shown and adapted, the Disney theme parks have grown in size and number around the world and his company has grown to become one of the world's largest mass media and entertainment conglomerates.\nEarly life and education.\nDisney was born on December 5, 1901, at 1249 Tripp Avenue, in Chicago's Hermosa neighborhood. He was the fourth son of Elias Disney\u200d\u2014\u200cborn in the Province of Canada, to Irish parents\u200d\u2014\u200cand Flora (n\u00e9e Call), an American of German and English descent. Aside from Walt, Elias and Flora's sons were Herbert, Raymond and Roy; and the couple had a fifth child, Ruth, in December 1903. In 1906, when Disney was four, the family moved to a farm in Marceline, Missouri, where his uncle Robert had just purchased land. In Marceline, Disney developed his interest in drawing when he was paid to draw the horse of a retired neighborhood doctor. Elias was a subscriber to the \"Appeal to Reason\" newspaper, and Disney practiced drawing by copying the front-page cartoons of Ryan Walker. He also began to develop an ability to work with watercolors and crayons. He lived near the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway line and became enamored with trains. He and his younger sister Ruth started school at the same time at the Park School in Marceline in late 1909. The Disney family were active members of a Congregational church. Disney later described his childhood in Marceline as one of the happiest and most formative periods of his life, and drew inspiration from the town for several of his future projects. \nIn 1911, the Disneys moved to Kansas City, Missouri. There, Disney attended the Benton Grammar School, where he met fellow-student Walter Pfeiffer, who came from a family of theatre fans and introduced him to the world of vaudeville and motion pictures. Before long, Disney was spending more time at the Pfeiffers' house than at home. Elias had purchased a newspaper delivery route for \"The Kansas City Star\" and \"Kansas City Times\". Disney and his brother Roy woke up at 4:30 every morning to deliver the \"Times\" before school and repeated the round for the evening \"Star\" after school. The schedule was exhausting, and Disney often received poor grades after falling asleep in class, but he continued his paper route for more than six years. He attended Saturday courses at the Kansas City Art Institute and also took a correspondence course in cartooning.\nIn 1917, Elias bought stock in a Chicago jelly producer, the O-Zell Company, and moved back to Chicago with his family. Disney enrolled at McKinley High School and became the cartoonist of the school newspaper, drawing patriotic pictures about World War I; he also took night courses at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts. \nIn mid-1918, he attempted to join the United States Army to fight the Germans, but he was rejected as too young. After forging the date of birth on his birth certificate, he joined the Red Cross in September 1918 as an ambulance driver. He was shipped to France but arrived in November, after the armistice. He drew cartoons on the side of his ambulance for decoration and had some of his work published in the army newspaper \"Stars and Stripes\".\nCareer.\n1919\u20131928: Early career.\nHe returned to Kansas City in October 1919, where he worked as an apprentice artist at the Pesmen-Rubin Commercial Art Studio, where he drew commercial illustrations for advertising, theater programs and catalogs, and befriended fellow artist Ub Iwerks. In January 1920, as Pesmen-Rubin's revenue declined after Christmas, Disney, aged 18, and Iwerks were laid off. \nThey started their own business, the short-lived Iwerks-Disney Commercial Artists. Failing to attract many customers, Disney and Iwerks agreed that Disney should leave temporarily to earn money at the Kansas City Film Ad Company, run by A.\u00a0V. Cauger; the following month Iwerks, who was not able to run their business alone, also joined. The company produced commercials using the cutout animation technique. Disney became interested in animation, although he preferred drawn cartoons such as \"Mutt and Jeff\" and Max Fleischer's \"Out of the Inkwell\". With the assistance of a borrowed book on animation and a camera, he began experimenting at home. He came to the conclusion that cel animation was more promising than the cutout method. Unable to persuade Cauger to try cel animation at the company, Disney opened a new business with a co-worker from the Film Ad Co, Fred Harman. Their main client was the local Newman Theater, and the short cartoons they produced were sold as \"Newman's Laugh-O-Grams\". Disney studied Paul Terry's \"Aesop's Fables\" as a model, and the first six \"Laugh-O-Grams\" were modernized fairy tales.\nIn May 1921, the success of the \"Laugh-O-Grams\" led to the establishment of Laugh-O-Gram Studio, for which he hired more animators, including Fred Harman's brother Hugh, Rudolf Ising and Iwerks. The Laugh-O-Grams cartoons did not provide enough income to keep the company solvent, so Disney started production of \"Alice's Wonderland\"\u200d\u2014\u200cbased on \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\"\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich combined live action with animation; he cast Virginia Davis in the title role. The result, a 12\u00bd-minute, one-reel film, was completed too late to save Laugh-O-Gram Studio, which went into bankruptcy in 1923.\nDisney moved to Hollywood in July 1923 at 21 years old. Although New York was the center of the cartoon industry, he was attracted to Los Angeles because his brother Roy was convalescing from tuberculosis there, and he hoped to become a live-action film director. Disney's efforts to sell \"Alice's Wonderland\" were in vain until he heard from New York film distributor Margaret J. Winkler. She was losing the rights to both the \"Out of the Inkwell\" and \"Felix the Cat\" cartoons, and needed a new series. In October, they signed a contract for six \"Alice\" comedies, with an option for two further series of six episodes each. Disney and his brother Roy formed the Disney Brothers Studio\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich later became the Walt Disney Company\u200d\u2014\u200cto produce the films; they persuaded Davis and her family to relocate to Hollywood to continue production, with Davis on contract at $100 a month. In July 1924, Disney also hired Iwerks, persuading him to relocate to Hollywood from Kansas City. In 1926, the first official Walt Disney Studio was established at 2725 Hyperion Avenue; the building was demolished in 1940.\nBy 1926, Winkler's role in the distribution of the \"Alice\" series had been handed over to her husband, the film producer Charles Mintz, although the relationship between him and Disney was sometimes strained. The series ran until July 1927, by which time Disney had begun to tire of it and wanted to move away from the mixed format to all animation. After Mintz requested new material to distribute through Universal Pictures, Disney and Iwerks created Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, a character Disney wanted to be \"peppy, alert, saucy and venturesome, keeping him also neat and trim\".\nIn February 1928, Disney hoped to negotiate a larger fee for producing the \"Oswald\" series, but found Mintz wanting to reduce the payments. Mintz had also persuaded many of the artists involved to work directly for him, including Harman, Ising, Carman Maxwell and Friz Freleng. Disney also found out that Universal owned the intellectual property rights to Oswald. Mintz threatened to start his own studio and produce the series himself if Disney refused to accept the reductions. Disney declined Mintz's ultimatum and lost most of his animation staff, except Iwerks, who chose to remain with him.\n1928\u20131934: Creation of Mickey Mouse and following successes.\nTo replace Oswald, Disney and Iwerks developed Mickey Mouse, possibly inspired by a pet mouse that Disney had adopted while working in his Laugh-O-Gram studio, although the origins of the character are unclear. Disney's original choice of name was Mortimer Mouse, but his wife Lillian thought it too pompous, and suggested Mickey instead. Iwerks revised Disney's provisional sketches to make the character easier to animate. Disney, who had begun to distance himself from the animation process, provided Mickey's voice until 1947. In the words of one Disney employee, \"Ub designed Mickey's physical appearance, but Walt gave him his soul.\"\nMickey Mouse first appeared in May 1928 as a single test screening of the short \"Plane Crazy\", but it, and the second feature, \"The Gallopin' Gaucho\", failed to find a distributor. Following the 1927 sensation \"The Jazz Singer\", Disney used synchronized sound on the third short, \"Steamboat Willie\", to create the first post-produced sound cartoon. After the animation was complete, Disney signed a contract with the former executive of Universal Pictures, Pat Powers, to use the \"Powers Cinephone\" recording system; Cinephone became the new distributor for Disney's early sound cartoons, which soon became popular.\nTo improve the quality of the music, Disney hired the professional composer and arranger Carl Stalling, on whose suggestion the \"Silly Symphony\" series was developed, providing stories through the use of music; the first in the series, \"The Skeleton Dance\" (1929), was drawn and animated entirely by Iwerks. Also hired at this time were several artists, both local and from New York. Both the Mickey Mouse and \"Silly Symphonies\" series were successful, but Disney and his brother felt they were not receiving their rightful share of profits from Powers. In 1930, Disney tried to trim costs from the process by urging Iwerks to abandon the practice of drawing every frame individually in favor of the more efficient technique of drawing key poses and letting assistants sketch the inbetween poses. Disney asked Powers for an increase in payments for the cartoons. Powers refused and signed Iwerks to work for him; Stalling resigned shortly afterwards, thinking that without Iwerks, the Disney Studio would close. Disney had a nervous breakdown in October 1931\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich he blamed on the machinations of Powers and his own overwork\u200d\u2014\u200cso he and Lillian took an extended holiday to Cuba and a cruise to Panama to recover.\nWith the loss of Powers as distributor, Disney studios signed a contract with Columbia Pictures to distribute the Mickey Mouse cartoons, which became increasingly popular, including internationally. Disney and his crew also introduced new cartoon stars like Pluto in 1930, Goofy in 1932 and Donald Duck in 1934. Always keen to embrace new technology and encouraged by his new contract with United Artists, Disney filmed \"Flowers and Trees\" (1932) in full-color three-strip Technicolor; he was also able to negotiate a deal giving him the sole right to use the three-strip process until August 31, 1935. All subsequent \"Silly Symphony\" cartoons were in color. \"Flowers and Trees\" was popular with audiences and won the inaugural Academy Award for best Short Subject (Cartoon) at the 1932 ceremony. Disney had been nominated for another film in that category, \"Mickey's Orphans\", and received an Honorary Award \"for the creation of Mickey Mouse\".\nIn 1933, Disney produced \"The Three Little Pigs\", a film described by the media historian Adrian Danks as \"the most successful short animation of all time\". The film won Disney another Academy Award in the Short Subject (Cartoon) category. The film's success led to a further increase in the studio's staff, which numbered nearly 200 by the end of the year. Disney realized the importance of telling emotionally gripping stories that would interest the audience, and he invested in a \"story department\" separate from the animators, with storyboard artists who would detail the plots of Disney's films.\n1934\u20131941: Golden age of animation.\nBy 1934, Disney had become dissatisfied with producing cartoon shorts, and believed a feature-length cartoon would be more profitable. The studio began the four-year production of \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", based on the fairy tale. When news leaked out about the project, many in the film industry predicted it would bankrupt the company; industry insiders nicknamed it \"Disney's Folly\". The film, which was the first animated feature made in full color and sound, cost $1.5\u00a0million to produce\u200d\u2014\u200cthree times over budget. To ensure the animation was as realistic as possible, Disney sent his animators on courses at the Chouinard Art Institute; he brought animals into the studio and hired actors so that the animators could study realistic movement. To portray the changing perspective of the background as a camera moved through a scene, Disney's animators developed a multiplane camera which allowed drawings on pieces of glass to be set at various distances from the camera, creating an illusion of depth. The glass could be moved to create the impression of a camera passing through the scene. The first work created on the camera\u200d\u2014\u200ca \"Silly Symphony\" called \"The Old Mill\" (1937)\u200d\u2014\u200cwon the Academy Award for Animated Short Film because of its impressive visual power. Although \"Snow White\" had been largely finished by the time the multiplane camera had been completed, Disney ordered some scenes be re-drawn to use the new effects.\n\"Snow White\" premiered in December 1937 to high praise from critics and audiences. The film became the most successful motion picture of 1938 and by May 1939 its total gross of $6.5\u00a0million made it the most successful sound film made to that date. Disney won another Honorary Academy Award, which consisted of one full-sized and seven miniature Oscar statuettes. The success of \"Snow White\" heralded one of the most productive eras for the studio; the Walt Disney Family Museum calls the following years \"the 'Golden Age of Animation'\". With work on \"Snow White\" finished, the studio began producing \"Pinocchio\" in early 1938 and \"Fantasia\" in November of the same year. Both films were released in 1940, and neither performed well at the box office\u200d\u2014\u200cpartly because revenues from Europe had dropped following the start of World War II in 1939. The studio incurred a loss on both pictures and was deeply in debt by the end of February 1941.\nIn response to the financial crisis, Disney and his brother Roy started the company's first public stock offering in 1940, and implemented heavy salary cuts. The latter measure, and Disney's sometimes high-handed and insensitive manner of dealing with staff, led to a 1941 animators' strike which lasted five weeks. While a federal mediator from the National Labor Relations Board negotiated with the two sides, Disney accepted an offer from the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs to make a goodwill trip to South America, ensuring he was absent during a resolution he knew would be unfavorable to the studio. Due to the strike\u200d\u2014\u200cand the financial state of the company\u200d\u2014\u200cseveral animators left the studio, and Disney's relationship with other members of staff was permanently strained as a result. The strike temporarily interrupted the studio's next production, \"Dumbo\" (1941), which Disney produced in a simple and inexpensive manner; the film received a positive reaction from audiences and critics alike.\n1941\u20131950: World War II and beyond.\nShortly after the release of \"Dumbo\" in October 1941, the U.S. entered World War\u00a0II. Disney formed the Walt Disney Training Films Unit within the company to produce instruction films for the military such as \"Four Methods of Flush Riveting\" and \"Aircraft Production Methods\". Disney also met with Henry Morgenthau Jr., the Secretary of the Treasury, and agreed to produce short Donald Duck cartoons to promote war bonds. Disney also produced several propaganda productions, including shorts such as \"Der Fuehrer's Face\"\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich won an Academy Award\u200d\u2014\u200cand the 1943 feature film \"Victory Through Air Power\".\nThe military films generated only enough revenue to cover costs, and the feature film \"Bambi\"\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich had been in production since 1937\u200d\u2014\u200cunderperformed on its release in August 1942, and lost $200,000 at the box office. On top of the low earnings from \"Pinocchio\" and \"Fantasia\", the company had debts of $4\u00a0million with the Bank of America in 1944. At a meeting with Bank of America executives to discuss the future of the company, the bank's chairman and founder, Amadeo Giannini, told his executives, \"I've been watching the Disneys' pictures quite closely because I knew we were lending them money far above the financial risk.\u00a0... They're good this year, they're good next year, and they're good the year after.\u00a0... You have to relax and give them time to market their product.\" Disney's production of short films decreased in the late 1940s, coinciding with increasing competition in the animation market from Warner Bros. and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Roy Disney, for financial reasons, suggested more combined animation and live-action productions. In 1948, Disney initiated a series of popular live-action nature films, titled \"True-Life Adventures\", with \"Seal Island\" the first; the film won the Academy Award in the Best Short Subject (Two-Reel) category.\n1950\u20131966: Theme parks, television, other interests, and final years.\nIn early 1950, Disney produced \"Cinderella\", his studio's first animated feature in eight years. It was popular with critics and theater audiences. Costing $2.2\u00a0million to produce, it earned nearly $8\u00a0million in its first year. Disney was less involved than he had been with previous pictures because of his involvement in his first entirely live-action feature, \"Treasure Island\" (1950), which was shot in Britain, as was \"The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men\" (1952). Other all-live-action features followed, many of which had patriotic themes. He continued to produce full-length animated features too, including \"Alice in Wonderland\" (1951) and \"Peter Pan\" (1953). From the early to mid-1950s, Disney began to devote less attention to the animation department, entrusting most of its operations to his key animators, the Nine Old Men, although he was always present at story meetings. Instead, he started concentrating on other ventures. Around the same time, Disney established his own film distribution division Buena Vista, replacing his most recent distributor RKO Pictures.\nFor several years Disney had been considering building a theme park. When he visited Griffith Park in Los Angeles with his daughters, he wanted to be in a clean, unspoiled park, where both children and their parents could have fun. He visited the Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen, Denmark, and was heavily influenced by the cleanliness and layout of the park. In March 1952, he received zoning permission to build a theme park in Burbank, near the Disney studios. This site proved too small, and a larger plot in Anaheim, south of the studio, was purchased. To distance the project from the studio\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich might attract the criticism of shareholders\u200d\u2014\u200cDisney formed WED Enterprises (now Walt Disney Imagineering) and used his own money to fund a group of designers and animators to work on the plans; those involved became known as \"Imagineers\". After obtaining bank funding he invited other stockholders, American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres\u200d\u2014\u200cpart of American Broadcasting Company (ABC)\u200d\u2014\u200cand Western Printing and Lithographing Company. In mid-1954, Disney sent his Imagineers to every amusement park in the U.S. to analyze what worked and what pitfalls or problems there were in the various locations and incorporated their findings into his design. Construction work started in July 1954, and Disneyland opened in July 1955; the opening ceremony was broadcast on ABC, which reached 70\u00a0million viewers. The park was designed as a series of themed lands, linked by the central Main Street, U.S.A.\u200d\u2014\u200ca replica of the main street in his hometown of Marceline. The connected themed areas were Adventureland, Frontierland, Fantasyland and Tomorrowland. The park also contained the narrow gauge Disneyland Railroad that linked the lands; around the outside of the park was a high berm to separate the park from the outside world. An editorial in \"The New York Times\" considered that Disney had \"tastefully combined some of the pleasant things of yesterday with fantasy and dreams of tomorrow\". Although there were early minor problems with the park, it was a success, and after a month's operation, Disneyland was receiving over 20,000 visitors a day; by the end of its first year, it attracted 3.6\u00a0million guests.\nThe money from ABC was contingent on Disney television programs. The studio had been involved in a successful television special on Christmas Day 1950 about the making of \"Alice in Wonderland\". Roy believed the program added millions to the box office takings. In a March 1951 letter to shareholders, he wrote that \"television can be a most powerful selling aid for us, as well as a source of revenue. It will probably be on this premise that we enter television when we do\". In 1954, after the Disneyland funding had been agreed, ABC broadcast \"Walt Disney's Disneyland\", an anthology consisting of animated cartoons, live-action features and other material from the studio's library. The show was successful in terms of ratings and profits, earning an audience share of over 50%. In April 1955, \"Newsweek\" called the series an \"American institution\". ABC was pleased with the ratings, leading to Disney's first daily television program, \"The Mickey Mouse Club\", a variety show catering specifically to children. The program was accompanied by merchandising through various companies (Western Printing, for example, had been producing coloring books and comics for over 20 years, and produced several items connected to the show). One of the segments of \"Disneyland\" consisted of the five-part miniseries \"Davy Crockett\" which, according to Disney biographer Neal Gabler, \"became an overnight sensation\". The show's theme song, \"The Ballad of Davy Crockett\", became internationally popular and ten million records were sold. As a result, Disney formed his own record production and distribution entity, Disneyland Records.\nAs well as the construction of Disneyland, Disney worked on other projects away from the studio. He was consultant to the 1959 American National Exhibition in Moscow; Disney Studios' contribution was \"America the Beautiful\", a 19-minute film in the 360-degree Circarama theater that was one of the most popular attractions. The following year he acted as the chairman of the Pageantry Committee for the 1960 Winter Olympics in Squaw Valley, California, where he designed the opening, closing and medal ceremonies. He was one of twelve investors in the Celebrity Sports Center, which opened in 1960 in Glendale, Colorado; he and Roy bought out the others in 1962, making the Disney company the sole owner.\nDespite the demands wrought by non-studio projects, Disney continued to work on film and television projects. In 1955, he was involved in \"Man in Space\", an episode of the \"Disneyland\" series, which was made in collaboration with NASA rocket designer Wernher von Braun. Disney also oversaw aspects of the full-length features \"Lady and the Tramp\" (the first animated film in CinemaScope) in 1955, \"Sleeping Beauty\" (the first animated film in Technirama 70 mm film) in 1959, \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\" (the first animated feature film to use Xerox cels) in 1961, and \"The Sword in the Stone\" in 1963.\nIn 1964, Disney produced \"Mary Poppins\", based on the book series by P. L. Travers; he had been trying to acquire the rights to the story since the 1940s. It became the most successful Disney film of the 1960s, although Travers disliked the film intensely and regretted having sold the rights. The same year he also became involved in plans to expand the California Institute of the Arts (colloquially called CalArts), and had an architect draw up blueprints for a new building.\nDisney provided four exhibits for the 1964 New York World's Fair, for which he obtained funding from selected corporate sponsors. For PepsiCo, who planned a tribute to UNICEF, Disney developed It's a Small World, a boat ride with audio-animatronic dolls depicting children of the world; Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln contained an animatronic Abraham Lincoln giving excerpts from his speeches; Carousel of Progress promoted the importance of electricity; and Ford's Magic Skyway portrayed the progress of mankind. Elements of all four exhibits\u200d\u2014\u200cprincipally concepts and technology\u200d\u2014\u200cwere re-installed in Disneyland, although It's a Small World is the ride that most closely resembles the original.\nDuring the early to mid-1960s, Disney developed plans for a ski resort in Mineral King, a glacial valley in California's Sierra Nevada. He hired experts such as the Olympic ski coach and ski-area designer Willy Schaeffler. With income from Disneyland accounting for an increasing proportion of the studio's income, Disney continued to look for venues for other attractions. In 1963, he presented a project to create a theme park in downtown St. Louis, Missouri; he initially reached an agreement with the Civic Center Redevelopment Corp, which controlled the land, but the deal later collapsed over funding. In late 1965, he announced plans to develop another theme park to be called \"Disney World\" (now Walt Disney World), a few miles southwest of Orlando, Florida. Disney World was to include the \"Magic Kingdom\"\u200d\u2014\u200ca larger and more elaborate version of Disneyland\u200d\u2014\u200cplus golf courses and resort hotels. The heart of Disney World was to be the \"Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow\" (EPCOT), which he described as:\nan experimental prototype community of tomorrow that will take its cue from the new ideas and new technologies that are now emerging from the creative centers of American industry. It will be a community of tomorrow that will never be completed, but will always be introducing and testing and demonstrating new materials and systems. And EPCOT will always be a showcase to the world for the ingenuity and imagination of American free enterprise.\nDuring 1966, Disney cultivated businesses willing to sponsor EPCOT. He received a story credit in the 1966 film \"Lt. Robin Crusoe, U.S.N.\" as Retlaw Yensid, his name spelt backwards. He increased his involvement in the studio's films, and was heavily involved in the story development of \"The Jungle Book\", the live-action musical feature \"The Happiest Millionaire\" (both 1967) and the animated short \"Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day\" (1968).\nIllness, death and aftermath.\nDisney had been a heavy smoker since World War\u00a0I. He did not use cigarettes with filters and had smoked a pipe as a young man. In early November 1966, he was diagnosed with lung cancer and was treated with cobalt therapy. Believing the treatment to have been successful, he returned to work, however on November 30 he felt unwell and was taken by ambulance from his home to St. Joseph Hospital where, on December 15, at age 65, he died of circulatory collapse caused by the cancer. His remains were cremated two days later and his ashes interred at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.\nThe release of \"The Jungle Book\" and \"The Happiest Millionaire\" in 1967 raised the total number of feature films that Disney had been involved in to 81. When \"Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day\" was released in 1968, it earned Disney an Academy Award in the Short Subject (Cartoon) category, awarded posthumously. After Disney's death, his studios continued to produce live-action films prolifically while the quality of their animated films was allowed to languish. In the late 1980s, this trend was reversed in what \"The New York Times\" describes as the \"Disney Renaissance\" that began with \"The Little Mermaid\" (1989). Disney's studios continue to produce successful film, television and stage entertainment.\nDisney's plans for the futuristic city of EPCOT did not come to fruition. After Disney's death, his brother Roy deferred his retirement to take full control of the Disney companies. He changed the focus of the project from a town to an attraction. At the inauguration in 1971, Roy dedicated Walt Disney World to his brother. Walt Disney World expanded with the opening of Epcot Center in 1982; Walt Disney's vision of a functional city was replaced by a park more akin to a permanent world's fair. In 2009, the Walt Disney Family Museum, designed by Disney's daughter Diane and her son Walter E. D. Miller, opened in the Presidio of San Francisco. Thousands of artifacts from Disney's life and career are on display, including numerous awards that he received. In 2014, the Disney theme parks around the world hosted approximately 134\u00a0million visitors.\nPersonal life and character.\nEarly in 1925, Disney hired an ink artist, Lillian Bounds. They married in July of that year, at her brother's house in her home town of Lewiston, Idaho. The marriage was generally happy, according to Lillian, although according to Disney's biographer Neal Gabler she did not \"accept Walt's decisions meekly or his status unquestionably, and she admitted that he was always telling people 'how henpecked he is'.\" Lillian had little interest in films or the Hollywood social scene and she was, in the words of the historian Steven Watts, \"content with household management and providing support for her husband\". Their marriage produced two daughters, Diane (born December 1933) and Sharon (adopted in December 1936, born six weeks previously). Within the family, neither Disney nor his wife hid the fact Sharon had been adopted, although they became annoyed if people outside the family raised the point. The Disneys were careful to keep their daughters out of the public eye as much as possible, particularly in the light of the Lindbergh kidnapping; Disney took steps to ensure his daughters were not photographed by the press.\nIn 1949, Disney and his family moved to a new home in the Holmby Hills district of Los Angeles. With the help of his friends Ward and Betty Kimball, who already had their own backyard railroad, Disney developed blueprints and immediately set to work on creating a miniature live steam railroad for his back yard. The name of the railroad, Carolwood Pacific Railroad, came from his home's location on Carolwood Drive. The miniature working steam locomotive was built by Disney Studios engineer Roger E. Broggie, and Disney named it \"Lilly Belle\" after his wife; after three years Disney ordered it into storage due to a series of accidents involving his guests.\nDisney grew more politically conservative as he got older. A Democratic Party supporter until the 1940 presidential election, when he switched allegiance to the Republican Party, he became a generous donor to Thomas\u00a0E.\u00a0Dewey's 1944 bid for the presidency. Disney engaged in red-baiting in response to organized labor actions against his company. In 1941, he paid for a full-page ad in \"Variety\" claiming that \"Communistic agitation\" was responsible for a cartoonist strike against him. In 1946, he was a founding member of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, an organization who stated they \"believ[ed] in, and like, the American Way of Life\u00a0... we find ourselves in sharp revolt against a rising tide of Communism, Fascism and kindred beliefs, that seek by subversive means to undermine and change this way of life\". In 1947, during the Second Red Scare, Disney testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), where he branded Herbert Sorrell, David Hilberman and William Pomerance, former animators and labor union organizers, as communist agitators; Disney stated that the 1941 strike led by them was part of an organized communist effort to gain influence in Hollywood.\n\"The New York Times\" reported in 1993 that Disney had been an FBI informant passing secret information to J. Edgar Hoover about communist activities in Hollywood. However, while Walt Disney was made a \"Special Agent in Charge Contact\" in 1954, FBI officials claim this was largely an honorary title regularly awarded to members of a community who might be of use to the bureau. The FBI declassified and released Walt Disney's file on their website, and revealed that much of Disney's correspondence with the bureau (via studio personnel) was in relation to the production of educational films; such as a certain installment of the \"Career Day\" newsreel segments on \"The Mickey Mouse Club\" focusing on the bureau (which aired in January 1958), as well as an unmade 1961 educational short warning children about the dangers of child molestation.\nDisney's public persona was very different from his actual personality. Playwright Robert E. Sherwood described him as \"almost painfully shy\u00a0... diffident\" and self-deprecating. According to his biographer Richard Schickel, Disney hid his shy and insecure personality behind his public identity. Kimball argues that Disney \"played the role of a bashful tycoon who was embarrassed in public\" and knew that he was doing so. Disney acknowledged the fa\u00e7ade and told a friend that \"I'm not Walt Disney. I do a lot of things Walt Disney would not do. Walt Disney does not smoke. I smoke. Walt Disney does not drink. I drink.\" Critic Otis Ferguson, in \"The New Republic\", called the private Disney: \"common and everyday, not inaccessible, not in a foreign language, not suppressed or sponsored or anything. Just Disney.\" Many of those with whom Disney worked commented that he gave his staff little encouragement due to his exceptionally high expectations. Norman recalls that when Disney said \"That'll work\", it was an indication of high praise. Instead of direct approval, Disney gave high-performing staff financial bonuses, or recommended certain individuals to others, expecting that his praise would be passed on.\nReputation.\nViews of Disney and his work have changed over the decades, and there have been polarized opinions. Mark Langer, in the \"American Dictionary of National Biography\", writes that \"Earlier evaluations of Disney hailed him as a patriot, folk artist, and popularizer of culture. More recently, Disney has been regarded as a paradigm of American imperialism and intolerance, as well as a debaser of culture.\" Steven Watts wrote that some denounce Disney \"as a cynical manipulator of cultural and commercial formulas\", while PBS records that critics have censured his work because of its \"smooth fa\u00e7ade of sentimentality and stubborn optimism, its feel-good re-write of American history\".\nWatts argues that many of Disney's post-World War II films \"legislated a kind of cultural Marshall Plan. They nourished a genial cultural imperialism that magically overran the rest of the globe with the values, expectations, and goods of a prosperous middle-class United States.\" Film historian Jay P. Telotte acknowledges that many see Disney's studio as an \"agent of manipulation and repression\", although he observes that it has \"labored throughout its history to link its name with notions of fun, family, and fantasy\". John Tomlinson, in his study \"Cultural Imperialism\", examines the work of Ariel Dorfman and Armand Mattelart, whose 1971 book (transl. \"How to Read Donald Duck\") identifies that there are \"imperialist\u00a0... values 'concealed' behind the innocent, wholesome fa\u00e7ade of the world of Walt Disney\"; this, they argue, is a powerful tool as \"it presents itself as harmless fun for consumption by children.\" Tomlinson views their argument as flawed, as \"they simply \"assume\" that reading American comics, seeing adverts, watching pictures of the affluent\u00a0... ['Yankee'] lifestyle has a direct pedagogic effect\".\nPolitics and allegations of prejudice.\nDisney has been accused of antisemitism for having given Nazi propagandist Leni Riefenstahl a tour of his studio a month after . Riefenstahl's invitation was solicited to Disney by painter and ballet dancer Hurbert \"Jay\" Stowitts, a close friend of Riefenstahl, and a former colleague of Leopold Stokowski who at the time was collaborating with Disney on \"Fantasia\". A month later a spokesperson for Disney told the \"New York Daily News\": \"Miss Riefenstahl got into the studio, but she crashed the gate. A Los Angeles man who is known to Disney obtained permission to take a party through the plant. Leni was in the party. If we had known it in advance she wouldn't have got in.\" Animation historian Jim Korkis theorizes that Disney may have also met with Riefenstahl for financial reasons: as an attempt by Disney to recover over 135,000 Reichsmarks owed from his German film distributor and to get the ban on Disney films lifted in Germany. Animator Art Babbitt, organizer behind the 1941 strike at the studio and who held a well-known grudge against Disney, claimed in his later years that he saw Disney and his lawyer attend meetings of the German American Bund, a pro-Nazi organization, during the late 1930s. However, according to Disney biographer Neal Gabler: \"...that was highly unlikely, not only because Walt had little enough time for his family, much less political meetings, but because he had no real political leanings at the time.\" Disney's office appointment book makes no mention of him attending Bund rallies, and no other employee ever claimed he attended such meetings.\nAccording to Gabler, Disney was apolitical and \"something of a political na\u00eff\" during the 1930s and he had previously told one reporter \u2013 as tensions in Europe were brewing \u2013 that America should \"let 'em fight their own wars\" claiming he had \"learned my lesson\" from World War I. Gabler also noted that in late 1939, Disney was going over a scale model of a new studio to be built in Burbank, when one animator suddenly asked him how the recently begun war in Europe would affect its construction, to which Disney responded by asking, \"What war?\" During World War II, Disney was actively involved in making propaganda films against the Nazis, both for the general public (such as \"Der Fuehrer's Face\" and \"Education for Death\"), as well as educational and training films exclusively for the United States Government. As early as October 1940 (over a year before America's entry into the war), Disney began enlisting contracts from various branches of the United States Armed Forces to make training films, and in March 1941 he held a luncheon with Government representatives formally offering his services \"...for national defence industries at cost and without profit. In making this offer, I am motivated solely by a desire to help as best I can in the present emergency.\" These training films contained highly classified information and required the highest level of security clearance to be viewed. If Disney had any previous sympathies toward Nazism, the U.S. Government would have disqualified him from making these films.\nThe Walt Disney Family Museum acknowledges that ethnic stereotypes common to films of the 1930s were included in some early cartoons but also points out that Disney donated regularly to Jewish charities and was named the 1955 \"Man of the Year\" by the B'nai B'rith chapter in Beverly Hills. The organization itself found no evidence of antisemitism on Disney's part. The plaque read: \"For exemplifying the best tenets of American citizenship and inter-group understanding and interpreting into action the ideals of B'nai B'rith.\" Disney had numerous Jewish employees, many of whom were in influential positions. None of Disney's employees\u00a0\u2013 including animator Art Babbitt, who disliked Disney intensely\u00a0\u2013 ever accused him of making antisemitic slurs or taunts. Jewish story man Joe Grant, who worked closely with Disney throughout the 1930s and 1940s stated, \"As far as I'm concerned, there was no evidence of antisemitism. I think the whole idea should be put to rest and buried deep. He was not antisemitic. Some of the most influential people at the studio were Jewish. It's much ado about nothing. I never once had a problem with him in that way.\" In addition songwriter Robert B. Sherman recalled that when one of Disney's lawyers made antisemitic remarks towards him and his brother Richard, Disney defended them and fired the attorney. Gabler, the first writer to gain unrestricted access to the Disney archives, concludes that the available evidence does not support accusations of antisemitism and that Disney largely got that reputation due to his association with Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals \u2013 an anti-Communist organization formed in 1944, that was rumored to have antisemitic undertones. Gabler concludes that \"...though Walt himself, in my estimation, was not antisemitic, nevertheless, he willingly allied himself with people who were antisemitic, and that reputation stuck. He was never really able to expunge it throughout his life.\" Disney distanced himself from the Motion Picture Alliance, and had no involvement with the organization after 1947. \nAccording to Disney's daughter Diane Disney-Miller, her sister Sharon dated a Jewish boyfriend for a period of time, to which her father raised no objections and reportedly said, \"Sharon, I think it's wonderful how these Jewish families have accepted you.\"\nDisney has also been accused of other forms of racism because some of his productions released between the 1930s and 1950s contain racially insensitive material. Gabler argues that \"Walt Disney was no racist. He never, either publicly or privately, made disparaging remarks about blacks or asserted white superiority. Like most white Americans of his generation, however, he was racially insensitive.\"\nThe feature film \"Song of the South\" was criticized by contemporary film critics, the NAACP, and others for its perpetuation of black stereotypes, but during filming Disney became close friends with its star, James Baskett, describing him in a letter to his sister Ruth as \"the best actor, I believe, to be discovered in years.\" Disney and Baskett stayed in contact long after the film's production, with Walt sending him gifts. When Baskett was in failing health, Disney not only began financially supporting him and his family, but also campaigned successfully for an Honorary Academy Award for his performance, making Baskett the first black actor so honored. Baskett died shortly afterward, and his widow wrote Disney a letter of gratitude for his support claiming he had been a \"friend in deed and [we] certainly have been in need.\" Floyd Norman, the studio's first black animator who worked closely with Disney during the 1950s and 1960s, said, \"Not once did I observe a hint of the racist behavior Walt Disney was often accused of after his death. His treatment of people\u200d\u2014\u200cand by this I mean all people\u200d\u2014\u200ccan only be called exemplary.\"\nPortrayals and cultural depictions.\nDisney has been portrayed numerous times in fictional works. H. G. Wells references Disney in his 1938 novel \"The Holy Terror\", in which World Dictator Rud fears that Donald Duck is meant to lampoon the dictator. Disney was portrayed by Len Cariou in the 1995 made-for-TV film \"A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes: The Annette Funicello Story\", and by Tom Hanks in the 2013 film \"Saving Mr. Banks\". In 2001, American German-language author Peter Stephan Jungk published (trans: \"The King of America\"), a fictional work of Disney's later years that re-imagines him as a power-hungry racist. The composer Philip Glass later adapted the book into the opera \"The Perfect American\" (2013).\nSeveral commentators have described Disney as a cultural icon. On Disney's death, journalism professor Ralph S. Izard comments that the values in Disney's films are those \"considered valuable in American Christian society\", which include \"individualism, decency,\u00a0... love for our fellow man, fair play and toleration\". Disney's obituary in \"The Times\" calls the films \"wholesome, warm-hearted and entertaining\u00a0... of incomparable artistry and of touching beauty\". Journalist Bosley Crowther argues that Disney's \"achievement as a creator of entertainment for an almost unlimited public and as a highly ingenious merchandiser of his wares can rightly be compared to the most successful industrialists in history.\" Correspondent Alistair Cooke calls Disney a \"folk-hero\u00a0... the Pied Piper of Hollywood\", while Gabler considers Disney \"reshaped the culture and the American consciousness\". In the \"American Dictionary of National Biography\", Langer writes:\nDisney remains the central figure in the history of animation. Through technological innovations and alliances with governments and corporations, he transformed a minor studio in a marginal form of communication into a multinational leisure industry giant. Despite his critics, his vision of a modern, corporate utopia as an extension of traditional American values has possibly gained greater currency in the years after his death.\nIn December 2021, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York opened a three-month special exhibit in honor of Disney titled \"Inspiring Walt Disney\".\nAwards and honors.\nDisney received 59 Academy Award nominations, including 22 awards: both totals are records. He was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards, but did not win, but he was presented with two Special Achievement Awards\u200d\u2014\u200cfor \"Bambi\" (1942) and \"The Living Desert\" (1953)\u200d\u2014\u200cand the Cecil B. DeMille Award. He also received four Emmy Award nominations, winning once, for Best Producer for the \"Disneyland\" television series. Several of his films are included in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\": \"Steamboat Willie\", \"The Three Little Pigs\", \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", \"Fantasia\", \"Pinocchio\", \"Bambi\", \"Dumbo\" and \"Mary Poppins\". In 1998, the American Film Institute published a list of the 100 greatest American films, according to industry experts; the list included \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (at number 49), and \"Fantasia\" (at 58).\nIn February 1960, Disney was inducted to the Hollywood Walk of Fame with two stars, one for motion pictures and the other for his television work; Mickey Mouse was given his own star for motion pictures in 1978, and Disneyland received one in 2005. Disney was also inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1986, the California Hall of Fame in December 2006, was the inaugural recipient of a star on the Anaheim walk of stars in 2014, and was a member of the first Orange County Hall of Fame class in 2023.\nThe Walt Disney Family Museum records that he \"along with members of his staff, received more than 950 honors and citations from throughout the world\". He was made a in the French in 1935, and in 1952 he was awarded the country's highest artistic decoration, the . Other national awards include Thailand's Order of the Crown (1960); Germany's Order of Merit (1956), Brazil's Order of the Southern Cross (1941), and Mexico's Order of the Aztec Eagle (1943). In the United States, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom on September 14, 1964, and on May 24, 1968, he was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. He received the Showman of the World Award from the National Association of Theatre Owners, and in 1955, the National Audubon Society awarded Disney its highest honor, the Audubon Medal, for promoting the \"appreciation and understanding of nature\" through his \"True-Life Adventures\" nature films. A minor planet discovered in 1980 by astronomer Lyudmila Karachkina, was named 4017 Disneya, and he was also awarded honorary degrees from Harvard, Yale, the University of Southern California and the University of California, Los Angeles.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32919", "revid": "1007291066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32919", "title": "Warszawa", "text": ""}
{"id": "32921", "revid": "31159396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32921", "title": "Watermark", "text": "Identification on paper to prevent counterfeiting\nA watermark is an identifying image or pattern in paper that appears as various shades of lightness/darkness when viewed by transmitted light (or when viewed by reflected light, atop a dark background), caused by thickness or density variations in the paper.\nWatermarks have been used on postage stamps, currency, and other government documents to discourage counterfeiting. There are two main ways of producing watermarks in paper; the \"dandy roll process\", and the more complex \"cylinder mould process\".\nWatermarks vary greatly in their visibility; while some are obvious on casual inspection, others require some study to pick out. Various aids have been developed, such as \"watermark fluid\" that wets the paper without damaging it. A watermark is very useful in the examination of paper because it can be used for dating documents and artworks, identifying sizes, mill trademarks and locations, and determining the quality of a sheet of paper. The word is also used for digital practices that share similarities with physical watermarks. In one case, overprint on computer-printed output may be used to identify output from an unlicensed trial version of a program. In another instance, identifying codes can be encoded as a digital watermark for a music, video, picture, or other file. Or an artist adding their identifying digital Signature, graphic, logo in their digital artworks as an identifier or anti-counterfeit measure.\nHistory.\nWatermarks were first introduced in Fabriano, Italy, in 1282. At the time, watermarks were created by changing the thickness of paper during a stage in the manufacturing process when it was still wet.\nProcesses.\nDandy roll process.\nTraditionally, a watermark was made by impressing a water-coated metal stamp onto the paper during manufacturing. The invention of the dandy roll in 1826 by John Marshall revolutionised the watermark process and made it easier for producers to watermark their paper.\nThe \"dandy roll\" is a light roller covered by material similar to window screen that is embossed with a pattern. Faint lines are made by \"laid wires\" that run parallel to the axis of the dandy roll, and the bold lines are made by \"chain wires\" that run around the circumference to secure the laid wires to the roll from the outside. Because the chain wires are located on the outside of the laid wires, they have a greater influence on the impression in the pulp, hence their bolder appearance than the laid wire lines.\nThis embossing is transferred to the pulp fibres, compressing and reducing their thickness in that area. Because the patterned portion of the page is thinner, it transmits more light through and therefore has a lighter appearance than the surrounding paper. If these lines are distinct and parallel, and/or there is a watermark, then the paper is termed \"laid paper\". If the lines appear as a mesh or are indiscernible, and/or there is no watermark, then it is called \"wove paper\". This method is called \"line drawing watermarks.\"\nCylinder mould process.\nAnother type of watermark is called the \"cylinder mould watermark\". It is a shaded watermark first used in 1848 that incorporates tonal depth and creates a greyscale image. Instead of using a wire covering for the dandy roll, the shaded watermark is created by areas of relief on the roll's own surface. Once dry, the paper may then be rolled again to produce a watermark of even thickness but with varying density. The resulting watermark is generally much clearer and more detailed than those made by the Dandy Roll process, and as such, Cylinder Mould Watermark Paper is the preferred type of watermarked paper for banknotes, passports, motor vehicle titles, and other documents where it is an important anti-counterfeiting measure.\nOn postage stamps.\nIn philately, the watermark is a key feature of a stamp, and often constitutes the difference between a common and a rare stamp. Collectors who encounter two otherwise identical stamps with different watermarks consider each stamp to be a separate identifiable issue. The \"classic\" stamp watermark is a small crown or other national symbol, appearing either once on each stamp or a continuous pattern. Watermarks were nearly universal on stamps in the 19th and early 20th centuries, but generally fell out of use, but some countries continue to use them.\nSome types of embossing, such as that used to make the \"cross on oval\" design on early stamps of Switzerland, resemble a watermark in that the paper is thinner, but can be distinguished by having sharper edges than is usual for a normal watermark. Stamp paper watermarks also show various designs, letters, numbers and pictorial elements.\nThe process of bringing out the stamp watermark is fairly simple. Sometimes a watermark in stamp paper can be seen just by looking at the unprinted back side of a stamp. More often, the collector must use a few basic items to get a good look at the watermark. For example, watermark fluid may be applied to the back of a stamp to temporarily reveal the watermark.\nEven using the simple watermarking method described, it can be difficult to distinguish some watermarks. Watermarks on stamps printed in yellow and orange can be particularly difficult to see. A few mechanical devices are also used by collectors to detect watermarks on stamps such as the Morley-Bright watermark detector and the more expensive Safe Signoscope. Such devices can be very useful for they can be used without the application of watermark fluid and also allow the collector to look at the watermark for a longer period of time to more easily detect the watermark.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32923", "revid": "50507667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32923", "title": "Western canon", "text": "Cultural classics valued in the West\nThe Western canon is the embodiment of high-culture literature, music, philosophy, and works of art that are highly cherished across the Western world, such works having achieved the status of classics.\nRecent discussions upon the matter emphasise cultural diversity within the canon. The canons of music and visual arts have been broadened to encompass often overlooked periods, whilst recent media like cinema grapple with a precarious position. Criticism arises, with some viewing changes as prioritising activism over aesthetic values, often associated with critical theory, as well as postmodernism. Another critique highlights a narrow interpretation of the West, dominated by British and American culture, at least under contemporary circumstances, prompting demands for a more diversified canon amongst the hemisphere.\nThere is no official list of works that a recognized panel of experts or scholars agreed upon that is \"the Western Canon,\" nor has there ever been such. A corpus of great works is an idea that has been discussed, negotiated, and criticized for the past century.\nLiterary canon.\nClassic book.\nA classic is a book, or any other work of art, accepted as being exemplary or noteworthy. In the second-century Roman miscellany \"Attic Nights\", Aulus Gellius refers to writers as \"classicus... scriptor, non proletarius\" (\"A distinguished, not a commonplace writer\"). Such classification were initiated with the Greeks' \"ranking\" their cultural works, with the word \"canon\" (ancient Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u03ce\u03bd, kan\u1e53n: \"measuring rod, standard\"). Similarly, early Christian Church Fathers declared as \"canon\" the authoritative texts of the New Testament, preserving them given the expense of vellum and papyrus and mechanical book reproduction. Thus, being included in a \"canon\" ensured a book's preservation as the best way to retain information about a civilization. In contemporary use, the Western canon defines the best of Western culture. In the ancient world, at the Alexandrian Library, scholars coined the Greek term [\"the admitted\", \"the included\"] to identify the writers in the canon. Although the term is often associated with the Western canon, it can be applied to works of literature, music and art, etc. from all traditions, such as the Chinese classics.\nWith regard to books, what makes a book \"classic\" has concerned various authors, from Mark Twain to Italo Calvino, and questions such as \"Why Read the Classics?\", and \"What Is a Classic?\" have been considered by others, including T. S. Eliot, Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve, Michael Dirda, and Ezra Pound.\nThe terms \"classic book\" and Western canon are closely related concepts, but are not necessarily synonymous. A \"canon\" is a list of books considered to be \"essential\", and it can be published as a collection (such as \"Great Books of the Western World\", Modern Library, Everyman's Library or Penguin Classics), presented as a list with an academic's imprimatur (such as Harold Bloom's), or be the official reading list of a university. In \"The Western Canon\" Bloom lists \"the major Western writers\" as Dante Alighieri, Geoffrey Chaucer, Miguel de Cervantes, Michel de Montaigne, William Shakespeare, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, William Wordsworth, Charles Dickens, Leo Tolstoy, James Joyce and Marcel Proust.\nGreat Books Program.\nA university or college Great Books Program is a program inspired by the Great Books movement begun in the United States in the 1920s by John Erskine of Columbia University, which proposed to improve the higher education system by returning it to the western liberal arts tradition of broad cross-disciplinary learning. These academics and educators included Robert Hutchins, Mortimer Adler, Stringfellow Barr, Scott Buchanan, Jacques Barzun, and Alexander Meiklejohn. The view among them was that the emphasis on narrow specialization in American colleges had harmed the quality of higher education by failing to expose students to the important products of Western civilization and thought.\nThe essential component of such programs is a high degree of engagement with primary texts, called the Great Books. The curricula of Great Books programs often follow a canon of texts considered more or less essential to a student's education, such as Plato's \"Republic\", or Dante's \"Divine Comedy\". Such programs often focus exclusively on Western culture. Their employment of primary texts dictates an interdisciplinary approach, as most of the Great Books do not fall neatly under the prerogative of a single contemporary academic discipline. Great Books programs often include designated discussion groups as well as lectures, and have small class sizes. In general students in such programs receive an abnormally high degree of attention from their professors, as part of the overall aim of fostering a community of learning.\nOver 100 institutions of higher learning, mostly in the United States, offer some version of a Great Books Program as an option for students.\nFor much of the 20th century, the Modern Library provided a larger convenient list of the Western canon. The list numbered more than 300 items by the 1950s, by authors from Aristotle to Albert Camus, and has continued to grow. When in the 1990s the concept of the Western canon was vehemently condemned, just as earlier Modern Library lists had been criticized as \"too American,\" Modern Library responded by preparing new lists of \"100 Best Novels\" and \"100 Best Nonfiction\" compiled by famous writers, and later compiled lists nominated by book purchasers and readers.\nDebate.\nSome intellectuals have championed a \"high conservative modernism\" that insists that universal truths exist, and have opposed approaches that deny the existence of universal truths. Yale University Professor of Humanities and famous literary critic Harold Bloom also argued strongly in favor of the canon, in his 1994 book \"\", and in general the canon remains as a represented idea in many institutions. Allan Bloom (no relation), in his highly influential \"The Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students\" (1987), argues that moral degradation results from ignorance of the great classics that shaped Western culture. Bloom further comments: \"But one thing is certain: wherever the Great Books make up a central part of the curriculum, the students are excited and satisfied.\" His book was widely cited by some intellectuals for its argument that the classics contained universal truths and timeless values which were being ignored by cultural relativists.\nClassicist Bernard Knox made direct reference to this topic when he delivered his 1992 Jefferson Lecture (the U.S. federal government's highest honor for achievement in the humanities). Knox used the intentionally \"provocative\" title \"The Oldest Dead White European Males\" as the title of his lecture and his subsequent book of the same name, in both of which Knox defended the continuing relevance of classical culture to modern society.\nDefenders maintain that those who undermine the canon do so out of primarily political interests, and that such criticisms are misguided and/or disingenuous. As John Searle, Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley, has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a certain irony in this [i.e., politicized objections to the canon] in that earlier student generations, my own for example, found the critical tradition that runs from Socrates through the \"Federalist Papers\", through the writings of Mill and Marx, down to the twentieth century, to be liberating from the stuffy conventions of traditional American politics and pieties. Precisely by inculcating a critical attitude, the \"canon\" served to demythologize the conventional pieties of the American bourgeoisie and provided the student with a perspective from which to critically analyze American culture and institutions. Ironically, the same tradition is now regarded as oppressive. The texts once served an unmasking function; now we are told that it is the texts which must be unmasked.\nOne of the main objections to a canon of literature is the question of authority; who should have the power to determine what works are worth reading?\nCharles Altieri, of the University of California, Berkeley, states that canons are \"an institutional form for exposing people to a range of idealized attitudes.\" It is according to this notion that work may be removed from the canon over time to reflect the contextual relevance and thoughts of society. American historian Todd M. Compton argues that canons are always communal in nature; that there are limited canons for, say a literature survey class, or an English department reading list, but there is no such thing as one absolute canon of literature. Instead, there are many conflicting canons. He regards Bloom's \"Western Canon\" as a personal canon only.\nThe process of defining the boundaries of the canon is endless. The philosopher John Searle has said, \"In my experience there never was, in fact, a fixed 'canon'; there was rather a certain set of tentative judgments about what had importance and quality. Such judgments are always subject to revision, and in fact they were constantly being revised.\" One of the notable attempts at compiling an authoritative canon for literature in the English-speaking world was the \"Great Books of the Western World\" program. This program, developed in the middle third of the 20th century, grew out of the curriculum at the University of Chicago. University president Robert Maynard Hutchins and his collaborator Mortimer Adler developed a program that offered reading lists, books, and organizational strategies for reading clubs to the general public. An earlier attempt had been made in 1909 by Harvard University president Charles W. Eliot, with the Harvard Classics, a 51-volume anthology of classic works from world literature. Eliot's view was the same as that of Scottish philosopher and historian Thomas Carlyle: \"The true University of these days is a Collection of Books\". (\"The Hero as Man of Letters\", 1840)\nIn the English-speaking world.\nBritish renaissance poetry.\nThe canon of Renaissance English poetry of the 16th and early 17th century has always been in some form of flux and towards the end of the 20th century the established canon was criticised, especially by those who wished to expand it to include, for example, more women writers. However, the central figures of the British renaissance canon remain, Edmund Spenser, Sir Philip Sidney, Christopher Marlowe, William Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, and John Donne. Spenser, Donne, and Jonson were major influences on 17th-century poetry. However, poet John Dryden condemned aspects of the metaphysical poets in his criticism. In the 18th century Metaphysical poetry fell into further disrepute, while the interest in Elizabethan poetry was rekindled through the scholarship of Thomas Warton and others. However, the canon of Renaissance poetry was formed in the Victorian period with anthologies like Palgrave's \"Golden Treasury\".\nIn the twentieth century T. S. Eliot and Yvor Winters were two literary critics who were especially concerned with revising the canon of renaissance English literature. Eliot, for example, championed poet Sir John Davies in an article in \"The Times Literary Supplement\" in 1926. During the course of the 1920s, Eliot did much to establish the importance of the metaphysical school, both through his critical writing and by applying their method in his own work. However, by 1961 A. Alvarez was commenting that \"it may perhaps be a little late in the day to be writing about the Metaphysicals. The great vogue for Donne passed with the passing of the Anglo-American experimental movement in modern poetry.\" Two decades later, a hostile view was expressed that emphasis on their importance had been an attempt by Eliot and his followers to impose a 'high Anglican and royalist literary history' on 17th-century English poetry.\nThe American critic Yvor Winters suggested in 1939 an alternative canon of Elizabethan poetry, which would exclude the famous representatives of the Petrarchan school of poetry, represented by Sir Philip Sidney and Edmund Spenser. Winters claimed that the Native or Plain Style \"anti-Petrarchan\" movement had been undervalued and argued that George Gascoigne (1525\u20131577) \"deserves to be ranked [...] among the six or seven greatest lyric poets of the century, and perhaps higher\".\nTowards the end of the 20th century the established canon was increasingly disputed.\nExpansion of the literary canon in the 20th century.\nIn the twentieth century there was a general reassessment of the literary canon, including women's writing, post-colonial literatures, gay and lesbian literature, writing by racialized minorities, working people's writing, and the cultural productions of historically marginalized groups. This reassessment has resulted in a whole scale expansion of what is considered \"literature\", and genres hitherto not regarded as \"literary\", such as children's writing, journals, letters, travel writing, and many others are now the subjects of scholarly interest.\nThe Western literary canon has also expanded to include the literature of Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and South America. Writers from Africa, Turkey, China, Egypt, Peru, and Colombia, Japan, etc., have received Nobel prizes since the late 1960s. Writers from Asia and Africa have also been nominated for, and also won, the Booker prize in recent years.\nFeminism and the literary canon.\nSusan Hardy Aitken argues that the Western canon has maintained itself by excluding and marginalising women, whilst idealising the works of men. Where women's work is introduced it can be considered inappropriately rather than recognising the importance of their work; a work's greatness is judged against socially situated factors which exclude women, whilst being portrayed as an intellectual approach.\nThe feminist movement produced both feminist fiction and non-fiction and created new interest in women's writing. It also prompted a general reevaluation of women's historical and academic contributions in response to the belief that women's lives and contributions have been underrepresented as areas of scholarly interest.\nHowever, in Britain and America at least women achieved major literary success from the late eighteenth century, and many major nineteenth-century British novelists were women, including Jane Austen, the Bront\u00eb family, Elizabeth Gaskell, and George Eliot. There were also three major female poets, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Christina Rossetti and Emily Dickinson. In the twentieth century there were also many major female writers, including Katherine Mansfield, Dorothy Richardson, Virginia Woolf, Eudora Welty, and Marianne Moore. Notable female writers in France include Colette, Simone de Beauvoir, Marguerite Yourcenar, Nathalie Sarraute, Marguerite Duras and Fran\u00e7oise Sagan.\nMuch of the early period of feminist literary scholarship was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women. Virago Press began to publish its large list of 19th and early 20th-century novels in 1975 and became one of the first commercial presses to join in the project of reclamation.\nAfrican-American authors.\nIn the twentieth century, the Western literary canon started to include African writers not only from African-American writers, but also from the wider African diaspora of writers in Britain, France, Latin America, and Africa. This correlated largely with the shift in social and political views during the civil rights movement in the United States. The first global recognition came in 1950 when Gwendolyn Brooks was the first African American to win a Pulitzer Prize for Literature. American Toni Morrison was the first African-American woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, in 1993.\nSome early African-American writers were inspired to defy ubiquitous racial prejudice by proving themselves equal to European American authors. As Henry Louis Gates Jr., has said, \"it is fair to describe the subtext of the history of black letters as this urge to refute the claim that because blacks had no written traditions they were bearers of an inferior culture.\"\nAfrican-American writers were also attempting to subvert the literary and power traditions of the United States. Some scholars assert that writing has traditionally been seen as \"something defined by the dominant culture as a white male activity.\" This means that, in American society, literary acceptance has traditionally been intimately tied in with the very power dynamics which perpetrated such evils as racial discrimination. By borrowing from and incorporating the non-written oral traditions and folk life of the African diaspora, African-American literature broke \"the mystique of connection between literary authority and patriarchal power.\" In producing their own literature, African Americans were able to establish their own literary traditions devoid of the European intellectual filter. This view of African-American literature as a tool in the struggle for African-American political and cultural liberation has been stated for decades, most famously by W. E. B. Du Bois.\nLatin America.\nOctavio Paz Lozano (1914\u20131998) was a Mexican poet and diplomat. For his body of work, he was awarded the 1981 Miguel de Cervantes Prize, the 1982 Neustadt International Prize for Literature, and the 1990 Nobel Prize in Literature.\nGabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez (1927\u20132014) was a Colombian novelist, short-story writer, screenwriter, and journalist. Considered one of the most significant authors of the 20th century and one of the best in the Spanish language, he was awarded the 1972 Neustadt International Prize for Literature and the 1982 Nobel Prize in Literature.\nGarc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez started as a journalist, and wrote many acclaimed non-fiction works and short stories, but is best known for his novels, such as \"One Hundred Years of Solitude\" (1967), \"The Autumn of the Patriarch\" (1975), and \"Love in the Time of Cholera\" (1985). His works have achieved significant critical acclaim and widespread commercial success, most notably for popularizing a literary style labeled as magic realism, which uses magical elements and events in otherwise ordinary and realistic situations. Some of his works are set in a fictional village called Macondo (the town mainly inspired by his birthplace Aracataca), and most of them explore the theme of solitude. On his death in April 2014, Juan Manuel Santos, the President of Colombia, described him as \"the greatest Colombian who ever lived.\"\nMario Vargas Llosa, (1936-2025) is a Peruvian writer, politician, journalist, essayist, college professor, and recipient of the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature. Vargas Llosa is one of Latin America's most significant novelists and essayists, and one of the leading writers of his generation. Some critics consider him to have had a larger international impact and worldwide audience than any other writer of the Latin American Boom. Upon announcing the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature, the Swedish Academy said it had been given to Vargas Llosa \"for his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images of the individual's resistance, revolt, and defeat\".\nCanon of philosophers.\nMany philosophers today agree that Greek philosophy has influenced much of Western culture since its inception. Alfred North Whitehead once noted: \"The safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato.\" Clear, unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophers to Early Islamic philosophy, the European Renaissance, and the Age of Enlightenment.\nPlato was a philosopher in Classical Greece and the founder of the Academy in Athens. He is widely considered the most pivotal figure in the development of philosophy, especially the Western tradition.\nAristotle was an ancient Greek philosopher. His writings cover many subjects \u2013\u00a0including physics, biology, zoology, metaphysics, logic, ethics, aesthetics, rhetoric, linguistics, politics and government\u2014and constitute the first comprehensive system of Western philosophy. Aristotle's views on physical science had a profound influence on medieval scholarship. Their influence extended from Late Antiquity into the Renaissance, and his views were not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics. In metaphysics, Aristotelianism profoundly influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophical and theological thought during the Middle Ages and continues to influence Christian theology, especially the Neoplatonism of the Early Church and the scholastic tradition of the Roman Catholic Church. Aristotle was well known among medieval Muslim intellectuals and revered as \"The First Teacher\" (). His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics.\nBoethius' \"On the Consolation of Philosophy\" () is often acclaimed as a central work from Late Antiquity, at the cusp of the early medieval period, that remained influential throughout the Middle Ages. Of Boethius, it has been said that \"[along] with Augustine and Aristotle, he is \"the\" fundamental philosophical and theological author in the Latin tradition\"; Edward Gibbon wrote of the \"Consolatione\" that it is \"a golden volume not unworthy of the leisure of Plato or Tully\", and Bertrand Russell wrote that, by merit of the same, Boethius \"would have been remarkable in any age; in the age in which he lived he is utterly amazing.\"\nThe vast body of Christian philosophy is typically represented on reading lists mainly by Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas. The academic canon of early modern philosophy generally includes Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant.\nRenaissance philosophy.\nMajor philosophers of the Renaissance include Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, Michel de Montaigne, Pico della Mirandola, Nicholas of Cusa and Giordano Bruno, Marsilio Ficino and Gemistos Plethon.\nSeventeenth-century philosophers.\nThe seventeenth century was important for philosophy, and the major figures were Francis Bacon, Thomas Hobbes, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Blaise Pascal, Baruch Spinoza, John Locke and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.\nEighteenth-century philosophers.\nMajor philosophers of the eighteenth century include George Berkeley, Montesquieu, Voltaire, David Hume, Giambattista Vico, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Denis Diderot, Immanuel Kant, Edmund Burke and Jeremy Bentham.\nNineteenth-century philosophers.\nImportant nineteenth century philosophers include Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831), Giuseppe Mazzini, Arthur Schopenhauer, Auguste Comte, S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and Friedrich Nietzsche.\nTwentieth-century philosophers.\nMajor twentieth century figures include Henri Bergson, Edmund Husserl, Bertrand Russell, Martin Heidegger, Ludwig Wittgenstein and Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Simone Weil, Michel Foucault, Pierre Bourdieu, Jacques Derrida and J\u00fcrgen Habermas. A porous distinction between analytic and continental approaches emerged during this period.\nMusic.\nClassical music forms the core of canon music and remains mostly unchanged to our days. It integrates a huge body of works starting from the 17th century and are reproduced on an ensemble of all acoustic musical instruments that were common in that century's Europe.\nThe term \"classical music\" did not appear until the early 19th century, in an attempt to distinctly canonize the period from Johann Sebastian Bach to Ludwig van Beethoven as a golden age. In addition to Bach and Beethoven, the other major figures from this period were George Frideric Handel, Joseph Haydn and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The earliest reference to \"classical music\" recorded by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" is from about 1836.\nIn classical music, during the nineteenth century a \"canon\" developed which focused on what was felt to be the most important works written since 1600, with a great concentration on the later part of this period, termed the Classical period, which is generally taken to begin around 1750. After Beethoven, the major nineteenth-century composers include Felix Mendelssohn, Franz Schubert, Robert Schumann, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, Hector Berlioz, Franz Liszt, Richard Wagner, Johannes Brahms, Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, Anton Bruckner, Giuseppe Verdi, Giacomo Puccini, Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns,\nGustav Mahler, and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.\nIn the 2000s, the standard concert repertoire of professional orchestras, chamber music groups, and choirs tends to focus on works by a relatively small number of mainly 18th- and 19th-century male composers. Many of the works deemed to be part of the musical canon are from genres regarded as the most \"serious\", such as the symphony, concerto, string quartet, and opera. Folk music was already giving art music melodies, and from the late 19th century, in an atmosphere of increasing nationalism, folk music began to influence composers in formal and other ways, before being admitted to some sort of status in the canon itself.\nSince the early twentieth century non-Western music has begun to influence Western composers. In particular, direct homages to Javanese gamelan music are found in works for western instruments by Claude Debussy, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, Francis Poulenc, Olivier Messiaen, Pierre Boulez, Benjamin Britten, John Cage, Steve Reich, and Philip Glass. Debussy was immensely interested in non-Western music and its approaches to composition. Specifically, he was drawn to the Javanese gamelan, which he first heard at the 1889 Paris Exposition. He was not interested in directly quoting his non-Western influences, but instead allowed this non-Western aesthetic to generally influence his own musical work, for example, by frequently using quiet, unresolved dissonances, coupled with the damper pedal, to emulate the \"shimmering\" effect created by a gamelan ensemble. American composer Philip Glass was not only influenced by the eminent French composition teacher Nadia Boulanger, but also by the Indian musicians Ravi Shankar and Alla Rakha, His distinctive style arose from his work with Shankar and Rakha and their perception of rhythm in Indian music as being entirely additive.\nIn the latter half of the 20th century the canon expanded to cover the so-called Early music of the pre-classical period, and Baroque music by composers other than Bach and George Frideric Handel, including Antonio Vivaldi, Claudio Monteverdi, Domenico Scarlatti, Alessandro Scarlatti, Henry Purcell, Georg Philipp Telemann, Jean-Baptiste Lully, Jean-Philippe Rameau, Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Arcangelo Corelli, Fran\u00e7ois Couperin, Heinrich Sch\u00fctz, and Dieterich Buxtehude. Earlier composers, such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Orlande de Lassus and William Byrd, have also received more attention in the last hundred years.\nThe absence of women composers from the classical canon was brought to the forefront of musicological literature in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Even though many women composers have written music in the common practice period and beyond, their works remain extremely underrepresented in concert programs, music history curriculums, and music anthologies. In particular, musicologist Marcia J Citron has examined \"the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received 'canon' of performed musical works.\" Since around 1980 the music of Hildegard von Bingen (1098\u20131179), a German Benedictine abbess, and Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho (born 1952) has begun to enter the canon. Saariaho's opera \"L'amour de loin\" has been staged in some of the world's major opera houses, including The English National Opera (2009) and in 2016 the Metropolitan Opera in New York.\nThe classical ensemble canon very rarely integrates musical instruments that are not acoustic and of western origins, it stayed apart from the wide use of electric, electronic and digital instruments that are common in today's popular music.\nVisual arts.\nThe backbone of traditional Western art history are artworks commissioned by wealthy patrons for private or public enjoyment. Much of this was religious art, mostly Roman Catholic art. The classical art of Greece and Rome has, since the Renaissance, been the fount of the Western tradition.\nGiorgio Vasari (1511\u20131574) is the originator of the artistic canon and the originator of many of the concepts it embodies. His \"Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects\" covers only artists working in Italy, with a strong pro-Florentine prejudice, and has cast a long shadow over succeeding centuries. Northern European art has arguably never quite caught up to Italy in terms of prestige, and Vasari's placing of Giotto as the founding father of \"modern\" painting has largely been retained. In painting, the rather vague term of Old master covers painters up to about the time of Goya.\nThis \"canon\" remains prominent, as indicated by the selection present in art history textbooks, as well as the prices obtained in the art trade. But there have been considerable swings in what is valued. In the 19th century the Baroque fell into great disfavour, but it was revived from around the 1920s, by which time the art of the 18th and 19th century was largely disregarded. The High Renaissance, which Vasari regarded as the greatest period, has always retained its prestige, including works by Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael, but the succeeding period of Mannerism has fallen in and out of favour.\nIn the 19th century the beginnings of academic art history, led by German universities, led to much better understanding and appreciation of medieval art, and a more nuanced understanding of classical art, including the realization that many if not most treasured masterpieces of sculpture were late Roman copies rather than Greek originals. The European tradition of art was expanded to include Byzantine art and the new discoveries of archaeology, notably Etruscan art, Celtic art and Upper Paleolithic art.\nSince the 20th century there has been an effort to re-define the discipline to be more inclusive of art made by women; vernacular creativity, especially in printed media; and an expansion to include works in the Western tradition produced outside Europe. At the same time there has been a much greater appreciation of non-Western traditions, including their place with Western art in wider global or Eurasian traditions. The decorative arts have traditionally had a much lower critical status than fine art, although often highly valued by collectors, and still tend to be given little prominence in undergraduate studies or popular coverage on television and in print.\nWomen and art.\nEnglish artist and sculptor Barbara Hepworth DBE (1903\u00a0\u2013 1975), whose work exemplifies Modernism, and in particular modern sculpture, is one of the few female artists to achieve international prominence.\nHistorical exclusion of women.\nWomen were discriminated against in terms of obtaining the training necessary to be an artist in the mainstream Western traditions. In addition, since the Renaissance the nude, more often than not female, has had a special position as subject matter. In her 1971 essay, \"Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?\", Linda Nochlin analyzes what she sees as the embedded privilege in the predominantly male Western art world and argues that women's outsider status allowed them a unique viewpoint to not only critique women's position in art, but to additionally examine the discipline's underlying assumptions about gender and ability. Nochlin's essay develops the argument that both formal and social education restricted artistic development to men, preventing women (with rare exception) from honing their talents and gaining entry into the art world.\nIn the 1970s, feminist art criticism continued this critique of the institutionalized sexism of art history, art museums, and galleries, and questioned which genres of art were deemed museum-worthy. This position is articulated by artist Judy Chicago:\n\"[I]t is crucial to understand that one of the ways in which the importance of male experience is conveyed is through the art objects that are exhibited and preserved in our museums. Whereas men experience presence in our art institutions, women experience primarily absence, except in images that do not necessarily reflect women's own sense of themselves.\"\nSources containing canonical lists.\nInternational literature.\nContemporary anthologies of renaissance literature.\nThe preface to the Blackwell anthology of \"Renaissance Literature\" from 2003 acknowledges the importance of online access to literary texts on the selection of what to include, meaning that the selection can be made on basis of functionality rather than representativity\". This anthology has made its selection based on three principles. One is \"unabashedly \"canonical\"\", meaning that Sidney, Spenser, Marlowe, Shakespeare, and Jonson have been given the space prospective users would expect. A second principle is \"non-canonical\", giving female writers such as Anne Askew, Elizabeth Cary, Emilia Lanier, Martha Moulsworth, and Lady Mary Wroth a representative selection. It also includes texts that may not be representative of the qualitatively best efforts of Renaissance literature, but of the quantitatively most numerous texts, such as homilies and erotica. A third principle has been thematic, so that the anthology aims to include texts that shed light on issues of special interest to contemporary scholars.\nThe Blackwell anthology is still firmly organised around authors, however. A different strategy has been observed by \"The Penguin Book of Renaissance Verse\" from 1992. Here the texts are organised according to topic, under the headings \"The Public World\", \"Images of Love\", \"Topographies\", \"Friends, Patrons and the Good Life\", \"Church, State and Belief\", \"Elegy and Epitaph\", \"Translation\", \"Writer, Language and Public\". It is arguable that such an approach is more suitable for the interested reader than for the student. While the two anthologies are not directly comparable, since the Blackwell anthology also includes prose and the Penguin anthology goes up to 1659, it is telling that while the larger Blackwell anthology contains work by 48 poets, seven of which are women, the Penguin anthology contains 374 poems by 109 poets, including 13 women and one poet each in Welsh, Si\u00f4n Phylip, and Irish, Eochaidh \u00d3 He\u00f3ghusa.\nGerman literature.\nBest German Novels of the Twentieth Century.\nThe Best German Novels of the Twentieth Century is a list of books compiled in 1999 by Literaturhaus M\u00fcnchen and Bertelsmann, in which 99 prominent German authors, literary critics, and scholars of German ranked the most significant German-language novels of the twentieth century. The group brought together 23 experts from each of the three categories. Each was allowed to name three books as having been the most important of the century. Cited by the group were five titles by both Franz Kafka and Arno Schmidt, four by Robert Walser, and three by Thomas Mann, Hermann Broch, Anna Seghers, and Joseph Roth.\n, edited by Marcel Reich-Ranicki, is a large anthology of exemplary works of German literature.\nFrench literature.\nSee key texts of French literature\nCanon of Dutch Literature.\nThe Canon of Dutch Literature comprises a list of 1000 works of Dutch-language literature important to the cultural heritage of the Low Countries, and is published on the DBNL. Several of these works are lists themselves; such as early dictionaries, lists of songs, recipes, biographies, or encyclopedic compilations of information such as mathematical, scientific, medical, or plant reference books. Other items include early translations of literature from other countries, history books, first-hand diaries, and published correspondence. Notable original works can be found by author name.\nScandinavia.\nDanish Culture Canon.\nThe Danish Culture Canon consists of 108 works of cultural excellence in eight categories: architecture, visual arts, design and crafts, film, literature, music, performing arts, and children's culture. An initiative of Brian Mikkelsen in 2004, it was developed by a series of committees under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 2006\u20132007 as \"a collection and presentation of the greatest, most important works of Denmark's cultural heritage.\" Each category contains 12 works, although music contains 12 works of score music and 12 of popular music, and the literature section's 12th item is an anthology of 24 works.\nSweden.\nV\u00e4rldsbiblioteket (\"The World Library\") was a Swedish list of the 100 best books in the world, created in 1991 by the Swedish literary magazine \"Tidningen Boken\". The list was compiled through votes from members of the Svenska Akademien, Swedish Crime Writers' Academy, librarians, authors, and others. Approximately 30 of the books were Swedish.\nSpain.\nFor the Spanish culture, specially for the Spanish literature, during the 19th and the first third of the 20th century similar lists were created trying to define the literary canon. This canon was established mainly through teaching programs, and literary critics like Pedro Estala, Antonio Gil y Z\u00e1rate, Marcelino Men\u00e9ndez Pelayo, Ram\u00f3n Men\u00e9ndez Pidal, or Juan Bautista Bergua. In the last decades, other important critics have been contributing to the topic, among them, Fernando L\u00e1zaro Carreter, Jos\u00e9 Manuel Blecua Perdices, Francisco Rico, and Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mainer.\nOther Spanish languages have also their own literary canons. A good introduction to the Catalan literary canon is \"La invenci\u00f3 de la tradici\u00f3 liter\u00e0ria\" by Manel Oll\u00e9, from the Open University of Catalonia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32927", "revid": "34662868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32927", "title": "World War II", "text": "1939\u20131945 global conflict\nWorld War\u00a0II or the Second World War (1 September 1939 \u2013 2 September 1945) was a global conflict between two coalitions: the Allies and the Axis powers. Nearly all of the world's countries participated, with many nations mobilising all resources in pursuit of total war. Tanks and aircraft played major roles, enabling the strategic bombing of cities and delivery of the first and only nuclear weapons ever used in war. World War II is the deadliest conflict in history, causing the death of 70 to 85 million people, more than half of whom were civilians. Millions died in genocides, including the Holocaust, and by massacres, starvation, and disease. After the Allied victory, Germany, Austria, Japan, and Korea were occupied, and German and Japanese leaders were put on trial for war crimes.\nThe causes of World War II included unresolved tensions in the aftermath of World War I, the rise of fascism in Europe and militarism in Japan. Key events preceding the war included Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the Spanish Civil War, the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937, and Germany's annexations of Austria and the Sudetenland. World War\u00a0II is generally considered to have begun on 1 September 1939, when Nazi Germany, under Adolf Hitler, invaded Poland, after which the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany. Poland was divided between Germany and the Soviet Union under the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. In 1940, the Soviet Union annexed the Baltic states and parts of Finland and Romania. After the fall of France in June 1940, the war continued mainly between Germany, now assisted by Fascist Italy, and the British Empire, with fighting in the Balkans, Mediterranean, and Middle East, the aerial Battle of Britain and the Blitz, and the naval Battle of the Atlantic. Through campaigns and treaties, Germany gained control of much of continental Europe and formed the Axis alliance with Italy, Japan, and other countries. In June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union, opening the Eastern Front and initially making large territorial gains.\nIn December 1941, Japan attacked American and British territories in Asia and the Pacific, including at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, leading the United States to enter the war against Japan and Germany. Japan conquered much of coastal China and Southeast Asia, but its advances in the Pacific were halted in June 1942 at the Battle of Midway. In early 1943, Axis forces were defeated in North Africa and at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union, and that year their continued defeats on the Eastern Front, an Allied invasion of Sicily and mainland Italy that resulted in the fall of Fascist Italy; and Allied offensives in the Pacific forced them into retreat on all fronts. In 1944, the Western Allies invaded France at Normandy, as the Soviet Union recaptured its pre-war territory and the US crippled Japan's navy and captured key Pacific islands. The war in Europe concluded with the liberation of German-occupied territories; invasions of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, which culminated in the fall of Berlin to Soviet troops; and Germany's unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945. On 6 and 9 August, the US dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. Faced with an imminent Allied invasion, the prospect of further atomic bombings, and a Soviet declaration of war and invasion of Manchuria, Japan announced its unconditional surrender on 15 August, and signed a surrender document on 2 September 1945.\nWorld War\u00a0II transformed the political, economic, and social structures of the world, and established the foundation of international relations for the rest of the 20th century and into the 21st century. The United Nations was created to foster international cooperation and prevent future conflicts, with the victorious great powers\u2014China, France, the Soviet Union, the UK, and the US\u2014becoming the permanent members of its security council. The Soviet Union and the US emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the half-century Cold War. In the wake of Europe's devastation, the influence of its great powers waned, triggering the decolonisation of Africa and of Asia. Many countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion.\nStart and end dates.\nMost historians agree that World War II began with the German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 and the United Kingdom and France's declaration of war on Germany two days later. Dates for the beginning of the Pacific War include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937, or the earlier Japanese invasion of Manchuria, on 19 September 1931. Others follow the British historian A. J. P. Taylor, who stated that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously, and the two wars became World War II in 1941. Other proposed starting dates for World War\u00a0II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935. The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World WarII as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939. Others view the Spanish Civil War as the start or prelude to World War II.\nThe exact date of the war's end is also not universally agreed upon. It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 15 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than with the formal surrender of Japan on 2 September 1945, which officially ended the war in Asia. A peace treaty between Japan and the Allies was signed in 1951. A 1990 treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place. No formal peace treaty between Japan and the Soviet Union was ever signed, although the state of war between the two countries was terminated by the Soviet\u2013Japanese Joint Declaration of 1956, which also restored full diplomatic relations between them.\nBackground.\nAftermath of World War I.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWorld War I had radically altered the political European map with the defeat of the Central Powers\u2014including Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire\u2014and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia, which led to the founding of the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, the victorious Allies of World War I, such as France, Belgium, Italy, Romania, and Greece, gained territory, and new nation-states were created out of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian Empires (Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Turkey).\nTo prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was established in 1920 by the Paris Peace Conference. The organisation's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military, and naval disarmament, as well as settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.\nDespite strong pacifist sentiment after World WarI, irredentist and revanchist nationalism had emerged in several European states. These sentiments were especially pronounced in Germany due to the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.\nGermany and Italy.\nThe German Empire was dissolved in the German revolution of 1918\u20131919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created. The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the political right and left. Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains; however, Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by the United Kingdom and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled in the peace settlement. From 1922 to 1925, the fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing, and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, promising the creation of a \"New Roman Empire\".\nAdolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the chancellor of Germany in 1933 when President Paul von Hindenburg and the Reichstag appointed him. Following Hindenburg's death in 1934, Hitler proclaimed himself \"F\u00fchrer\" of Germany and abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign. France, seeking to secure its alliance with Italy, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession. The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany, and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.\nEuropean treaties.\nThe United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front in April 1935 in order to contain Germany, a key step towards military globalisation; however, that June, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions. The Soviet Union, concerned by Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of Eastern Europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France. Before taking effect, though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless. The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year.\nHitler defied the Versailles and Locarno Treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936, encountering little opposition due to the policy of appeasement. In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome\u2013Berlin Axis. A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy joined the following year.\nAsia.\nThe Kuomintang party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid-1920s, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese Communist Party (CCP) allies and new regional warlords. In 1931, an increasingly militaristic Empire of Japan, which had long sought influence in China as the first step of what its government saw as the country's right to rule Asia, staged the Mukden incident as a pretext to invade Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo.\nChina appealed to the League of Nations to stop the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria. The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe, and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933. Thereafter, Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria, and Chahar and Suiyuan. After the 1936 Xi'an Incident, the Kuomintang and CCP forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan.\nPre-war events.\nItalian invasion of Ethiopia (1935).\nThe Second Italo-Ethiopian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936. The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire (also known as Abyssinia) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy (), which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea. The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (); in addition it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace. Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations, but the League did little when the former clearly violated Article X of the League's Covenant. The United Kingdom and France supported imposing sanctions on Italy for the invasion, but the sanctions were not fully enforced and failed to end the Italian invasion. Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany's goal of absorbing Austria.\nSpanish Civil War (1936\u20131939).\nWhen civil war broke out in Spain, Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels, led by General Francisco Franco. Italy supported the Nationalists to a greater extent than the Nazis: Mussolini sent more than 70,000 ground troops, 6,000 aviation personnel, and 720 aircraft to Spain. The Soviet Union supported the existing government of the Spanish Republic. More than 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists. Both Germany and the Soviet Union used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics. The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, remained officially neutral during World WarII but generally favoured the Axis. His greatest collaboration with Germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front.\nJapanese invasion of China (1937).\nIn July 1937, Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Peking after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge incident, which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China. The Soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with China to lend materiel support, effectively ending China's prior cooperation with Germany. From September to November, the Japanese attacked Taiyuan, engaged the Kuomintang Army around Xinkou, and fought Communist forces in Pingxingguan. Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but after three months of fighting, Shanghai fell. The Japanese continued to push Chinese forces back, capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937. After the fall of Nanking, tens or hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the Japanese.\nIn March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at Taierzhuang, but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by the Japanese in May. In June 1938, Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River; this manoeuvre bought time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan, but the city was taken by October. Japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of Chinese resistance that Japan had hoped to achieve; instead, the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war.\nSoviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts.\nIn the mid-to-late 1930s, Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union and Mongolia. The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin-ron, which emphasised Japan's expansion northward, was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time. This policy would prove difficult to maintain in light of the Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol in 1939, the ongoing Second Sino-Japanese War and ally Nazi Germany pursuing neutrality with the Soviets. Japan and the Soviet Union eventually signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941, and Japan adopted the doctrine of Nanshin-ron, promoted by the Navy, which took its focus southward and eventually led to war with the United States and the Western Allies.\nEuropean occupations and agreements.\nIn Europe, Germany and Italy were becoming more aggressive. In March 1938, Germany annexed Austria, again provoking little response from other European powers. Encouraged, Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population. Soon the United Kingdom and France followed the appeasement policy of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement, which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands. Soon afterwards, Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary, and Poland annexed the Trans-Olza region of Czechoslovakia.\nAlthough all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation. In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish \"war-mongers\" and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build-up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy. In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic. Hitler also delivered an ultimatum to Lithuania on 20 March 1939, forcing the concession of the Klaip\u0117da Region, formerly the German \"Memelland\".\nGreatly alarmed and with Hitler making further demands on the Free City of Danzig, the United Kingdom and France guaranteed their support for Polish independence; when Italy conquered Albania in April 1939, the same guarantee was extended to the Kingdoms of Romania and Greece. Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel. Hitler accused the United Kingdom and Poland of trying to \"encircle\" Germany and renounced the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German\u2013Polish declaration of non-aggression.\nThe situation became a crisis in late August as German troops continued to mobilise against the Polish border. On 23 August the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact with Germany, after tripartite negotiations for a military alliance between France, the United Kingdom, and Soviet Union had stalled. This pact had a secret protocol that defined German and Soviet \"spheres of influence\" (western Poland and Lithuania for Germany; eastern Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Bessarabia for the Soviet Union), and raised the question of continuing Polish independence. The pact neutralised the possibility of Soviet opposition to a campaign against Poland and assured that Germany would not have to face the prospect of a two-front war, as it had in World WarI. Immediately afterwards, Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August, but upon hearing that the United Kingdom had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland and that Italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.\nIn response to British requests for direct negotiations to avoid war, Germany made demands on Poland, which served as a pretext to worsen relations. On 29 August, Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig, and to allow a plebiscite in the Polish Corridor in which the German minority would vote on secession. The Poles refused to comply with the German demands, and on the night of 30\u201331 August in a confrontational meeting with the British ambassador Nevile Henderson, Ribbentrop declared that Germany considered its claims rejected.\nCourse of the war.\nWar breaks out in Europe (1939\u20131940).\nOn 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland after having staged several false flag border incidents as a pretext to initiate the invasion. The first German attack of the war came against the Polish defences at Westerplatte. The United Kingdom responded with an ultimatum for Germany to cease military operations, and on 3 September, after the ultimatum was ignored, Britain and France declared war on Germany. During the Phoney War period, the alliance provided no direct military support to Poland, outside of a cautious French probe into the Saarland. The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and war effort. Germany responded by ordering U-boat warfare against Allied merchant and warships, which would later escalate into the Battle of the Atlantic.\nOn 8 September, German troops reached the suburbs of Warsaw. The Polish counter-offensive to the west halted the German advance for several days, but it was outflanked and encircled by the \"Wehrmacht\". Remnants of the Polish army broke through to besieged Warsaw. On 17 September 1939, two days after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviet Union invaded Poland under the supposed pretext that the Polish state had ceased to exist. On 27 September, the Warsaw garrison surrendered to the Germans, and the last large operational unit of the Polish Army surrendered on 6October. Despite the military defeat, Poland never surrendered; instead, it formed the Polish government-in-exile and a clandestine state apparatus remained in occupied Poland. A significant part of Polish military personnel evacuated to Romania and Latvia; many of them later fought against the Axis in other theatres of the war.\nGermany annexed western Poland and occupied central Poland; the Soviet Union annexed eastern Poland. Small shares of Polish territory were transferred to Lithuania and Slovakia. On 6 October, Hitler made a public peace overture to the United Kingdom and France but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union. The proposal was rejected and Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France, which was postponed until the spring of 1940 due to bad weather.\nAfter the outbreak of war in Poland, Stalin threatened Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania with military invasion, forcing the three Baltic countries to sign pacts allowing the creation of Soviet military bases in these countries; in October 1939, significant Soviet military contingents were moved there. Finland refused to sign a similar pact and rejected ceding part of its territory to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939, and was subsequently expelled from the League of Nations for this crime of aggression. Despite overwhelming numerical superiority, Soviet military success during the Winter War was modest, and the Finno\u2013Soviet war ended in March 1940 with some Finnish concessions of territory.\nIn June 1940, the Soviet Union occupied the entire territories of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as well as the Romanian regions of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region. In August 1940, Hitler imposed the Second Vienna Award on Romania which led to the transfer of Northern Transylvania to Hungary. In September 1940, Bulgaria demanded Southern Dobruja from Romania with German and Italian support, leading to the Treaty of Craiova. The loss of one-third of Romania's 1939 territory caused a coup against King Carol II, turning Romania into a fascist dictatorship under Marshal Ion Antonescu, with a course set towards the Axis in the hopes of a German guarantee. Meanwhile, German\u2013Soviet political relations and economic co-operation gradually stalled, and both states began preparations for war.\nWestern Europe (1940\u20131941).\nIn April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off. Denmark capitulated after six hours, and despite Allied support, Norway was conquered within two months. British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the resignation of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, who was replaced by Winston Churchill on 10May 1940.\nOn the same day, Germany launched an offensive against France. To circumvent the strong Maginot Line fortifications on the Franco-German border, Germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. The Germans carried out a flanking manoeuvre through the Ardennes region, which was mistakenly perceived by the Allies as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles. By successfully implementing new \"Blitzkrieg\" tactics, the \"Wehrmacht\" rapidly advanced to the Channel and cut off the Allied forces in Belgium, trapping the bulk of the Allied armies in a cauldron on the Franco-Belgian border near Lille. The United Kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of Allied troops from the continent by early June, although they had to abandon almost all their equipment.\nOn 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom. The Germans turned south against the weakened French army, and Paris fell to them on 14June. Eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany; it was divided into German and Italian occupation zones, and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany. France kept its fleet, which the United Kingdom attacked on 3July in an attempt to prevent its seizure by Germany.\nThe air Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours. The German campaign for air superiority started in August but its failure to defeat RAF Fighter Command forced the indefinite postponement of the proposed German invasion of Britain. The German strategic bombing offensive intensified with night attacks on London and other cities in the Blitz, but largely ended in May 1941 after failing to significantly disrupt the British war effort.\nUsing newly captured French ports, the German Navy enjoyed success against an over-extended Royal Navy, using U-boats against British shipping in the Atlantic. The British Home Fleet scored a significant victory on 27May 1941 by sinking the German battleship \"Bismarck\".\nIn November 1939, the United States was assisting China and the Western Allies, and had amended the Neutrality Act to allow \"cash and carry\" purchases by the Allies. In 1940, following the German capture of Paris, the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased. In September the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases. Still, a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention in the conflict well into 1941. In December 1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless, calling for the United States to become an \"arsenal of democracy\" and promoting Lend-Lease programmes of military and humanitarian aid to support the British war effort; Lend-Lease was later extended to the other Allies, including the Soviet Union after it was invaded by Germany. The United States started strategic planning to prepare for a full-scale offensive against Germany.\nAt the end of September 1940, the Tripartite Pact formally united Japan, Italy, and Germany as the Axis powers. The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country\u2014with the exception of the Soviet Union\u2014that attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three. The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia, and Romania joined. Romania and Hungary later made major contributions to the Axis war against the Soviet Union, in Romania's case partially to recapture territory ceded to the Soviet Union.\nMediterranean (1940\u20131941).\nIn early June 1940, the Italian \"Regia Aeronautica\" attacked and besieged Malta, a British possession. From late summer to early autumn, Italy conquered British Somaliland and made an incursion into British-held Egypt. In October, Italy attacked Greece, but the attack was repulsed with heavy Italian casualties; the campaign ended within months with minor territorial changes. To assist Italy and prevent Britain from gaining a foothold, Germany prepared to invade the Balkans, which would threaten Romanian oil fields and strike against British dominance of the Mediterranean.\nIn December 1940, British Empire forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa. The offensives were successful; by early February 1941, Italy had lost control of eastern Libya, and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner. The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats, with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission after a carrier attack at Taranto, and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan.\nItalian defeats prompted Germany to deploy an expeditionary force to North Africa; at the end of March 1941, Rommel's Afrika Korps launched an offensive which drove back Commonwealth forces. In less than a month, Axis forces advanced to western Egypt and besieged the port of Tobruk.\nBy late March 1941, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact; however, the Yugoslav government was overthrown two days later by pro-British nationalists. Germany and Italy responded with simultaneous invasions of both Yugoslavia and Greece, commencing on 6 April 1941; both nations were forced to surrender within the month. The airborne invasion of the Greek island of Crete at the end of May completed the German conquest of the Balkans. Partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.\nIn the Middle East in May, Commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy-controlled Syria. Between June and July, British-led forces invaded and occupied the French possessions of Syria and Lebanon, assisted by the Free French.\nAxis attack on the Soviet Union (1941).\nWith the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations for war. With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany, and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource-rich European possessions in Southeast Asia, the two powers signed the Soviet\u2013Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941. By contrast, the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union, massing forces on the Soviet border.\nHitler believed that the United Kingdom's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany. On 31 July 1940, Hitler decided that the Soviet Union should be eliminated and aimed for the conquest of Ukraine, the Baltic states and Byelorussia. However, other senior German officials like Ribbentrop saw an opportunity to create a Euro-Asian bloc against the British Empire by inviting the Soviet Union into the Tripartite Pact. In November 1940, negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the pact. The Soviets showed some interest but asked for concessions from Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable. On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.\nOn 22 June 1941, Germany, supported by Italy and Romania, invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them; they were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary. The primary targets of this surprise offensive were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk\u2013Astrakhan line\u2014from the Caspian to the White Seas. Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate communism, generate \"Lebensraum\" (\"living space\") by dispossessing the native population, and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.\nAlthough the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war, Operation Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt strategic defence. During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel. By mid-August, however, the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre, and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad. The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made possible further advance into Crimea and industrially-developed eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov).\nThe diversion of three-quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front prompted the United Kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy. In July, the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany and in August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter, which outlined British and American goals for the post-war world. In late August the British and Soviets invaded neutral Iran to secure the Persian Corridor, Iran's oil fields, and preempt any Axis advances through Iran toward the Baku oil fields or India.\nBy October, Axis powers had achieved operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region, with only the sieges of Leningrad and Sevastopol continuing. A major offensive against Moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather, the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow, where the exhausted troops were forced to suspend the offensive. Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives: two key cities remained in Soviet hands, the Soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential. The \"blitzkrieg\" phase of the war in Europe had ended.\nBy early December, freshly mobilised reserves allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops. This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army, allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops west.\nWar breaks out in the Pacific (1941).\nFollowing the Japanese false flag Mukden incident in 1931, the Japanese shelling of the American gunboat USS \"Panay\" in 1937, and the 1937\u20131938 Nanjing Massacre, Japanese-American relations deteriorated. In 1939, the United States notified Japan that it would not be extending its trade treaty and American public opinion opposing Japanese expansionism led to a series of economic sanctions\u2014the Export Control Acts\u2014which banned US exports of chemicals, minerals and military parts to Japan, and increased economic pressure on the Japanese regime. During 1939 Japan launched its first attack against Changsha, but was repulsed by late September. Despite several offensives by both sides, by 1940 the war between China and Japan was at a stalemate. To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina in September 1940.\nChinese nationalist forces launched a large-scale counter-offensive in early 1940. In August, Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China; in retaliation, Japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists. Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation. In March, the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the nationalist Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during the Battle of Shanggao. In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.\nGerman successes in Europe prompted Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia. The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan with oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941. In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina, threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East. The United States, the United Kingdom, and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo. At the same time, Japan was planning an invasion of the Soviet Far East, intending to take advantage of the German invasion in the west, but abandoned the operation after the sanctions.\nSince early 1941, the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China. Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate. At the same time the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them. Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines (an American protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946) and warned Japan that the United States would react to Japanese attacks against any \"neighboring countries\".\nFrustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the American\u2013British\u2013Dutch sanctions, Japan prepared for war. Emperor Hirohito, after initial hesitation about Japan's chances of victory, began to favour Japan's entry into the war. As a result, Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe resigned. Hirohito refused the recommendation to appoint Prince Naruhiko Higashikuni in his place, choosing War Minister Hideki Tojo instead. On 3 November, Nagano explained in detail the plan of the attack on Pearl Harbor to the Emperor. On 5 November, Hirohito approved in imperial conference the operations plan for the war. On 20 November, the new government presented an interim proposal as its final offer. It called for the end of American aid to China and for lifting the embargo on the supply of oil and other resources to Japan. In exchange, Japan promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw its forces from southern Indochina. The American counter-proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with all Pacific powers. That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force; the Japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.\nJapan planned to seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific. The Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over-stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war. To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter, it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset. On 7 December 1941 (8 December in Asian time zones), Japan attacked British and American holdings with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific. These included an attack on the American fleets at Pearl Harbor and the Philippines, as well as invasions of Guam, Wake Island, Malaya, Thailand, and Hong Kong.\nThese attacks led the United States, United Kingdom, China, Australia, and several other states to formally declare war on Japan, whereas the Soviet Union, being heavily involved in large-scale hostilities with European Axis countries, maintained its neutrality agreement with Japan. Germany, followed by the other Axis states, declared war on the United States in solidarity with Japan, citing as justification the American attacks on German war vessels that had been ordered by Roosevelt.\nAxis advance stalls (1942\u20131943).\nOn 1 January 1942, the Allied Big Four\u2014the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom, and the United States\u2014and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations, thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter and agreeing not to sign a separate peace with the Axis powers.\nDuring 1942, Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue. All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective. The Americans favoured a straightforward, large-scale attack on Germany through France. The Soviets demanded a second front. The British argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out German strength, leading to increasing demoralisation, and bolstering resistance forces; Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign. An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour, without using large-scale armies. Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.\nAt the Casablanca Conference in early 1943, the Allies reiterated the statements issued in the 1942 Declaration and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies. The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes. Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland, and to invade France in 1944.\nPacific (1942\u20131943).\nBy the end of April 1942, Japan and its ally Thailand had almost conquered Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Singapore, and Rabaul, inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners. Despite stubborn resistance by Filipino and US forces, the Philippine Commonwealth was eventually captured in May 1942, forcing its government into exile. On 16 April, in Burma, 7,000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of Yenangyaung and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division. Japanese forces achieved naval victories in the South China Sea, Java Sea, and Indian Ocean, and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin, Australia. In January 1942, the only Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha. These easy victories over the unprepared US and European opponents left Japan overconfident, and overextended.\nIn early May 1942, Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia. The planned invasion was thwarted when an Allied task force, centred on two American fleet carriers, fought Japanese naval forces to a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea. Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska. In mid-May, Japan started the Zhejiang-Jiangxi campaign in China, with the goal of inflicting retribution on the Chinese who aided the surviving American airmen in the Doolittle Raid by destroying Chinese air bases and fighting against the Chinese 23rd and 32nd Army Groups. In early June, Japan put its operations into action, but the Americans had broken Japanese naval codes in late May and were fully aware of the plans and order of battle, and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.\nWith its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle, Japan attempted to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua. The Americans planned a counterattack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.\nBoth plans started in July, but by mid-September, the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese, and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna\u2013Gona. Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal. By the start of 1943, the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops. In Burma, Commonwealth forces mounted two operations. The first was a disastrous offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942 that forced a retreat back to India by May 1943. The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese frontlines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.\nEastern Front (1942\u20131943).\nDespite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year. In May, the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkov, and then in June 1942 launched their main summer offensive against southern Russia, to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy the Kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front. The Germans split Army Group South into two groups: Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River. The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.\nBy mid-November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting. The Soviets began their second winter counter-offensive, starting with an encirclement of German forces at Stalingrad, and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow, though the latter failed disastrously. By early February 1943, the German army had taken tremendous losses; German troops at Stalingrad had been defeated, and the front-line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive. In mid-February, after the Soviet push had tapered off, the Germans launched another attack on Kharkov, creating a salient in their front line around the Soviet city of Kursk.\nWestern Europe/Atlantic and Mediterranean (1942\u20131943).\nExploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast. By November 1941, Commonwealth forces had launched a counter-offensive in North Africa, Operation Crusader, and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made. The Germans also launched a North African offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala line by early February, followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives. Concerns that the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942. An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein. On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the failed Dieppe Raid, demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.\nIn August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta. A few months later, the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt, dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya. This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies. Hitler responded to the French colony's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France; although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces. Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia, which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943.\nIn June 1943, the British and Americans began a strategic bombing campaign against Germany with a goal to disrupt the war economy, reduce morale, and \"de-house\" the civilian population. The firebombing of Hamburg was among the first attacks in this campaign, inflicting significant casualties and considerable losses on infrastructure of this important industrial centre.\nAllies gain momentum (1943\u20131944).\nAfter the Guadalcanal campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific. In May 1943, Canadian and US forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians. Soon after, the United States, with support from Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Islander forces, began major ground, sea and air operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands. By the end of March 1944, the Allies had completed both of these objectives and had also neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands. In April, the Allies launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea.\nIn the Soviet Union, both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large offensives in central Russia. On 5 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge. Within a week, German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets' well-constructed defences, and for the first time in the war, Hitler cancelled an operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success. This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July, which, combined with previous Italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month.\nOn 12 July 1943, the Soviets launched their own counter-offensives, thereby nearly completely dispelling any chance of German victory or even stalemate in the east. The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority, giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front. The Germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther\u2013Wotan line, but the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and the Lower Dnieper Offensive.\nOn 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following Italy's armistice with the Allies and the ensuing German occupation of Italy. Germany, with the help of the fascists, responded to the armistice by disarming Italian forces that were in many places without superior orders, seizing military control of Italian areas, and creating a series of defensive lines. German special forces then rescued Mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in German-occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic, causing an Italian civil war. The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid-November.\nGerman operations in the Atlantic also suffered. By May 1943, as Allied counter-measures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign. In November 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran. The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory and the military planning for the Burma campaign, while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.\nFrom November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese awaited Allied relief as they forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition. In January 1944, the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at Anzio.\nOn 27 January 1944, Soviet troops launched a major offensive that expelled German forces from the Leningrad region, thereby ending the most lethal siege in history. The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre-war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re-establish national independence. This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region. By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops. The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and, at the cost of allowing several German divisions to retreat, Rome was captured on 4 June.\nThe Allies had mixed success in mainland Asia. In March 1944, the Japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against Allied positions in Assam, India, and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima. In May 1944, British and Indian forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma by July, and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina. The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields. By June, the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a new attack on Changsha.\nAllies close in (1944).\nOn 6 June 1944 (commonly known as D-Day), after three years of Soviet pressure, the Western Allies invaded northern France. After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy, they also attacked southern France. These landings were successful and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France. Paris was liberated on 25 August by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces, both led by General Charles de Gaulle, and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year. An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands failed. After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, but failed to cross the Roer river. In Italy, the Allied advance slowed due to the last major German defensive line.\nOn 22 June, the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus that nearly destroyed the German Army Group Centre. Soon after that, another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland. The Soviet Red Army however halted in the Praga district on the other side of the Vistula and watched passively as the Germans quelled the Warsaw Uprising initiated by the Home Army (the main faction of the Polish resistance, loyal to the non-communist government-in exile). The national uprising in Slovakia was also quelled by the Germans. The Soviet Red Army's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d'\u00e9tat in Romania and in Bulgaria, followed by those countries' shift to the Allied side.\nIn September 1944, Soviet troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of German Army Groups E and F in Greece, Albania, and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off. By this point, the communist-led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941, controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against German forces further south. In northern Serbia, the Soviet Red Army, with limited support from Bulgarian forces, assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October. A few days later, the Soviets launched a massive assault against German-occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945. Unlike impressive Soviet victories in the Balkans, bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to a Soviet-Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions, although Finland was forced to fight their German former allies.\nBy the start of July 1944, Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam, pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River while the Chinese captured Myitkyina. In September 1944, Chinese forces captured Mount Song and reopened the Burma Road. In China, the Japanese had more successes, having finally captured Changsha in mid-June and the city of Hengyang by early August. Soon after, they invaded the province of Guangxi, winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by mid-December.\nIn the Pacific, US forces continued to push back the Japanese perimeter. In mid-June 1944, they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea. These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, Hideki Tojo, and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands. In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.\nAxis collapse and Allied victory (1944\u20131945).\nOn 16 December 1944, Germany made a last attempt to split the Allies on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter-offensive in the Ardennes and along the French-German border, hoping to encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and prompt a political settlement after capturing their primary supply port at Antwerp. By 16 January 1945, this offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled. In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line. In mid-January 1945, the Red Army attacked in Poland, pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany, and overran East Prussia. On 4 February Soviet, British, and US leaders met for the Yalta Conference. They agreed on the occupation of post-war Germany, and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan.\nIn February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while the Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river. By March, the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr, encircling the German Army Group B. In early March, in an attempt to protect its last oil reserves in Hungary and retake Budapest, Germany launched its last major offensive against Soviet troops near Lake Balaton. Within two weeks, the offensive had been repulsed, the Soviets advanced to Vienna, and captured the city. In early April, Soviet troops captured K\u00f6nigsberg, while the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany capturing Hamburg and Nuremberg. American and Soviet forces met at the Elbe river on 25 April, leaving unoccupied pockets in southern Germany and around Berlin.\nSoviet troops stormed and captured Berlin in late April. In Italy, German forces surrendered on 29 April, while the Italian Social Republic capitulated two days later. On 30 April, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany.\nMajor changes in leadership occurred on both sides during this period. On 12 April, President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by his vice president, Harry S. Truman. Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April. On 30 April, Hitler committed suicide in his headquarters, and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz (as President of the Reich) and Joseph Goebbels (as Chancellor of the Reich). Goebbels also committed suicide on the following day and was replaced by Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk, in what would later be known as the Flensburg Government. Total and unconditional surrender in Europe was signed on 7and 8May, to be effective by the end of 8 May. German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May. On 23 May all remaining members of the German government were arrested by Allied forces in Flensburg. On 5 June all German political and military institutions were placed under Allied control through the Berlin Declaration.\nIn the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945. They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and recaptured Manila in March. Fighting continued on Luzon, Mindanao, and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war. Meanwhile, the United States Army Air Forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in Japan in an effort to destroy Japanese war industry and civilian morale. A devastating bombing raid on Tokyo of 9\u201310 March was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history.\nIn May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, overrunning the oilfields there. British, American, and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March, and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by 3 May. Chinese forces started a counterattack in the Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945. American naval and amphibious forces also moved towards Japan, taking Iwo Jima by March, and Okinawa by the end of June. At the same time, a naval blockade by submarines was strangling Japan's economy and drastically reducing its ability to supply overseas forces.\nOn 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany. They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany, and the American, British and Chinese governments reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of Japan, specifically stating that \"the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction\". During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.\nThe call for unconditional surrender was rejected by the Japanese government, which believed it would be capable of negotiating for more favourable surrender terms. In early August, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Between the two bombings, the Soviets, pursuant to the Yalta agreement, declared war on Japan, invaded Japanese-held Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army, which was the largest Japanese fighting force. These two events persuaded previously adamant Imperial Army leaders to accept surrender terms. The Red Army also captured the southern part of Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands. On the night of 9\u201310 August 1945, Emperor Hirohito announced his decision to accept the terms demanded by the Allies in the Potsdam Declaration. On 15 August, the Emperor communicated this decision to the Japanese people through a speech broadcast on the radio (\"Gyokuon-h\u014ds\u014d\", literally \"broadcast in the Emperor's voice\"). On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed at Tokyo Bay on the deck of the American battleship on 2 September 1945, ending the war.\nAftermath.\nThe Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany, both initially divided between western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, respectively. However, their paths soon diverged. In Germany, the western and eastern occupation zones officially ended in 1949, with the respective zones becoming separate countries, West Germany and East Germany. In Austria, however, occupation continued until 1955, when a joint settlement between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union permitted the reunification of Austria as a democratic state officially non-aligned with any political bloc (although in practice having better relations with the Western Allies). A denazification program in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals in the Nuremberg trials and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.\nGermany lost a quarter of its pre-war (1937) territory. Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland, and East Prussia was divided between Poland and the Soviet Union, followed by the expulsion to Germany of the nine million Germans from these provinces, as well as three million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia. By the 1950s, one-fifth of West Germans were refugees from the east. The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon Line, from which two million Poles were expelled. North-east Romania, parts of eastern Finland, and the Baltic states were annexed into the Soviet Union. Italy lost its monarchy, colonial empire, and some European territories.\nIn an effort to maintain world peace, the Allies formed the United Nations, which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 as a common standard for all member nations. The great powers that were the victors of the war\u2014France, China, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the United States\u2014became the permanent members of the UN's Security Council. The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.\nBesides Germany, the rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence. Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere, which led to the establishment of Communist-led regimes, with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities. As a result, East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Albania became Soviet satellite states. Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the Soviet Union. A communist uprising in Greece was put down with Anglo-American support and the country remained aligned with the West.\nPost-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact. The long period of political tensions and military competition between them\u2014the Cold War\u2014would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and number of proxy wars throughout the world.\nIn Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administered Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed South Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands. Korea, formerly under Japanese colonial rule, was divided and occupied by the Soviet Union in the North and the United States in the South between 1945 and 1948. Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948, each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea, which led ultimately to the Korean War.\nIn China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946. Communist forces prevailed and established the People's Republic of China on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949. In the Middle East, the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. While European powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.\nThe global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently. The United States emerged much richer than any other nation, leading to a baby boom, and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much greater than that of any of the other powers, and it dominated the world economy. The Allied occupational authorities pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany from 1945 to 1948. Due to international trade interdependencies, this policy led to an economic stagnation in Europe and delayed European recovery from the war for several years.\nAt the Bretton Woods Conference in July 1944, the Allied nations drew up an economic framework for the post-war world. The agreement created the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which later became part of the World Bank Group. The Bretton Woods system lasted until 1973. Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in West Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the US Marshall Plan economic aid (1948\u20131951) both directly and indirectly caused. The post-1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle. Italy also experienced an economic boom and the French economy rebounded. By contrast, the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin, and although receiving a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance, more than any other European country, it continued in relative economic decline for decades. The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increases in production in the immediate post-war era, having seized and transferred most of Germany's industrial plants and exacted war reparations from its satellite states. Japan recovered much later. China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.\nImpact.\nCasualties and war crimes.\nEstimates for the total number of casualties in the war vary, because many deaths went unrecorded. Most suggest 60\u00a0million people died, about 20 million military personnel and 40\u00a0million civilians.\nThe Soviet Union alone lost around 27\u00a0million people during the war, including 8.7\u00a0million military and 19\u00a0million civilian deaths. A quarter of the total people in the Soviet Union were wounded or killed. Germany sustained 5.3\u00a0million military losses, mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany.\nAn estimated 11 to 17\u00a0million civilians died as a direct or as an indirect result of Hitler's racist policies, including mass killing of around 6million Jews, along with Roma, homosexuals, at least 1.9\u00a0million ethnic Poles and millions of other Slavs (including Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians), and other ethnic and minority groups. Between 1941 and 1945, more than 200,000 ethnic Serbs, along with Roma and Jews, were persecuted and murdered by the Axis-aligned Croatian Usta\u0161e in Yugoslavia. Concurrently, Muslims and Croats were persecuted and killed by Serb nationalist Chetniks, with an estimated 50,000\u201368,000 victims (of which 41,000 were civilians). Also, more than 100,000 Poles were massacred by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in the Volhynia massacres, between 1943 and 1945. At the same time, about 10,000\u201315,000 Ukrainians were killed by the Polish Home Army and other Polish units, in reprisal attacks.\nIn Asia and the Pacific, the number of people killed by Japanese troops remains contested. According to R.J. Rummel, the Japanese killed between 3million and more than 10\u00a0million people, with the most probable case of almost 6,000,000 people. According to the British historian M. R. D. Foot, civilian deaths are between 10 million and 20 million, whereas Chinese military casualties (killed and wounded) are estimated to be over five million. Other estimates say that up to 30 million people, most of them civilians, were killed. The most infamous Japanese atrocity was the Nanjing Massacre, in which fifty to three hundred thousand Chinese civilians were raped and murdered. Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2.47\u00a0million casualties occurred during the Three Alls policy. General Yasuji Okamura implemented the policy in Hebei and Shandong.\nAxis forces employed biological and chemical weapons. The Imperial Japanese Army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of China (\"see Unit 731\") and in early conflicts against the Soviets. Both the Germans and the Japanese tested such weapons against civilians, and sometimes on prisoners of war.\nThe Soviet Union was responsible for the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers, and the imprisonment or execution of hundreds of thousands of political prisoners by the NKVD secret police, along with mass civilian deportations to Siberia, in the Baltic states and eastern Poland annexed by the Red Army. Soviet soldiers committed mass rapes in occupied territories, especially in Germany. The exact number of German women and girls raped by Soviet troops during the war and occupation is uncertain, but historians estimate their numbers are likely in the hundreds of thousands, and possibly as many as two million, while figures for women raped by German soldiers in the Soviet Union go as far as ten million.\nThe mass bombing of cities in Europe and Asia has often been called a war crime, although no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War\u00a0II. The USAAF bombed a total of 67 Japanese cities, killing 393,000 civilians, including the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and destroying 65% of built-up areas.\nGenocide, concentration camps, and slave labour.\nNazi Germany, under the dictatorship of Adolf Hitler, was responsible for murdering about 6million Jews in what is now known as the Holocaust. They also murdered an additional 4million others who were deemed \"unworthy of life\" (including the disabled and mentally ill, Soviet prisoners of war, Romani, homosexuals, Freemasons, and Jehovah's Witnesses) as part of a program of deliberate extermination, in effect becoming a \"genocidal state\". Soviet POWs were kept in especially unbearable conditions, and 3.6\u00a0million Soviet POWs out of 5.7\u00a0million died in Nazi camps during the war. In addition to concentration camps, death camps were created in Nazi Germany to exterminate people on an industrial scale. Nazi Germany extensively used forced labourers; about 12\u00a0million Europeans from German-occupied countries were abducted and used as a slave work force in German industry, agriculture and war economy.\nThe Soviet Gulag became a \"de facto\" system of deadly camps during 1942\u20131943, when wartime privation and hunger caused numerous deaths of inmates, including foreign citizens of Poland and other countries occupied in 1939\u20131940 by the Soviet Union, as well as Axis POWs. By the end of the war, most Soviet POWs liberated from Nazi camps and many repatriated civilians were detained in special filtration camps where they were subjected to NKVD evaluation, and 226,127 were sent to the Gulag as real or perceived Nazi collaborators.\nJapanese prisoner-of-war camps, many of which were used as labour camps, also had high death rates. The International Military Tribunal for the Far East found the death rate of Western prisoners was 27 percent (for American POWs, 37 percent), seven times that of POWs under the Germans and Italians. While 37,583 prisoners from the UK, 28,500 from the Netherlands, and 14,473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan, the number of Chinese released was only 56.\nAt least five million Chinese civilians from northern China and Manchukuo were enslaved between 1935 and 1941 by the East Asia Development Board, or \"K\u014dain\", for work in mines and war industries. After 1942, the number reached 10\u00a0million. In Java, between 4and 10\u00a0million \"r\u014dmusha\" (Japanese: \"manual labourers\"), were forced to work by the Japanese military. About 270,000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese-held areas in Southeast Asia, and only 52,000 were repatriated to Java.\nOccupation.\nIn Europe, occupation came under two forms. In Western, Northern, and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.5\u00a0billion reichsmarks (27.8\u00a0billion US dollars) by the end of the war; this figure does not include the plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods. Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 percent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 percent of total German income as the war went on.\nIn the East, the intended gains of \"Lebensraum\" were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders. Unlike in the West, the Nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the \"inferior people\" of Slavic descent; most German advances were thus followed by mass atrocities and war crimes. The Nazis killed an estimated 2.8\u00a0million ethnic Poles in addition to Polish-Jewish victims of the Holocaust. Although by 1942 resistance groups formed in most occupied territories, the assessments of the effectiveness of Soviet partisans and French Resistance suggests that they did not significantly hamper German operations until late 1943.\nIn Asia, Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples. Although Japanese forces were sometimes welcomed as liberators from European domination, Japanese war crimes frequently turned local public opinion against them. During Japan's initial conquest, it captured of oil (~550,000 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces; and by 1943, was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to of oil (~6.8 million tonnes), 76 percent of its 1940 output rate.\nHome fronts and production.\nIn the 1930s, Britain and the United States together controlled almost 75% of world mineral output\u2014essential for projecting military power.\nIn Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics. In 1938, the Western Allies (United Kingdom, France, Poland and the British Dominions) had a 30 percent larger population and a 30 percent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis powers (Germany and Italy); including colonies, the Allies had more than a 5:1 advantage in population and a nearly 2:1 advantage in GDP. In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan but only an 89 percent higher GDP; this reduces to three times the population and only a 38 percent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.\nThe United States produced about two-thirds of all munitions used by the Allies in World War II, including warships, transports, warplanes, artillery, tanks, trucks, and ammunition. Although the Allies' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan, they became the decisive factor by 1942, after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies and the war evolved into one of attrition. While the Allies' ability to out-produce the Axis was partly due to more access to natural resources, other factors, such as Germany and Japan's reluctance to employ women in the labour force, Allied strategic bombing, and Germany's late shift to a war economy contributed significantly. Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and had not equipped themselves to do so. To improve their production, Germany and Japan used millions of slave labourers; Germany enslaved about 12\u00a0million people, mostly from Eastern Europe, while Japan used more than 18\u00a0million people in Far East Asia.\nAdvances in technology and its application.\nAircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and ground-support, and each role developed considerably. Innovations included airlift (the capability to quickly move limited high-priority supplies, equipment, and personnel); and strategic bombing (the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy's ability to wage war). Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery, in particular the introduction of the proximity fuze. The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.\nAdvances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines. Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship (in place of the battleship). In the Atlantic, escort carriers became a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap. Carriers were also more economical than battleships due to the relatively low cost of aircraft and because they are not required to be as heavily armoured. Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War, were expected by all combatants to be important in the second. The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics. Gradually, improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh Light, Hedgehog, Squid, and homing torpedoes proved effective against German submarines.\nLand warfare changed from the static frontlines of trench warfare of World War\u00a0I, which had relied on improved artillery that outmatched the speed of both infantry and cavalry, to increased mobility and combined arms. The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon. In the late 1930s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World WarI, and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower. At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications. This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat. This, along with Germany's use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France. Many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, anti-tank guns (both towed and self-propelled), mines, short-ranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were used. Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces, and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War\u00a0I. The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG 34, and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings. The assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard post-war infantry weapon for most armed forces.\nMost major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most well-known being the German Enigma machine. Development of SIGINT (\"sig\"nals \"int\"elligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption. Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes and British Ultra, a pioneering method for decoding Enigma that benefited from information given to the United Kingdom by the Polish Cipher Bureau, which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war. Another component of military intelligence was deception, which the Allies used to great effect in operations such as Mincemeat and Bodyguard.\nOther technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the world's first programmable computers (Z3, Colossus, and ENIAC), guided missiles and modern rockets, the Manhattan Project's development of nuclear weapons, operations research, the development of artificial harbours, and oil pipelines under the English Channel. Although penicillin was discovered before the war, the development] of industrial production technology as well as the mass production and use began during the war.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32928", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32928", "title": "William Jefferson Clinton", "text": ""}
{"id": "32936", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32936", "title": "Worf, Benjamin Lee, 1897-1941", "text": ""}
{"id": "32937", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32937", "title": "Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 1897-1941", "text": ""}
{"id": "32958", "revid": "22274532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32958", "title": "With prejudice", "text": ""}
{"id": "32961", "revid": "46443173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32961", "title": "Wine", "text": "Alcoholic drink made from grapes\nWine is an alcoholic drink made from fermented grape juice. It is produced and consumed in many regions around the world, in a wide variety of styles which are influenced by different varieties of grapes, growing environments, viticulture methods, and production techniques.\nWine has been produced for thousands of years, the earliest evidence dating from c.\u20096000 BCE in present-day Georgia. Its popularity spread around the Mediterranean during Classical antiquity, and was sustained in Western Europe by winemaking monks and a secular trade for general drinking. New World wine was established by settler colonies from the 16th century onwards, and the wine trade increased dramatically up to the latter half of the 19th century, when European vineyards were largely destroyed by the invasive pest phylloxera. After the Second World War, the wine market improved dramatically as winemakers focused on quality and marketing to cater for a more discerning audience, and wine remains a popular drink in much of the world.\nWine has played an important role in religion since antiquity, and has featured prominently in the arts for centuries. It is drunk on its own and paired with food, often in social settings such as wine bars and restaurants. It is often tasted and assessed, with drinkers using a wide range of descriptors to communicate a wine's characteristics. Wine is also collected and stored, as an investment or to improve with age. Its alcohol content makes wine generally unhealthy to consume, although it may have cardioprotective benefits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe earliest known traces of wine were found near Tbilisi, Georgia (c.\u20096000 BCE). The earliest known winery, from c.\u20094100 BCE, is the Areni-1 winery in Armenia. In Italy, the oldest traces of wine date back to the 4th millennium BC, these are the oldest traces of the Mediterranean basin. The subsequent spread of wine culture around the Mediterranean was probably due to the influence of the Phoenicians (from c.\u20091000 BCE) and Greeks (from c.\u2009600 BCE). The Phoenicians exported the wines of Byblos, which were known for their quality into Roman times. Industrialized production of wine in ancient Greece spread across the Italian peninsula and to southern Gaul. The ancient Romans further increased the scale of wine production and trade networks, especially in Gaul around the time of the Gallic Wars.\nIn medieval Europe, monks grew grapes and made wine for the Eucharist. Monasteries expanded their land holdings over time and established vineyards in many of today's most successful wine regions. Bordeaux was a notable exception, being a purely commercial enterprise serving the Duchy of Aquitaine and by association Britain between the 12th and 15th centuries.\npx; overflow: hidden;\"&gt;\npx; left: -px; width: px\"&gt;\n Grape harvesting at Ch\u00e2teau de Saumur, depicted in (c.\u20091416)\nEuropean wine grape traditions were incorporated into New World wine, with colonists planting vineyards in order to celebrate the Eucharist. Vineyards were established in Mexico by 1530, Peru by the 1550s and Chile shortly afterwards. The European settlement of South Africa and subsequent trade involving the Dutch East India Company led to the planting of vines in 1655. Jesuit Missionaries managed to grow vines in California in the 1670s, and plantings were later established in Los Angeles in the 1820s and Napa and Sonoma in the 1850s. Arthur Phillip introduced vines to Australia in 1788, and viticulture was widely practised by the 1850s. The Australian missionary Samuel Marsden introduced vines to New Zealand in 1819.\nThe Great French Wine Blight began in the latter half of the 19th century, caused by an infestation of the aphid phylloxera brought over from America, whose louse stage feeds on vine roots and eventually kills the plant. Almost every vine in Europe needed to be replaced, by necessity grafted onto American rootstock which is naturally resistant to the pest. This practise continues to this day, with the exception of a small number of phylloxera-free wine regions such as South Australia.\nThe subsequent decades saw further issues impact the wine trade, with the rise of prohibitionism, political upheaval and two world wars, and economic depression and protectionism. The co-operative movement gained traction with winemakers during the interwar period, and the was established in 1947 to oversee the administration of France's appellation laws, the first to create comprehensive restrictions on grape varieties, maximum yields, alcoholic strength and vinification techniques. After the Second World War, the wine market improved; all major producing countries adopted appellation laws, which increased consumer confidence, and winemakers focused on quality and marketing as consumers became more discerning and wealthy. New World wines, previously dominated by a few large producers, began to fill a niche in the market, with small producers meeting the demand for high quality small-batch artisanal wines. A consumer culture has emerged, supporting wine-related publications, wine tourism, paraphernalia such as preservation devices and storage solutions, and educational courses.\nProduction.\nStyles.\nThe term \"wine\" typically refers to a drink made from fermented grape juice; drinks from other fruits are generically called fruit wine. It does not include drinks made from starches (e.g. beer), honey (mead), apples (cider), pears (perry), or a liquid which is subsequently distilled to make liquor. Most fruits other than grapes lack sufficient fermentable sugars, are overly acidic, and do not have enough nutrients for yeast, necessitating winemaker intervention. They do not typically improve with age, and last less than a year after bottling. Fruit wines are particularly popular in North America and Scandinavia.\nThe sweetness of wine is determined by the amount of residual sugar left after fermentation. Dessert wines have a high level of residual sugar remaining after fermentation. There are several ways of making sweet wines, such as the use of grapes affected by noble rot (e.g. Sauternes), exposed to freezing temperatures (e.g. icewine), or dried (e.g. Vin Santo).\nSparkling wines are effervescent, and can be any color, although they are usually white. They generally undergo secondary fermentation to create carbon dioxide, which remains dissolved in the wine under pressure in a sealed container. Two common methods of accomplishing this are the traditional method, used for Cava, Champagne, and more expensive sparkling wines, and the Charmat method, used for Prosecco, Asti, and less expensive wines. A hybrid \"transfer method\" is also used, yielding intermediate results, and simple addition of carbon dioxide is used in the cheapest of wines.\nThe type of grape used and the amount of skin contact while the juice is being extracted determines the color of the wine. \nViticulture.\nWine is usually made from one or more varieties of the European species \"Vitis vinifera\", such as Chardonnay and Cabernet Sauvignon. Most \"Vitis vinifera\" vines have been grafted onto North American species' rootstock, a common practice due to their resistance to phylloxera, a root louse that eventually kills the vine.\nIn the context of wine production, is a concept that encompasses the growing environment of the vine, including elevation and slope of the vineyard, type and chemistry of soil, and climatic and seasonal conditions. The range of possible combinations of these factors can result in great differences in the characteristics and quality of the resultant wine.\nWine grapes grow mainly between 30 and 50 degrees latitude north and south of the equator, although the effects of climate change and advances in viticulture are increasing the area under vine elsewhere. The world's southernmost vineyard is in Sarmiento, Argentina, near the 46th parallel south. The northernmost wine region is Okanagan Valley which reaches up to the 50th parallel north.\nVinification.\nThere are a number of different ways of making wine in a modern winery, each decision affecting the final outcome. The first step is harvesting the grapes, the timing of which depends on sugar and acid levels, any diseases affecting the crop, and the weather, among other factors. Grapes are harvested by hand or machine, sorted to select those of sufficient quality, typically destemmed, and then crushed to release the juice. The liquid may macerate for a few hours before being pressed and clarified.\nThe liquid is then transferred to a container for fermentation, which is typically made of stainless steel, wood or concrete, and either open or closed. Yeast is naturally present on grape skins, but most producers choose to use a specific strain for their predictable behaviour, allowing them to control the flavors produced. The yeast consumes the sugars and converts them into alcohol, heat, and carbon dioxide. For red wines, winemakers may choose to encourage the extraction of tannins and flavor from the grape skins by agitating the mixture. If permitted by law, the winemaker may include additives such as sugar, to increase the alcohol content (chaptalization), or adjust the acid levels. Some wines undergo a secondary, malolactic fermentation, in which the harsher malic acid is converted into lactic acid by bacteria. Finally the wine may be filtered to remove microbes and yeast, and sulfites may be added as a preservative.\nContainers.\nMost wines are sold in glass bottles, traditionally sealed with a cork stopper. The standard volume of wine bottle is 75cl, although they can range from 18.7cl to 18 liters. The bottles used for sparkling wine must be thick to withstand the pressure of the gas behind the cork, which can be up to .\nMost cork for wine bottles comes from Alentejo, but a decline in quality in the late 20th century and an increase in demand spurred development of alternatives. An increasing number of wine producers use alternative closures such as screwcaps and synthetic \"corks\". Although alternative closures reduce the risk of cork taint, they have been blamed for causing excessive reduction.\nOther containers include plastic bags within cardboard boxes (box or bag-in-box wines); aluminium cans; and stainless steel kegs (wine on tap).\nProducing countries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nRegulations govern the classification and sale of wine in many regions of the world. When one variety of grape is predominantly used, the wine may be marketed as a \"varietal\" as opposed to a \"blended\" wine. Similarly, in order to state a vintage, a percentage of the grapes must have been harvested in the declared year.\nEuropean classifications.\nEuropean wines tend to be classified by region (e.g. Bordeaux, Rioja and Chianti), with concomitant restrictions on grape varieties, yields and vinification methods.\nSince 2009, wine from the European Union has been classified under the geographical indicators \"protected geographical indication\" (PGI) and \"protected designation of origin\" (PDO), which protect product names in order to promote the products of a specific area and the methods used. National regulations correspond to these designations and subdivide them, such as in Germany's and, Italy's , and the French system of . \nThe classification of Swiss wine was historically complex due to its system of federalism. It generally follows EU regulations to simplify exporting, although wine sold domestically does not need to. English wine follows rules for PGI and PDO products similar to the EU.\nOutside Europe.\nNew World wine classifications are generally limited to indications of geographical areas, such as in the American Viticultural Area and Australian Wine Geographical Indications systems. Australia also relies on awarding individual wines at prominent wine competitions, as well as in the influential publication \"Langton's Classification of Australian Wine\".\nSome producers have created voluntary schemes to allow producers to indicate adherence to a stricter set of criteria than required by law, such as Appellation Marlborough Wine in New Zealand and Meritage in the USA. Overall, however, New World countries avoid rigid classification systems, allowing for more flexibility and experimentation.\nVintages.\nWine indicating a vintage contains the juice of grapes harvested that year, with the exception of picked in early January, which is dated the previous year. Most of a vintage's characteristics are a result of the weather experienced by the vines during their growth cycle; the interaction between weather, grape varieties and leads to different areas thriving under different conditions. In most of Europe, good vintages correlate with years of plenty of sunshine and average-to-warm temperatures, whereas bad vintages almost always occur in cold and/or wet years with little sunshine. In warmer climates, good vintages usually have average-to-cool temperatures. Even within a single area, however, aspects such as the soil type and depth can lead to different results, as can the variety of grape being grown, as different varieties tolerate different types of weather. Therefore vintages are rarely uniformly \"good\" or \"bad\" even within a small area.\nFor consistency, non-vintage wines can be blended from more than one vintage, which helps winemakers maintain a consistent flavor profile. This is common for Champagne, Port, Sherry and Madeira.\nForgery and manipulation.\nWine fraud can take several forms, such as mixing a wine with a cheaper one to increase profits, surreptitiously adulterating it with additives, or passing it off as a more expensive wine by relabeling it. Such instances of fraud have a history dating back to Ancient Greece, but wine fraud has become less common overall since the late 19th century as legal frameworks and appellation systems have become stricter and more widespread. Nevertheless, the increase of the value of fine wines since the 1970s has led to a corresponding increase in relabeling fraud.\nConsumption.\nServing.\nDecanting involves pouring the wine into an intermediate container before serving it in a glass, which allows the removal of undesirable sediments that may have formed in the wine. Sediment is more common in older bottles. Aeration in a decanter may benefit younger wines by \"opening them up\", releasing more flavor, but aerating older wines can oxidize them.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nServe tannic red wines relatively warm, \nServe complex dry white wines relatively warm, \nServe soft, lighter red wines for refreshment at \nCool sweet, sparkling, flabby white and ros\u00e9 wines, and those with any off-odour, at\n\u00c9mile Peynaud, cited in \"The Oxford Companion to Wine\"\nAs a standard rule, red wines are served at what would historically have been \"room temperature\" (now, with modern heating and insulation, this would be considered the temperature of a cool room), whites chilled, and sparkling and sweeter whites even cooler. Volatile flavor compounds evaporate more easily at higher temperatures, so warmth increases the aromatic intensity. However, alcohol begins to evaporate noticeably over , and the carbon dioxide in sparkling wines is released too quickly at temperatures of about . The palate is more sensitive to sweetness at higher temperatures, so when the sweetness is not balanced by acidity a wine should be served cooler. Cooler temperatures suppress aroma, and therefore faults detectable on the nose, but increase sensitivity to tannins and bitterness.\nTasting.\nWine tasting is the sensory examination and evaluation of wine, allowing the consumer to identify faults and appreciate the product. Tasting takes place in many different settings, from casual social engagements to blind tasting examinations. Tasting a wine typically involves assessing its appearance, smell, and taste. \nWhen judging a wine's appearance, faults can be apparent due to cloudiness or unexpected effervescence. The color of the wine may indicate its age, with red wines becoming paler and white wines becoming darker, although color is also influenced by the grapes used. \"Legs\" or \"tears\"\u00a0\u2013 lines formed on the glass after swirling\u00a0\u2013 indicate high alcohol content or sweetness.\nA wine's \"nose\" (aroma) may range from neutral to pungent, and informs most of the experience of tasting a wine. Tasters often use a wide range of descriptors to compare wine aromas to other things, from fruits and vegetables such as pineapple and asparagus to non-consumables such as compost heaps and leather. The origin of these scents may be the grapes used, or the fermentation or maturation process. When the nose includes an undesirable scent, this may indicate a fault.\nOn the palate the taster experiences the mouthfeel of the wine, including its sweetness, acidity, bitterness, tannins, and alcohol, as well as saltiness in the case of sherry. Once the wine is swallowed or spat out, the length of time the flavours remain detectable is an indicator of quality.\nGlobal popularity.\nThe total global consumption of wine was in decline in the early 2010s, primarily because the French and Italians were drinking considerably less. , however, this trend appears to be reversing due to an increase in popularity with younger Americans and the Chinese. The 2024 global market was estimated at US$515.1 billion, with a projected compound annual growth rate of 7.1% between 2025 and 2030. Trends include a growing demand for organic wine, and for higher-quality products which justify a higher price point.\nCulinary uses.\nWine is important in cuisine; it can be used in preparation and tenderizing, as well as a flavor agent in marinades , stocks, stews (e.g. , beef bourguignon), and sauces (e.g. in wine sauces). Many desserts also contain wine, such as zabaione and trifle. Ethanol evaporates at , so when wine is heated past this point it likely loses much of its alcohol content, and its acidity and sugars become more prominent. The necessary quality of cooking wine is a matter of debate, but faulty wine is not appropriate for culinary use, and the range of flavor compounds in a fine wine do not survive heating.\nHealth effects.\nSome studies have shown an association between moderate wine consumption and a decrease in cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. However, alcohol consumption is also associated with an increased risk of a number of other health conditions, such as cancer.\nThe stilbene resveratrol has shown cardioprotective attributes in humans. Grape skins naturally produce resveratrol in response to fungal infection, including exposure to yeast during fermentation. Nevertheless, the potential harms of regular alcohol consumption are considered to outweigh any such benefits. \nResearch by Pesticide Action Network found that European wines contain large amounts of PFAS (\"forever chemicals\"), particularly TFA, which have long-term negative health consequences.\nStorage.\nMany wines improve with age; conversely, wines can reduce in quality over time by suboptimal storage conditions, such as being exposed to strong light and heat. Optimal conditions are provided by wine cellars and wine caves, as well as temperature-controlled cabinets.\nThe ideal temperature for wine storage is with a humidity of 65\u201370%. Lower humidity levels and temperature fluctuations can dry out or stress a cork over time, allowing oxygen to enter the bottle, which reduces the wine's quality through oxidation. Wines with corks are typically stored horizontally to help keep the cork moist, but this is not necessary for screwcaps.\nIn society.\nCollecting.\nInvestment by buying bottles and cases of the most desirable wines became especially popular during the early 21st century, due to an increase in the global popularity of wine as well as low interest rates driving demand for alternatives which may yield higher returns. Bordeaux is especially popular for investment, due to its fame, high volume of output, longevity, and relatively simple naming system. Burgundy is also popular, with the 2016 Roman\u00e9e-Conti fetching \u00a33,250 per bottle, as well as Italian wines such as Barolo, Barbaresco, and those of Tuscany.\nWines may also be bought and then aged for future consumption. Most wine is intended to be drunk within a year of bottling, but top-quality wines are usually sold long before they reach their optimal drinking window, with flavors developing in the bottle over many years. Estimating the optimal time to consume a wine is impossible to do accurately, partly because it is only clear that the ideal time has passed when the quality starts to decline, but also because bottle variation and differences in storage create differences even between wines of the same vintage and batch.\nSocial consumption.\nPeople drink wine for a number of reasons, including to aid socialization, to pair with food, and simply as a sensory experience. Wine is increasingly viewed as a \"lifestyle\" product, with a concomitant interest in associated activities such as wine tourism. Producers have used an increased interest in the Mediterranean diet, with wine as one of its constituent parts, to drive sales; in continental western Europe, wine is considered an everyday pleasure.\nIn London, wine bars date from the 19th century, and they became popular in the 1970s in France, and the 1980s in London and New York City. They have experienced a resurgence in more recent years, and in Britain are often based on European caf\u00e9s.\nSommeliers have become increasingly prominent in fine dining establishments as in-house experts, especially for wine and food pairing, with their tastes influencing the wider market as well. As consumer knowledge has improved, and with the popularity of tasting menus and experimental dishes which are difficult to pair, their public image may have become more important than their traditional role of recommending a wine to drink with a meal.\nIn the arts.\nWine connoisseurship began to flourish in the late Middle Ages and into the Renaissance, and comparisons between wines were written in verse, with examples such as \"Battle of the Wines\" by Henri d'Andeli and by Giovanni Battista Scarlino. Biblical scenes which feature wine, such as the Last Supper, Wedding at Cana, Noah's drunkenness, and the Parable of the Prodigal Son, were popular with painters. Later Renaissance poets and artists would also depict the figure of Bacchus, such as in \"Parthenopeus\" by Giovanni Pontano (c.\u20091450), which refers to him \"the nurse of love\". In northern Europe, wine served to represent folly or gluttony, as in \"Allegory of Gluttony and Lust\" by Hieronymus Bosch.\nThis moralizing perspective became common in 17th century verse, incorporated into a theme of in which the vice of drinking leads imbibers to the grave. Wine negatively affects several Shakespeare characters, such as Cassio in \"Othello\" and the Duke of Clarence in \"Richard III\", and the works of John Milton contain several negative references to wine. Drinking songs, extant since antiquity, flourished in England during this period, with traveling balladeers using alcohol as inspiration as they composed and performed in the increasing number of alehouses. The depiction of the \"Temptation of St Anthony\" by David Ryckaert III shows the saint being tempted primarily by wine, with music also featuring as a prominent temptation.\nIn the 19th century, avant-garde paintings inspired by everyday life naturally featured wine, often as the catalyst for overindulgence and drunkenness. An example of this is Manet's 1882 painting \"A Bar at the Folies-Berg\u00e8re\", which depicts a bar and crowd at a music hall, the bar replete with Champagne. Classically-inspired scenes such as the bacchanalia continued to feature in 20th century artworks by artists such as Andr\u00e9 Derain and Pablo Picasso, tending to depict wine consumption in a more positive light.\nThere are hundreds of examples of poetry from the 19th and 20th centuries featuring wine, notably \"Don Juan\" by Lord Byron, which \"recall[s] the classical \"carpe diem\" philosophy of Theognis and Horace\". Byron in \"Don Juan\" and his contemporary John Keats in the 1817 poem \"Give me women, wine and snuff\" play with the centuries-old phrase \"wine, women and song\", which links wine to other hedonistic pleasures in a hendiatris. The phrase in its original German was also used for the title of the waltz \"Wein, Weib und Gesang\" by Johann Strauss II in 1869. Both \"Villanelle of the Poet's Road\" by Ernest Christopher Dowson (1899) and \"A Drinking Song\" by Yeats (1910) combine this hedonistic attitude with a somber \"memento mori\" theme. \nWine features in many 21st century songs and films, and acts as the central topic of the 2004 film \"Sideways\", whose popularity had a measurable effect on wine sales in the US. Research has demonstrated that music can enhance the experience of drinking wine, an example of crossmodal perception, and Champagne producer Krug provides pairing suggestions for music and its wines.\nIn religion.\nAncient religions.\nDionysus, the Ancient Greek god of wine, is attested from around 1200BCE, with a distinct personality becoming apparent by the eighth century BCE. Festivals in his name took place in wine-producing regions across Greece and Asia Minor in autumn or early spring, respectively when grapes were harvested or wine was released. He was one of the most frequently represented figures in classical art and literature.\nBacchus was the incarnation of Dionysus in the Roman pantheon. It is unclear when his cult gained popularity, but in 186BCE the Senate forbade rites in his honor in the decree . He features on many Roman sarcophagi, appearing to represent \"an agent of deliverance from earthly concerns\", in a similar way to how the Greeks viewed him.\nModern religions.\nWine forms an integral part of Jewish laws and traditions. The Derekh Eretz Rabbah and the Tosefta detail strict rules on the drinking of wine, and excessive consumption is condemned by scripture. Nevertheless, wine is approved as a medicine in the Talmud. The \"Kiddush\" is a blessing recited over wine or grape juice to sanctify the Shabbat, and during the Passover Seder, it is a Rabbinic obligation of adults to drink four cups of wine.\nWine was drunk at the Last Supper, during which Jesus used it as a metaphor for his blood\u00a0\u2013 this forms a key part of the Eucharist and informs theological ideas on transubstantiation, being a key symbol of salvation. The centrality of wine in the Eucharist led to monks growing grapes to make wine, and monasteries became important agents in wine production during the Middle Ages.\nAlcoholic drinks, including wine, are forbidden under most interpretations of Islamic law. The Qur'an, cited as the root of this prohibition, portrays wine in various lights, including as an \"abomination\" as well as a reward (\"rivers of wine\") in Jannah. By contrast, the Hadith consistently condemns wine, although it is not explicitly prohibited.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32975", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32975", "title": "Worldcon", "text": "Annual convention for SF and fantasy\nThe World Science Fiction Convention, branded as Worldcon, is a science fiction convention and the annual convention of the World Science Fiction Society (WSFS). It has been held each year since 1939 (except for the years 1942 to 1945, during World War II). The members of each Worldcon are the members of WSFS, and vote both to select the site of the Worldcon two years later, and to select the winners of the annual Hugo Awards, which are presented at each convention.\nActivities.\nActivities and events at the convention typically include:\nAwards.\n&lt;section begin=Awards /&gt;\nThe World Science Fiction Society administers and presents the Hugo Awards, the oldest and most noteworthy award for science fiction. Selection of the recipients is by vote of the Worldcon members. Categories include novels and short fiction, artwork, dramatic presentations, and various professional and fandom activities.\nOther awards may be presented at Worldcon at the discretion of the individual convention committee. This has often included the national SF awards of the host country, such as the Japanese Seiun Awards as part of Nippon 2007, and the Prix Aurora Awards as part of Anticipation in 2009. The Astounding Award for Best New Writer and the Sidewise Award, though not sponsored by the Worldcon, are usually presented, as well as the Chesley Awards, the Prometheus Award, and others.&lt;section end=Awards /&gt;\nGuests of Honor.\nEach Worldcon committee selects a number of guests of honor (or \"GoHs\") for the convention. Typically there is an author (aka \"Writer\" or \"Pro\") and a fan guest of honor. Many conventions also have artist, editor, and science guests, and most have a toastmaster for major events, such as the opening and closing ceremonies and the Hugo award ceremony. A few conventions have had two or even three author guests.\nWhile other conventions may select guests on the basis of current popularity, Worldcons typically select guests of honor as an acknowledgement of significant lifetime contribution to the field; while these are often well-known figures, some committees choose lesser-known figures precisely because the committee feels the guest's accomplishments deserve more recognition from the community. Selection is treated by authors, fans, and others as a recognition of lifetime achievement. As such, the tradition is to award it only to those who have been making significant contributions for at least 20 years. Guests of honor generally receive travel expenses, membership, and a small \"per diem\" from the convention, but no speaking fees.\nIn order to announce guests immediately after site selection, Worldcon bid committees select one or more guests \"before\" the site selection vote. Fans consider it inappropriate for bids to compete on the basis of their chosen guests (so as to avoid having someone chosen by a losing bid feeling that fandom had voted against them personally), so bids do not reveal who their guests are until after the vote, and losing bids generally never reveal who they invited. This is usually treated with the same discretion as the Hugo Awards, where only a few people might know in advance who the guests will be.\nWorld Science Fiction Society.\nThe name \"Worldcon\" is owned by the World Science Fiction Society (WSFS), an unincorporated literary society whose purpose is to promote interest in science fiction. WSFS has no standing officers, only small standing committees, and a large membership composed of the members of the current Worldcon. Its main activities are running the selection (voting) process for the annual convention and various awards. The conventions themselves are run by non-profit, volunteer fan organizations, who bid to host the event.\nThe WSFS constitution itself is discussed and amended by the annual general meeting, known as the \"business meeting\", held at the Worldcon, usually as three morning sessions on successive days. All attending members of the Worldcon may attend, participate, and vote at the Business Meeting, although in practice only a small number of the members actually do so. The WSFS constitution includes rules for site selection, for the Hugo Awards, and for amending itself. The business meeting also empanels a number of ad hoc committees to deal with review of amendments and with certain administrative functions.\nThe only permanent (\"standing\") committee of WSFS (as opposed to the Business Meeting) is the Mark Protection Committee (MPC), which is responsible for maintaining the society's trademarks and domain names.\nSite selection.\nHistorically, most Worldcons were held in the United States; however, beginning in the later part of the 20th century an increasing number of them have been hosted in other countries. In 2017, the 75th World Science Fiction Convention (\"Worldcon 75\") was held in Helsinki, Finland; the 2018 Worldcon was held in San Jose, California, and the 2019 Worldcon was held in Dublin, Ireland. The 2020 Worldcon was scheduled to be in New Zealand; however, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it was a virtual event (accessed by internet only).\nThe first Worldcon to be held outside the US was the sixth, in 1948 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and the first outside North America was the 15th World Science Fiction Convention, in 1957 in Bayswater, London. The first held in a country where English was not the primary language was the Heicon '70, the 28th World Science Fiction Convention held in Heidelberg, West Germany. The 2007 Worldcon in Yokohama, Japan, was the first to be held in Asia. Other non-US Worldcons held in the 21st century have included: the 2003 Worldcon in Toronto, Ontario, Canada; the 2005 Worldcon, held in Glasgow, Scotland; the 2009 Worldcon, in Montreal, Quebec, Canada; the 2010 Worldcon, in Melbourne, Australia; the 2014 Worldcon, in London, United Kingdom; the 2017 Worldcon, in Helsinki, Finland; the 2023 Worldcon, in Chengdu, China; and the 2024 Worldcon, in Glasgow, Scotland. \nSites for future Worldcons are determined by voting of the Worldcon membership. Worldcons through 1970 were selected one year in advance, from 1971 through 1986 two years in advance, from 1987 to 2007, three years in advance, then from 2008 to the present, two years in advance again. For example, during the 2011 Worldcon in Reno, San Antonio was selected to host the 2013 Worldcon. The rules changes to lengthen or shorten the period were implemented by selecting two future Worldcons at the 1969 and 1984 conventions and by having the 2005 convention not select any.\nTo ensure that the Worldcon is relocated to different locations, the WSFS constitution requires that the proposed sites must all be at least away from the site of the convention at which the selection vote happens.\nWhen a Worldcon is held outside of North America, a North American Science Fiction Convention (NASFiC) may also be held within North America that same year. Since 1975, whenever a Worldcon site outside North America is selected, WSFS administers a parallel site selection process for the NASFiC, voted on by WSFS members at the Worldcon (or NASFiC if there is one) held one year prior to the prospective NASFiC. With the 2014 Worldcon being held in the United Kingdom, members at the 2013 Worldcon in San Antonio chose Detroit to be the site of the 2014 NASFiC and Spokane, Washington, as the site of the 2015 Worldcon.\nIn 2020, The 78th Worldcon was held in Wellington, New Zealand. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, organizers announced during March 2020 that it would be a \"virtual\" con with attendees and panelists using video technologies to participate.\nIn 2021, The 79th Worldcon took place in Washington, D.C. In 2022, the 80th Worldcon would be held in Chicago, Illinois. This was announced at the 2020 Worldcon, chosen by the members of the 78th Worldcon. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia was the other competing site. A group of writers and officers of the Worldcon have signed an open letter against Saudi Arabia's bid to host the 2022 World Science Fiction Convention, citing human rights abuses and discriminatory laws.\nChengdu, China hosted the 81st Worldcon in 2023. It was the second Worldcon to be held in Asia after the 65th Worldcon in Japan in 2007. Over 100 authors, including Hugo winners and Uyghur writers, signed an open letter calling for the hosting to be reconsidered due to ongoing human rights violations in the Uyghur region. The choice of location was also criticized due to the effects of the Chinese government's censorship regime and the exclusion of authors publicly critical of human rights in China such as R. F. Kuang, Xiran Jay Zhao, and Neil Gaiman.\nThe 82nd Worldcon was held in Glasgow, Scotland in 2024. The 83rd Worldcon was held in Seattle, Washington in 2025. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia reasserted its bid for 2026, but the bid was replaced by one for Cairo, Egypt; the site ultimately chosen was Anaheim, California, which was the only official bid at the time of voting. Montreal and Tel Aviv both submitted bids for 2027, but Tel Aviv later suspended their bid \"due to the situation in Israel\".\nConvention committees.\nAs WSFS itself is an unincorporated society, each Worldcon is organized by a separate committee (usually) legally incorporated in the local jurisdiction; in the United States, these are usually organized as 501(c)(3) non-profit corporations, while in the United Kingdom, they are usually operated by companies limited by guarantee. The local organizers may be standalone, one-time committees (organized to hold the one event and then disbanded afterwards), or they may be organized by an existing local group. A few groups, such as MCFI in Boston, SFSFC (San Francisco Science Fiction Conventions, Inc.) in northern California, and SCIFI (Southern California Institute for Fan Interests Inc.) in southern California are permanent corporations established to manage Worldcons (or other one-off or rotating conventions) in different years in the same geographical area.\nLike most non-media science fiction conventions, all Worldcons are managed entirely by volunteers, with no paid staff. Senior committee members typically devote hundreds of hours (not to mention thousands of dollars in travel expenses in some cases) in preparation for a particular convention. While each convention is managed separately by the local committee, an informal and self-selected group of volunteers constitute the \"Permanent Floating Worldcon Committee\" who volunteer for many Worldcons in different years; this group offers a measure of institutional continuity to otherwise disparate legal organizations.\nRecent Worldcons have had budgets running in excess of a million dollars. The main source of revenue is convention membership, but Worldcons also collect fees from exhibiting dealers and artists and advertisers in publications, and some conventions manage to attract sponsorships of as much as 5% of total income. The main expenses are facilities rental and related costs, then (if possible) membership reimbursements to program participants and volunteers, then publications, audiovisual equipment rental, and hospitality. Traditionally, all members (except for guests of honor) must pay for their membership; if the convention makes an adequate surplus after covering operating expenses, full or partial membership reimbursements are paid back to volunteers after the convention. Most Worldcons have a small surplus, which the rules of WSFS suggest be disbursed \"for the benefit of WSFS as a whole;\" typically at least half of any surplus is donated to future Worldcons, a tradition termed \"pass-along funds\".\nBecause of their size, Worldcons have two layers of management between the chairperson and the staff. \"Departments\" operate a specific convention function, while \"divisions\" coordinate the work of several departments. Department heads (sometimes called \"area heads\") have one or more deputies plus a large staff, or they may have no staff at all. Most Worldcons have between five and twelve division heads who form the convention executive group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32977", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32977", "title": "Writing", "text": "Persistent representation of language\nWriting is the act of creating a persistent representation of language. A writing system includes a particular set of symbols called a \"script\", as well as the rules by which they encode a particular spoken language. Every written language arises from a corresponding spoken language; while the use of language is universal across human societies, most spoken languages are not written.\nWriting is a cognitive and social activity involving neuropsychological and physical processes. The outcome of this activity, also called \"writing\" (or a \"text\") is a series of physically inscribed, mechanically transferred, or digitally represented symbols. Reading is the corresponding process of interpreting a written text, with the interpreter referred to as a \"reader\".\nIn general, writing systems do not constitute languages in and of themselves, but rather a means of encoding language such that it can be read by others across time and space. While not all languages use a writing system, those that do can complement and extend the capacities of spoken language by creating durable forms of language that can be transmitted across space (e.g. written correspondence) and stored over time (e.g. libraries). Writing can also impact what knowledge people acquire, since it allows humans to externalize their thinking in forms that are easier to reflect on, elaborate on, reconsider, and revise.\nTools, materials, and motivations to write.\nAny instance of writing involves a complex interaction among available tools, intentions, cultural customs, cognitive routines, genres, tacit and explicit knowledge, and the constraints and limitations of the systems used. Writing implements used to make physical inscriptions include fingers, styluses, ink brushes, pencils, pens, and many styles of lithography; writing surfaces on which inscriptions may be made include stone tablets, clay tablets, bamboo slips, papyrus, wax tablets, vellum, parchment, paper, copperplate, and slate.\nThe typewriter, as well as the digital word processor, allow individual writers to produce visually consistent text mechanically via a keyboard.\nAdvancements in natural language processing and natural language generation have resulted in software capable of producing certain forms of formulaic writing (e.g. weather forecasts and sports reporting) without the direct involvement of humans after initial configuration or, more commonly, to be used to support writing processes such as generating initial drafts, producing feedback with the help of a rubric, copy-editing, and helping translation.\nMotivations and purposes.\nHistorically, writing emerged to address the needs of societies growing in economic and social complexity. Once developed, potential applications included tracking produce and other wealth, recording history, maintaining culture, codifying knowledge through curricula as well as lists of texts deemed to contain foundational knowledge (e.g. \"The Canon of Medicine\") or artistic value (e.g. the literary canon). Aids to administration included legal codes, census records, contracts, deeds of ownership, taxation, trade agreements, and treaties. As Charles Bazerman explains, the \"marking of signs on stones, clay, paper, and now digital memories\u2014each more portable and rapidly traveling than the previous\u2014provided means for increasingly coordinated and extended action as well as memory across larger groups of people over time and space.\" Further innovations included more uniform, predictable, and widely dispersed legal systems, the distribution of accessible versions of sacred texts, and furthering practices of scientific inquiry and knowledge management, all of which were largely reliant on portable and easily reproducible forms of inscribed language. The history of writing is co-extensive with uses of writing and the elaboration of activity systems that give rise to and circulate writing.\nIndividual motivations for writing include the ability to operate beyond the limitations of one's own memory (e.g. to-do lists, recipes, reminders, logbooks, maps, directions for complicated tasks or rituals), dissemination of ideas and coordination (e.g. essays, monographs, broadsides, plans, petitions, manifestos), creativity and storytelling, maintaining kinship and other social networks, business correspondence regarding goods and services, and life writing (e.g. a diary or journal).\nThe global spread of digital communication systems such as email and social media has made writing an increasingly important feature of daily life, where these systems mix with older technologies like paper, pencils, whiteboards, printers, and copiers. Substantial amounts of everyday writing characterize most workplaces in developed countries. In many occupations (e.g. law, accounting, software design, human resources), written documentation is not only the main deliverable but also the mode of work itself. Even in occupations not typically associated with writing, routine records management has most employees writing at least some of the time.\nContemporary uses.\nSome professions are typically associated with writing, such as literary authors, journalists, and technical writers, but writing is pervasive in most modern forms of work, civic participation, household management, and leisure activities.\nBusiness and finance.\nWriting permeates everyday commerce. For example, in the course of an afternoon, a wholesaler might receive a written inquiry about the availability of a product line, then communicate with suppliers and fabricators through work orders and purchase agreements, correspond via email to affirm shipping availability with a drayage company, write an invoice, and request proof of receipt in the form of a written signature. At a larger scale, modern systems of finances, banking, and business rest on written documents\u00a0\u2013 including regulations, policies, and procedures; the creation of reports and other monitoring documents to make, evaluate, and provide accountability for decisions and operations; the creation and maintenance of records; internal written communications within departments to coordinate work; written communications that comprise work products presented to other departments and to clients; and external communications to clients and the public. Business and financial organizations also rely on many written legal documents, such as contracts, reports to government agencies, tax records, and accounting reports. Financial institutions and markets that hold, transmit, trade, insure, or regulate holdings for clients or other institutions are particularly dependent on written records (though now often in digital form) to maintain the integrity of their roles.\nGovernance and law.\nMany modern systems of government are organized and sanctified through written constitutions at the national and sometimes state or other organizational levels. Written rules and procedures typically guide the operations of the various branches, departments, and other bodies of government, which regularly produce reports and other documents as work products and to account for their actions. In addition to legislatures that draft and pass laws, these laws are administered by an executive branch, which can present further written regulations specifying the laws and how they are carried out. Governments at different levels also typically maintain written records on citizens concerning identities, life events such as births, deaths, marriages, and divorces, the granting of licenses for controlled activities, criminal charges, traffic offences, and other penalties small and large, and tax liability and payments.\nScience and scholarship.\nResearch undertaken in academic disciplines is typically published as articles in journals or within book-length monographs. Arguments, experiments, observational data, and other evidence collated in the course of research is represented in writing, and serves as the basis for later work. Data collection and drafting of manuscripts may be supported by grants, which usually require proposals establishing the value of such work and the need for funding. The data and procedures are also typically collected in lab notebooks or other preliminary files. Preprints of potential publications may also be presented at academic or disciplinary conferences or on publicly accessible web servers to gain peer feedback and build interest in the work. Prior to official publication, these documents are typically read and evaluated by peer review from appropriate experts, who determine whether the work is of sufficient value and quality to be published.\nPublication does not establish the claims or findings of work as being authoritatively true, only that they are worth the attention of other specialists. As the work appears in review articles, handbooks, textbooks, or other aggregations, and others cite it in the advancement of their own research, does it become codified as contingently reliable knowledge.\nJournalism.\nNews and news reporting are central to citizen engagement and knowledge of many spheres of activity people may be interested in about the state of their community, including the actions and integrity of their governments and government officials, economic trends, natural disasters and responses to them, international geopolitical events, including conflicts, but also sports, entertainment, books, and other leisure activities. While news and newspapers have grown rapidly from the eighteenth to the twentieth centuries, the changing economics and ability to produce and distribute news have brought about radical and rapid challenges to journalism and the consequent organization of citizen knowledge and engagement. These changes have also created challenges for journalism ethics that have been developed over the past century.\nEducation and educational institutions.\nFormal education\u00a0is the social context most strongly associated with the learning of writing, and students may carry these particular associations long after leaving school. Alongside the writing that students read (in the forms of textbooks, assigned books, and other instructional materials as well as self-selected books) students do much writing within schools at all levels, on subject exams, in essays, in taking notes, in doing homework, and in formative and summative assessments. Some of this is explicitly directed toward the learning of writing, but much is focused more on subject learning.\nWriting systems.\nWriting systems may be broadly classified according to what units of language are generally represented by its symbols:\nLogographies.\nA logography is written using logograms\u00a0\u2013 written characters which represent individual words or morphemes. Many logograms have internal structures, with components potentially representing both phonographic and ideographic (e.g. Chinese character radicals, hieroglyphic determinatives) aspects of the morpheme.\nThe main logographic system in use is Chinese characters, used primarily to write the Chinese languages and Japanese, and historically others from regions influenced by Chinese culture, such as Korean and Vietnamese. Other logographic systems include cuneiform and Maya script.\nSyllabaries.\nA syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent syllables, typically a consonant followed by a vowel, or just a vowel alone. In some scripts more complex syllables (e.g. consonant\u2013vowel\u2013consonant or consonant\u2013consonant\u2013vowel) may have dedicated glyphs. Phonetically similar syllables are not written similarly.\nSyllabaries are best suited to languages with a relatively simple syllable structure, such as Japanese. Other syllabic scripts include Linear B and the Cherokee syllabary.\nAlphabets.\nAn alphabet is a set of written symbols that represent consonants and vowels.\nAbjads.\nAlphabets that generally only have letters for consonants are called \"abjads\" or \"consonantaries\"; though optional, abjads may also use diacritical marks to specify which vowels follow each consonant. The earliest alphabets were abjads, influenced by symbols representing specific consonants that originated in Egyptian hieroglyphs. Most abjads are likewise native to the Middle East, reflecting the relatively limited variation of vowels in the morphology of the Semitic languages spoken in the region.\nAbugidas.\nIn most of the alphabets of India and Southeast Asia, vowels are indicated through diacritics or modification of the shape of the consonant. These are called \"abugidas\" or \"alphasyllabaries\". The term \"abugida\" is derived from the names of the initial letters in the Ge\u02bdez script, another prominent abugida used to write several languages in Ethiopia and Eritrea.\nHistory and origins.\nWriting first emerged in the Early Bronze Age to meet the growing economic needs of the city-states of Sumeria, located in southern Mesopotamia. During this time, the complexity of trade and administration outgrew the power of memory, with Sumerian cuneiform serving as a reliable means for recording transactions, maintaining financial accounts, and keeping historical records, among similar activities.\nCuneiform, used to write the Sumerian language, was followed relatively quickly by Egyptian hieroglyphs, with both emerging from proto-writing systems between 3400 and 3100\u00a0BC, with the earliest coherent texts from . The Indus script (), found on different types of artefacts produced by the Indus Valley Civilization on the Indian subcontinent, remains undeciphered, and whether it functioned as true writing is not agreed upon. While its origins are not visually obvious, the opportunity for Mesopotamian cultural diffusion to have introduced the concept of writing to the Indus peoples is clear.\nMesopotamia.\nIn the 1970s, archaeologist Denise Schmandt-Besserat presented a theory establishing a link between cuneiform and previously uncategorized clay \"tokens\", the oldest of which have been found in the Zagros region of Iran. Around 8000\u00a0BC, Mesopotamians began using clay tokens to count their agricultural and manufactured goods. Later they began placing these tokens inside large, hollow clay containers (bulla, or globular envelopes) which were then sealed. The quantity of tokens in each container came to be expressed by impressing, on the container's surface, one picture for each instance of the token inside. They next dispensed with the tokens, relying solely on symbols for the tokens, drawn on clay surfaces. To avoid making a picture for each instance of the same object (for example: 100 pictures of a hat to represent 100 hats), they counted the objects by using various small marks.\nCuneiform (from Latin , lit.\u2009'wedge') emerged in the context of this technology for keeping accounts. By the end of the 4th millennium\u00a0BC, the Mesopotamians were using a triangular-shaped stylus pressed into soft clay to record numbers. This system was gradually augmented with using a sharp stylus to indicate what was being counted by means of pictographs. Round and sharp styluses were gradually replaced with wedge-shaped styluses, at first only recording logograms\u00a0\u2013 with phonetic elements introduced by the 29th century\u00a0BC to represent syllables in Sumerian, resulting in a general purpose writing system.\nFrom the 26th century\u00a0BC, cuneiform was adapted to write the East Semitic Akkadian language (Assyrian and Babylonian) which had spread across southern Mesopotamia\u00a0\u2013 and then to others such as Elamite, Hattian, Hurrian and Hittite. Scripts similar in appearance to this writing system include those for Ugaritic and Old Persian. With the adoption of Aramaic as the lingua franca of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013609\u00a0BC), Old Aramaic was also adapted to Mesopotamian cuneiform. The latest cuneiform texts in Akkadian discovered thus far date from the 1st century\u00a0AD.\nEgypt.\nThe earliest known hieroglyphs (from Greek, lit.\u2009'sacred writing') are clay labels for the Predynastic ruler \"Scorpion I\", dated and recovered at Abydos (modern Umm el-Qa'ab)\u00a0\u2013 or otherwise the Narmer Palette, dated . The hieroglyphic script was logographic, with phonetic adjuncts that included an effective alphabet. The oldest deciphered sentence is attested on a seal impression from the tomb of Seth-Peribsen at Abydos, dating to the Second Dynasty (28th or 27th century\u00a0BC). Around 800 hieroglyphs were used during the Old, Middle, and New Kingdom periods (2686\u20131077\u00a0BC); by the Greco-Roman period (30\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 642\u00a0AD), more than 5,000 distinct glyphs are attested.\nWriting was important in maintaining the Egyptian empire, and literacy in the difficult system of hieroglyphs was concentrated among an educated elite of scribes serving temple, pharaonic, and military authorities.\nMesoamerica.\nOf several pre-Columbian scripts in Mesoamerica, the one that appears to have been best developed, and the only one to be deciphered, is the Maya script. The earliest inscription identified as Maya dates to the 3rd century\u00a0BC. Maya writing used around 800 distinct symbols\u00a0\u2013 mainly logograms, complemented by a set of syllabograms used for affixes, disambiguation between different readings of a logogram, or the substitution of certain logograms entirely.\nChina.\nThe earliest surviving examples of writing in China\u00a0\u2013 inscriptions on oracle bones, usually tortoise plastrons and ox scapulae which were used for divination\u00a0\u2013 date from , during the Late Shang period. A small number of bronze inscriptions from the same period have also survived.\nElamite scripts.\nThe Proto-Elamite script, in use , is attested on clay tablets found at different sites across modern-day Iran, with the majority having been excavated at Susa, an ancient city located east of the Tigris. The script is thought to have been partly logographic, to have developed from early cuneiform, and to have used more than 1,000 signs\u00a0\u2013 though its inscriptions \"have been, and will remain, highly problematic in a discussion of writing because they represent a very unclear period of literacy\".\nThe Elamite cuneiform script, used \u00a0\u2013 331\u00a0BC, was adapted from cuneiform as was used to write Akkadian. At any given point during this period, Elamite cuneiform used around 130 symbols\u00a0\u2013 with a total of 206 used across its entire lifespan, far fewer than in most other cuneiform scripts.\nAegean systems.\nPrior to the invention of the Greek alphabet during the Iron Age, Cretan hieroglyphs are attested on artefacts from Crete during the early-to-mid 2nd millennium\u00a0BC. Linear B, the writing system of the Mycenaean Greeks, was used in Knossos on Crete as well as the Greek mainland . Linear A, yet to be deciphered, was used in the Aegean Islands and the mainland .\nDevelopment of the alphabet.\nThe alphabet is only known to have been invented once in human history, by a community of Canaanite turquoise miners in the Sinai Peninsula to write West Semitic languages, \"in the context of cultural exchanges between Semitic-speaking people from the Levant and communities in Egypt\". This earliest attested form is known as the \"Proto-Sinaitic script\", and it adapted concepts and at least some of its written letterforms from Egyptian hieroglyphic writing; it adopted wholly West Semitic sound values for its letters, as opposed to adapting existing Egyptian ones. Precise dating of its origin, as well as the graphical origins of many letterforms (if any) remain unclear, and the script remains undeciphered. Around 30 crude inscriptions have been found at a mountainous Egyptian mining site known as Serabit el-Khadem, with symbols that stood for single consonant sounds rather than whole words or concepts\u00a0\u2013 the basis of an alphabetic system. It was not until between the 12th and 9th centuries\u00a0BC that use of the alphabet became widespread.\nThe Phoenician alphabet (c.\u20091050\u00a0BC) is a direct descendant of Proto-Sinaitic. Proto-Sinaitic and Phoenician were abjads which only had letters representing consonantal sounds; Phoenician was ultimately adapted into the Greek alphabet (), the first to represent vowel sounds, which it did by re-purposing unused Phoenician consonantal signs. The Cumae alphabet, a variant of the early Greek alphabet, gave rise to the Etruscan alphabet and its own descendants, such as the Latin alphabet. Other descendants from the Greek alphabet include Cyrillic, used to write languages such as Bulgarian and Russian. The Phoenician alphabet was also adapted into the Aramaic script, from which the West Asian Square Hebrew, Arabic, and South Asian Brahmic scripts are descended.\nReligious texts.\nIn the history of writing, religious texts or writing have played a special role. For example, some religious text compilations have been some of the earliest popular texts, or even the only written texts in some languages, and in some cases are still highly popular around the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33055", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33055", "title": "Winter solstice (disambiguation)", "text": "Winter solstice is an astronomical phenomenon which marks the shortest day and the longest night of the year.\nThe winter solstice may be referred to as:\nWinter solstice may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33056", "revid": "48689303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33056", "title": "Whitehorse", "text": "Capital and largest city of Yukon, Canada\nWhitehorse () is the capital of Yukon, and the largest city in Northern Canada. It was incorporated in 1950 and is located at kilometre 1426 (Historic Mile 918) on the Alaska Highway in southern Yukon. Whitehorse's downtown and Riverdale areas occupy both shores of the Yukon River, which rises in British Columbia and meets the Bering Sea in Alaska. The city was named after the White Horse Rapids for their resemblance to the mane of a white horse.\nBecause of the city's location in the Whitehorse valley and relative proximity to the Pacific Ocean, the climate tends to be milder. At this latitude, winter days are short and summer days have up to about 19 hours of daylight.\nAs of the 2021 Canadian census, the population was 28,201 within city boundaries and 31,913 in the census agglomeration. These figures represent approximately 70 and 79 percent, respectively, of the total population of Yukon.\nHistory.\nArchaeological research south of the downtown area, at a location known as Canyon City, has revealed evidence of use by First Nations for several thousand years. The surrounding area had seasonal fish camps and Frederick Schwatka, in 1883, observed the presence of a portage trail used to bypass Miles Canyon. Before the Gold Rush, several different tribes passed through the area seasonally and their territories overlapped.\nThe discovery of gold in the Klondike in August 1896, by Skookum Jim, Tagish Charlie, and George Washington Carmack, set off a major change in the historical patterns of the region. Early prospectors used the Chilkoot Pass, but by July 1897, crowds of neophyte prospectors had arrived via steamship and were camping at \"White Horse\". By June 1898, there was a bottleneck of prospectors at Canyon City, and many boats had been lost to the rapids as well as five people. Samuel Steele of the North-West Mounted Police remarked: \"why more casualties have not occurred is a mystery to me.\"\nOn their way to find gold, prospectors also found copper in the \"copper belt\" in the hills west of Whitehorse. The first copper claims were staked by Jack McIntyre on July 6, 1898, and Sam McGee on July 16, 1899. Two tram lines were built, one stretch on the east bank of the Yukon River from Canyon City to the rapids, just across from the present day downtown, and the other on the west bank of the river.\nThe White Pass and Yukon Route narrow-gauge railway linking Skagway to Whitehorse had begun construction in May 1898. By May 1899, construction had arrived at the south end of Bennett Lake. Construction began again at the north end of Bennett lake to Whitehorse. It was only in June\u2013July 1900 that construction finished the difficult Bennett Lake section itself, completing the entire route.\nBy 1901, the \"Whitehorse Star\" was already reporting on daily freight volumes. Even though traders and prospectors were all calling the city Whitehorse (White Horse), there was an attempt by the railway people to change the name to Closeleigh (British Close brothers provided funding for the railway), this was refused by William Ogilvie, the territory's Commissioner.\nOn May 23, 1905, a small fire in the barber shop of the Windsor Hotel got out of control when the fire engine ran out of water, spreading throughout the city and causing $300,000 (equivalent to $ million in 2023) in damage, though there were no deaths. Robert Service was working as a bank teller at the time and participated in suppressing the flame. The White Horse Restaurant and Inn was among the buildings destroyed, after its co-founder Frederick Trump had sold his shares and left the city.\nIn 1920, the first planes landed in Whitehorse and the first air mail was sent in November 1927. Until 1942, rail, river, and air were the only way to get to Whitehorse, but in 1942 the US military decided an interior road would be safer to transfer troops and provisions between Alaska and the US mainland and began construction of the Alaska Highway. The entire project was accomplished between March and November 1942. The Canadian portion of the highway was only returned to Canadian sovereignty after the war. The Canol pipeline was also constructed to supply oil to the north with a refinery in Whitehorse.\nIn 1950, the city was incorporated and by 1951 the population had doubled from its 1941 numbers. On April 1, 1953, the city was designated the capital of the Yukon Territory when the seat was moved from Dawson City after the construction of the Klondike Highway. On March 21, 1957, the name was officially changed from White Horse to Whitehorse.\nGeography.\nWhitehorse is located at kilometre 1,425 (Historic Mile 918) of the Alaska Highway and is framed by three nearby mountains: Grey Mountain to the east, Mount Sumanik to the northwest and Golden Horn Mountain to the south. The rapids which were the namesake of the city have disappeared under Miles Canyon and Schwatka Lake, formed by the construction of a hydroelectricity dam in 1958. Whitehorse is currently the 64th largest city in Canada by area. The city limits present a near rectangular shape orientated in a NW-SE direction.\nCityscape.\nWhitehorse Bylaw 426 (1975) restricts the operation of motor vehicles to designated roadways in certain \"Protected Areas\" to ensure maximum conservation of the environmental quality. Most are near the downtown core (downtown and Yukon river escarpments, Mt. Mac ski trails, Riverdale, Valleyview, Hillcrest, Granger, Porter Creek, and Mountainview) and one, Pineridge, is south of downtown.\nIn 1999, the city approved the Area Development Scheme (ADS) which reallocated the area previously known as \"Whitehorse Copper\" to the following uses: Country Residential, Commercial, Service Industrial, and Heavy industrial.\nRecent demands for growth have reignited urban planning debates in Whitehorse. In 1970 the Metropolitan Whitehorse development plan included park and greenbelt areas that were to be preserved to ensure high quality of life even within city limits.\nClimate.\nWhitehorse has a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfc\", Trewartha \"Eclc\") and lies in the rain shadow of the Coast Mountains, causing precipitation totals to be quite low year-round. Due to the city's location in the Whitehorse valley, the climate is milder than other comparable northern communities such as Yellowknife; however, during cold snaps it is not uncommon for temperatures to drop below . With an average annual temperature of Whitehorse is the warmest place in the Yukon. The temperature measurements for the city are taken at the airport. The Whitehorse Riverdale weather station situated at a lower elevation than the airport is also .\nAt this latitude winter days are short and summer days have just over 19 hours of daylight. Whitehorse has an average daily high of in July and average daily low of in January. The highest temperature ever recorded in Whitehorse was on 14 June 1969. The coldest temperature ever recorded was on 21 January 1906.\nWhitehorse has little precipitation, with an average annual snowfall of and of rainfall. According to the Meteorological Service of Canada, Whitehorse has the distinction of being Canada's driest city. Whitehorse is in the Cordilleran climate region, the Complex Soils of Mountain Areas soil region, the Cordilleran vegetation region, and the Boreal Cordillera ecozone.\nNeighbourhoods.\nDue to Whitehorse's unique urban development objectives and varied topography, neighbourhoods are usually separated from each other by large geographical features. In addition to the city's downtown core on the Yukon River's west bank, two subdivisions sit at the same elevation as the Yukon River \u2014 . Crossing the bridge to the east bank of the river leads to Riverdale, one of the city's oldest neighbourhoods. From Riverdale, the road climbing up Grey Mountain leads to Grey Mountain Cemetery and the local FM radio antenna.\nThe rest of Whitehorse is generally located above . Immediately after climbing \"Two Mile Hill\", looking to the north are the old residential neighbourhoods of Takhini West, Takhini North, and Takhini East, where many homes actually are originally army barracks and military officers' residences. Yukon University, Yukon Arts Centre and Whitehorse Correctional Centre are situated in Takhini. Situated further north are Range Point, Porter Creek, and Crestview, as well as Whitehorse's newest neighbourhood, Whistle Bend, where a significant amount of new residential growth is currently occurring.\nWest of downtown are Valleyview, Hillcrest (also largely constituted of old military lodgings) and the Erik Nielsen Whitehorse International Airport; and beyond the Canada Games Centre along Hamilton Boulevard are the neighbourhoods of McIntyre (designated to replace inferior lands and homes of the Kwanlin Dun First Nation (\"The Village\") previously located where Marwell adjoins a marshy area), then Ingram, Arkell, Logan, Granger, and rapidly expanding Copper Ridge.\nWhitehorse also has subdivisions designated \"Country Residential\" which are subject to different municipal bylaws and are located farther out from the downtown. They consist of the rural Whitehorse subdivisions of Hidden Valley and MacPherson at Whitehorse's northern limits; to the south: McCrae (also spelt MacRae), Wolf Creek, Wolf Creek North, Mary Lake, Cowley Creek, Spruce Hill, Pineridge and Fox Haven Estates. Also located at the south end of the city is the newly designated Mt. Sima Service Industrial Subdivision.\nConstruction of Whistle Bend, Whitehorse's newest subdivision, began in 2010 on the \"Lower Bench\" east of the Porter Creek subdivision.\nAttractions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Whitehorse had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 4,195 persons or 15.1% of the total population of Whitehorse. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were Philippines (1,325 persons or 31.6%), United Kingdom (395 persons or 9.4%), United States of America (365 persons or 8.7%), India (335 persons or 8.0%), Germany (230 persons or 5.5%), China (175 persons or 4.2%), France (95 persons or 2.3%), Netherlands (70 persons or 1.7%), South Korea (65 persons or 1.5%), and Japan (60 persons or 1.4%).\nAs of 2021, most of the residents are Canadian citizens (91.0%).\nEthnicity.\nWhitehorse's population is mostly European (66.9%), but has a significant number of Indigenous peoples (16.3%): First Nations (11.7%), Metis (3.4%), and Inuit (0.7%). There is also a moderate visible minority population (16.8%): Filipino (6.6%), South Asian (3.5%), and Chinese (1.9%) were the three largest minority groups.\nLanguage.\nAs a federal territory, the Yukon is officially bilingual in English and French. In 2011, 84.3% of the residents of Whitehorse declared English as their only mother tongue, while 4.6% reported French as their only mother tongue, and 9.7% of the population reported a non-official language as their mother tongue. According to the 2011 census the most spoken non-official language in Whitehorse was German, followed by Tagalog, Spanish, Chinese and Dutch.\nThe 2021 census shows 82.3% of Whitehorse residents declaring English as their mother tongue, 6.1% French, and 14.4% another language. The largest non-official language groups were Tagalog (3.6%), German (2% including Swiss German), and Punjabi (1.3%).\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in Whitehorse included:\nSports.\nWhitehorse has an extensive trail network within its limits, estimated at in 2007, including sections of the Trans Canada Trail. These trails are used for a variety of activities, both motorized and non-motorized.\nThe city is responsible for the maintenance of numerous sports and recreation fields including two dozen grass/sand/soil/ice sports surfaces, three ball diamonds, the Canada Games Centre Multiplex (pools, ice rinks, fieldhouse, fitness centre, walking/running track, physiotherapy), the Takhini Arena, and Mount McIntyre Recreation Centre. Private interests run Mount Sima, which contains 350m or 1,150\u00a0ft of downhill skiing in the winter and mountain biking in the summer, three golf courses, a bowling alley, and three gyms, including one with squash courts.\nThe annual 1,000 mile Yukon Quest sled dog race between Whitehorse and Fairbanks, Alaska, is considered one of the toughest in the world. The race alternates its starting and finishing points each year. The city has hosted several large sporting events including the 2007 Canada Winter Games, for which a CA$45 million sport multiplex was built; the Canadian Junior Freestyle Championships in 2006, the Arctic Winter Games (2000, 1992, 1986, 1980, 1972, 2012 and up coming location for the 2026 games), the annual International Curling Bonspiel, and the Dustball International Slowpitch Tournament. Other major sports events held by Whitehorse include:\nAlthough there are no territorial junior league teams, the business community sponsors a number of local teams of volleyball, baseball, basketball, broomball, ice hockey, soccer, ultimate disk, and squash. High school teams are very active and partake in competitions with schools in neighbouring Alaska, and a few local athletes have flourished on the Canadian sports scene. Whitehorse is also home to the Whitehorse Glacier Bears swimming club.\nGovernment.\nMunicipal.\nWhitehorse municipal elections occur every three years. The current mayor of Whitehorse is Kirk Cameron. Municipal services provided by the city of Whitehorse include: water and sewer systems, road maintenance, snow and ice control, non-recyclable waste and composting, as well as a mosquito control program.\nTerritorial.\nWhitehorse was represented by 13 of 21 MLAs in Yukon's Legislative Assembly, as per the 2024 map of Yukon electoral districts. In 2009 Yukon's electoral map was modified to give Whitehorse an extra seat, bringing its total up to 10 out of 19. The Legislative Assembly Building is located in downtown Whitehorse and elections usually take place every three to five years. The last general election was held in 2025. Whitehorse residents have three local political parties from which to choose: Yukon Liberal Party, Yukon New Democratic Party, Yukon Party.\nFederal.\nAll of Yukon consists of a single federal electoral district and therefore there is only one Member of Parliament (MP) and 65% of Yukon's voters live in Whitehorse. Residents of the Yukon have been voting federally since a byelection returned the first Yukon MP in January 1903 and, from 1984 onward, have had candidates from at least four federal political parties to choose from. In 2006, 2008 and 2011, the choices have been: Conservative, Green, Liberal, and NDP. Other parties that have contested the riding from 1984 onward include the Libertarian Party, the Rhinoceros Party, the three precursors of the Conservative Party (Reform Party, Canadian Alliance and Progressive Conservatives), the National Party (1993) and the Christian Heritage Party.\nLiberal Brendan Hanley is Yukon's MP.\nJudicial.\nAll court matters are handled in Whitehorse at the Andrew Philipsen Law Building which also houses a law library. Yukon's Territorial Court (three judges) handles most adult criminal prosecutions under the criminal code and other federal statutes. The Supreme Court of Yukon has three resident judges and nine judges from NWT and Nunavut. The Court of Appeal, made up of justices from British Columbia, Yukon, NWT and Nunavut, sits in Whitehorse only one week of the year, so most appeals are heard in Vancouver, British Columbia.\nMilitary.\nThe Canadian Armed Forces is represented in Whitehorse by Canadian Forces Detachment Yukon located in downtown Whitehorse, Regional Cadet Support Unit (North) was at Boyle Barracks (until a re-organization in 2012 amalgamated the cadet support unit into Regional Cadet Support Unit (NW) based out of Winnipeg, Manitoba) and the Canadian Rangers of the Whitehorse Patrol of 1 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group. 2685 Yukon Regiment Army Cadet Corps and 551 Whitehorse Squadron, Royal Canadian Air Cadets of the Canadian Cadet Organizations also operate in Whitehorse. All units operate as part of Canadian Forces Joint Task Force (North).\n440 Transport Squadron, and other units of the Royal Canadian Air Force, including the Snowbirds often operate and train out of Erik Nielsen Whitehorse International Airport, formerly RCAF Station Whitehorse.\nBoyle Barracks is located south of downtown Whitehorse. The facility houses Regional Cadet Support Unit (North), Whitehorse Cadet Summer Training Centre, service support elements of Joint Task Force (North), and is used by 1 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group, the Junior Canadian Rangers, and other units to conduct training. Boyle Barracks is located on the property of the unused Wolf Creek Juvenile Corrections Centre which is leased by the Department of National Defence from the Yukon Government.\nWhitehorse Cadet Summer Training Centre offers a variety of courses and activities that focus on general training, leadership, and expedition training up to the instructor level. Courses are two, three, and six weeks long and are offered throughout the summer. Personnel are drawn primarily from the territories, but many come from across Canada. The training centre also hosts members of the United Kingdom's Army Cadet Force and Combined Cadet Force.\nEducation.\nWhitehorse has several schools as part of a Yukon Government operated public school system. Except for \"\u00c9cole \u00c9milie-Tremblay\", Yukon does not have school boards. However, each school has a council composed of three to seven elected positions for two-year terms, consisting of (and elected by) citizens residing in the school's assigned area and parents of students attending the school. All teachers are employed directly by the Department of Education, and there are no tuition fees to be paid to attend elementary and secondary institutions with the exception of the Wood Street Centre School, which offers specialized experiential programs for high school students in the sciences and arts. Yukon schools follow British Columbia's school curriculum.\nElementary education (K-7).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nBroadcast.\nRadio.\nWhitehorse is also served by CIY270, a Weatheradio Canada station broadcasting at 162.400\u00a0MHz on the weather band.\nTelevision.\nLocal cable provider NorthwesTel hosts three local television channels: Community Cable 9, an advertisement slide-show channel and a public service channel.\nCBC Television operated an affiliate in Whitehorse, CFWH-TV, from 1968 to 2012. Initially served using the Frontier Coverage Package until Anik satellite broadcasts became available early in 1973; this transmitter was shut down on July 31, 2012, due to budget cuts.\nPrint.\nWhitehorse's two major English-language newspapers are the \"Whitehorse Daily Star\" (founded as a weekly in 1900, it currently published three times per week) and the \"Yukon News\" (founded as a weekly in 1960 by Ken Shortt, published five days a week from 1967 to 1999, and currently prints twice weekly). Other local newspapers include \"What's Up Yukon\" (a local free music, arts, culture, events, weekly founded in 2005) and a French-language newspaper \"L'Aurore bor\u00e9ale\" (founded in 1983).\nThe quarterly magazine \"Yukon, North of Ordinary\" started in 2007.\nInfrastructure.\nEmergency services.\nWhitehorse contracts out its police service to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, with the main police station on 4th avenue in the city centre. Whitehorse's ambulance service are run by Yukon Government's Emergency Medical Services and is staffed by full-time Primary Care Paramedics (PCP) and Advanced Care Paramedics (ACP). Whitehorse's Search and Rescue (SAR) is ensured by a partnership between the RCMP, YG's Emergency Measures Organization (EMO) and volunteer SAR teams. \nWhitehorse has its own fire service, known as City of Whitehorse Fire Department (WHFD) with two fire stations. The first, Station #1, located in the city centre at the corner of Second Avenue and Steele Street, and Station #2 (305 B Range Road) atop \"Two Mile Hill\" on the west side, with room for three trucks. It was built in 2010 to become a public safety building. The original fire hall located along on the waterfront has been preserved as a historic building and cultural centre. The Fire Department currently operates with thirty-three full-time staff and approximately ten volunteers. Both fire stations are staffed 24/7 through a rotation of four platoons of six firefighters and one dispatcher.\nWHFD is equipped and trained to respond to Motor vehicle Accidents, high and low angle rescue, confined space, and static water ice rescue. Haz-mat, swift water and urban search and rescue are not under the department's current capabilities or can only be responded to at awareness levels. All medical emergencies are responded to by Yukon Government Emergency Medical Services. All aircraft emergencies are dealt with by the Eric Nielsen Whitehorse International Airport(ENWIA) ARFF fire department with mutual aid agreement activities from WHFD. Whitehorse Fire Department is professionally represented by the IAFF and the BCPFFA.\nWhitehorse Fire Department is the largest municipal fire department in the territory and the only professional one. Though they are 13% of the total population of firefighters in the territory, WHFD protects 82% of the population, and responds to 84% of fire calls within the Yukon. WHFD falls under the authority of the Yukon Fire Marshals Office (FMO) and reports directly to it. Fire and life safety inspection throughout the City of Whitehorse are conducted by the Whitehorse Fire Department duty crews as well as designated Fire Prevention Officers under the direction of Municipal Bylaw 2000\u201301 \"Emergency Services Bylaw\" with authority from the current edition of the National Fire Code of Canada.\nWildland fire crews also operate in the summer to combat the forest fires across the territory. They will lend assistance to crews in B.C., Alberta, and the other territories as needed.\nEnergy grid.\nYukon Energy operates four conventional hydroelectric generating stations: Whitehorse Dam (40 MW), Aishihik Lake (37 MW), Mayo A (5 MW), and Mayo B (10 MW), which provide the bulk of generation for the Yukon Energy grid. An additional 39 MW of diesel generation is maintained for supplemental back-up.\nAdditionally, Yukon Energy operated two wind turbines near Whitehorse, which were decommissioned in 2018. Four new turbines are under construction and expected to begin feeding electricity into the grid during the winter of 2023/2024.\nHealth care.\nThe first \"White Horse General Hospital\" (WGH) was built in the downtown area in 1902 with a 10-bed capacity. During World War I beds increased to 30, 10 beds were added in 1943, then 20 beds in 1949, and an operating wing was added in 1951. In 1959 the hospital was rebuilt on the other bank of the Yukon River, across from its previous location, but decision making was still based in Ottawa (National Health and Welfare, Medical Services Branch). The downtown area has several private medical, dental, and optometry clinics.\nIn 1990, the Yukon Hospital Corporation (YHC) was created in order to prepare the transfer of powers regarding the hospital from the Federal Government to the Yukon Territorial Government. In April 1993 management of WGH was officially transferred to the YHC following a collaboration with the Yukon government and Council of Yukon First Nations (CYFN, then CYI). Construction of the present building lasted from 1994 through 1997. As of 2021, Whitehorse General Hospital contains 56 beds, emergency care services, and several medical imaging technologies.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nWhitehorse is served by the Erik Nielsen Whitehorse International Airport and has, as of 2022, scheduled service to Vancouver, Kelowna, Victoria, Calgary, Edmonton, Dawson City, Old Crow and Inuvik. Seasonal scheduled service is provided to Yellowknife (nonstop), Ottawa (via Yellowknife), and Toronto (via Yellowknife), as well as Frankfurt, Germany (nonstop). The airport was developed as part of the Northwest Staging Route in 1941\u201342 and has two long paved runways. A wartime-era hangar served as terminal building from about 1960, and was replaced in December 1985 with a modern terminal. Air North, a scheduled passenger and cargo airline operating Boeing 737 jetliners and ATR 42 turboprops, is based in Whitehorse. Alkan Air provides charter and medical services and also operates a flying school.\nRoads.\nSurface access to Whitehorse is provided by a network of highways, including the international Alaska Highway connecting the Yukon with Alaska, British Columbia, and Alberta highway networks.\nWhitehorse has been described as \"pearls on a string\", with its residential, industrial, and service subdivisions located along the main thoroughfares that carry traffic within city limits, with large gaps of undeveloped (often hilly) land between them. The Alaska Highway is the primary roadway, with branch roads reaching additional subdivisions. One such branch road, signed as \"Highway 1A\" and following Two Mile Hill Road, 4th Avenue, 2nd Avenue, and Robert Service Way, is the main access to downtown, Riverdale, and the Marwell Industrial Area.\nThe city road network is adequate, although it is congested during rush hours and discussions occasionally occur as to how it might better be managed, such as designating one-way streets.\nPublic transit.\nWhitehorse Transit provides bus service on weekdays from about 6:40 am to 10 pm, and on weekends and holiday to about 8 pm. For passengers who have difficulty using the transit buses, there is a Handy Bus Service.\nThere is a waterfront tram, known as the \"trolley\", which provides transport along a short rail section along the Yukon River in the Summer; it is leisure- and tourist-oriented, operated by a non-profit society, and not integrated into the municipal transit system. It runs from the Roundhouse to Rotary Peace Park, located on the south end of the city centre (the Northern stretch between Roundhouse and Spook Creek Station was included until 2018, but the City administration has removed necessary train tracks since) on a small portion of the tracks formerly belonging to White Pass and Yukon Route.\nOther than that, Whitehorse presently has no active railway service.\nThe White Pass Railway offers seasonal service between Skagway, Alaska and Carcross, south of Whitehorse.\nWater.\nThe Yukon River is essentially navigable from Whitehorse to the Bering Sea. At above sea level, the river at Whitehorse is the highest point on earth that can be reached by watercraft navigating from the sea. Currently, no passenger or freight services use the river at Whitehorse.\nSister cities.\nHistorical sister city partnerships:\nNotable people.\nNotable politicians include the first female mayor of Whitehorse, in 1975, Ione Christensen, whose family had moved to Whitehorse in 1949.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33057", "revid": "50983397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33057", "title": "White House", "text": "Residence and workplace of the US president\nThe White House is the official residence and workplace of the president of the United States. Located at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW in Washington, D.C., it has served as the residence of every U.S. president since John Adams in 1800 when the national capital was moved from Philadelphia. The White House is also a metonym for the Executive Office of the President.\nThe residence was designed by the Irish-born architect James Hoban in the Neoclassical style. Hoban modeled the building on Leinster House in Dublin, a building which today houses the Oireachtas, the Irish legislature. Constructed between 1792 and 1800, its exterior walls are Aquia Creek sandstone painted white. When Thomas Jefferson moved into the house in 1801, he and his architect Benjamin Henry Latrobe added low colonnades on each wing to conceal what then were stables and storage. In 1814, during the War of 1812, the mansion was set ablaze by British forces in the burning of Washington, destroying the interior and charring much of the exterior. Reconstruction began almost immediately, and President James Monroe moved into the partially reconstructed Executive Residence in October 1817. Exterior construction continued with the addition of the semicircular South Portico in 1824 and the North Portico in 1829.\nBecause of crowding within the executive mansion, President Theodore Roosevelt had all work offices relocated to the newly constructed West Wing in 1901. Eight years later, in 1909, President William Howard Taft expanded the West Wing and created the first Oval Office, which was eventually moved and expanded. In the Executive Residence, the third floor attic was converted to living quarters in 1927 by augmenting the existing hip roof with long shed dormers. A newly constructed East Wing was used as a reception area for social events; Jefferson's colonnades connected the new wings. The East Wing alterations were completed in 1946, creating additional office space. By 1948, the residence's load-bearing walls and wood beams were found to be close to failure. Under Harry S. Truman, the interior rooms were completely dismantled and a new internal load-bearing steel frame was constructed inside the walls. On the exterior, the Truman Balcony was added. Once the structural work was completed, the interior rooms were rebuilt.\nThe present-day White House complex includes the Executive Residence (with six stories: the Ground Floor, State Floor, Second Floor, and Third Floor, and a two-story basement), the West Wing, the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, which previously served the State Department and other departments (it now houses additional offices for the president's staff and the vice president), and Blair House, a guest residence. In 2025, the Trump administration demolished the East Wing to make room for a planned new East Wing including the ballroom, which would be funded through private donations. The property is maintained by the National Park Service as part of the White House and President's Park. In 2007, it was ranked second on the American Institute of Architects list of America's Favorite Architecture.\nEarly history.\n1789\u20131800.\nFollowing his inauguration on April 30, 1789, President George Washington occupied two private houses in New York City, which served as the nation's first executive mansion. He lived at the first, Walter Franklin House, which was owned by Treasury Commissioner Samuel Osgood, at 3Cherry Street, through late February 1790. The executive mansion moved to the larger quarters at Alexander Macomb House at 39\u201341 Broadway, where Washington stayed with his wife Martha and a small staff until August 1790. In May 1790, construction began on Government House, a new official residence in Manhattan.\nWashington, however, never lived at Government House since the national capital was moved to Philadelphia in 1790, where it remained through 1800. The July 1790 Residence Act designated the capital be permanently located in the new Federal District, and temporarily in Philadelphia for ten years while the permanent capital was built. Philadelphia rented the mansion of Robert Morris, a merchant, at 190 High Street, now 524\u201330 Market Street, as the President's House, which Washington occupied from November 1790 to March 1797. Since the house was too small to accommodate the 30 people who then made up the presidential family, staff, and servants, Washington had the house enlarged.\nPresident John Adams, who succeeded Washington and served as the nation's second president, occupied the High Street mansion in Philadelphia from March 1797 to May 1800. Philadelphia began construction of a much grander presidential mansion several blocks away in 1792. It was nearly completed by the time of Adams' 1797 inauguration. However, Adams chose not to occupy it, saying he did not have congressional authorization to lease the building. It remained vacant until 1800 when it was sold to the University of Pennsylvania.\nOn Saturday, November 1, 1800, Adams became the first president to occupy the White House. President's House in Philadelphia was converted into Union Hotel and then used for stores before being demolished in 1832.\nArchitectural competition.\nThe President's House was a major feature of Pierre (Peter) Charles L'Enfant's 1791 plan for the newly established federal city of Washington, D.C. After L'Enfant's dismissal in early 1792, Washington and his secretary of state, Thomas Jefferson, who both had personal interests in architecture, agreed that the design of the President's House and the Capitol would be chosen in a design competition.\nNine proposals were submitted for the new presidential residence with the award going to Irish-American architect James Hoban. Hoban supervised the construction of both the U.S. Capitol and the White House. Hoban was born in Ireland and trained at the Dublin Society of Arts. He emigrated to the U.S. after the American Revolution, first seeking work in Philadelphia and later finding success in South Carolina, where he designed the state capitol in Columbia.\nPresident Washington visited Charleston, South Carolina, in May 1791 on his Southern Tour, and saw the Charleston County Courthouse then under construction, which had been designed by Hoban. Washington is reputed to have met with Hoban during the visit. The following year, Washington summoned the architect to Philadelphia and met with him in June 1792.\nOn July 16, 1792, the president met with the commissioners of the federal city to make his judgment in the architectural competition. His review is recorded as being brief, and he quickly selected Hoban's submission.\nDesign influences.\nThe Neoclassical design of the White House is based primarily on architectural concepts inherited from the Roman architect Vitruvius and the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio. The design of the upper floors also includes elements based on Dublin's Leinster House, which later became the seat of the Irish parliament (Oireachtas). The upper windows with alternate triangular and segmented pediments are inspired by the Irish building. Additionally, several Georgian-era Irish country houses have been suggested as sources of inspiration for the overall floor plan, including the bow-fronted south front and the former niches in the present-day Blue Room.\nThe first official White House guide, published in 1962, suggested a link between Hoban's design for the South Portico and Ch\u00e2teau de Rastignac, a neoclassical country house in La Bachellerie in the Dordogne region of France. Construction on the French house was initially started before 1789, interrupted by the French Revolution for 20 years, and then finally built between 1812 and 1817 based on Salat's pre-1789 design.\nThe conceptual link between the two houses has been criticized because Hoban did not visit France. Supporters of the connection contend that Thomas Jefferson, during his tour of Bordeaux in 1789, viewed Salat's architectural drawings, which were on file at \u00c9cole Sp\u00e9ciale d'Architecture. On his return to the U.S., Jefferson then shared the influence with Washington, Hoban, Monroe, and Benjamin Henry Latrobe.\nConstruction.\nConstruction of the White House began at noon on October 13, 1792, with the laying of the cornerstone. The main residence and foundations of the house were built largely by employed Europeans, whilst enslaved African-Americans quarried stone used in the construction. Much of the other work on the house was done by immigrants, including the sandstone walls, which were erected by Scottish masons, the high-relief rose, and garland decorations above the north entrance and the fish scale pattern beneath the pediments of the window hoods.\nThere are conflicting claims as to where the sandstone used in the construction of the White House originated. Some reports suggest sandstone from the Croatian island of Bra\u010d, specifically the Pu\u010di\u0161\u0107a quarry whose stone was used to build the ancient Diocletian's Palace in Split, was used in the building's original construction. However, researchers believe limestone from the island was used in the 1902 renovations and not the original construction. Others suggest the original sandstone simply came from Aquia Creek in Stafford County, Virginia, since importation of the stone at the time would have proved too costly. The initial construction took place over a period of eight years at a reported cost of $232,371.83 (). Although not yet completed, the White House was ready for occupancy circa November 1, 1800.\nPierre L'Enfant's plan for a grand palace was five times larger than the house that was eventually built. Due in part to material and labor shortages, the finished structure contained only two main floors instead of the planned three, and a less costly brick served as a lining for the stone fa\u00e7ades. When construction was finished, the porous sandstone walls were whitewashed with a mixture of lime, rice glue, casein, and lead, giving the house its familiar color and name.\nArchitectural description.\nThe main entrance is located on the north fa\u00e7ade under a porte cochere with Ionic columns. The ground floor is hidden by a raised carriage ramp and parapet. The central three bays are situated behind a prostyle portico that was added c.\u20091830. The windows of the four bays flanking the portico, at first-floor level, have alternating pointed and segmented pediments, while the second-floor pediments are flat. A lunette fanlight and a sculpted floral festoon surmount the entrance. The roofline is hidden by a balustraded parapet.\nThe three-level southern fa\u00e7ade combines Palladian and neoclassical architectural styles. The ground floor is rusticated in the Palladian fashion. The south portico was completed in 1824. At the center of the southern fa\u00e7ade is a neoclassical projected bow of three bays. The bow is flanked by five bays, the windows of which, as on the north fa\u00e7ade, have alternating segmented and pointed pediments at first-floor level. The bow has a ground-floor double staircase leading to an Ionic colonnaded loggia and the Truman Balcony, built in 1946. The more modern third floor is hidden by a balustraded parapet and plays no part in the composition of the fa\u00e7ade.\nNaming conventions.\nThe building was originally variously referred to as the President's Palace, Presidential Mansion, or President's House. The earliest evidence of the public calling it the \"White House\" was recorded in 1811. A myth emerged that during the rebuilding of the structure after the Burning of Washington, white paint was applied to mask the burn damage it had suffered, giving the building its namesake hue. The name \"Executive Mansion\" was used in official contexts until President Theodore Roosevelt established \"The White House\" as its formal name in 1901 via Executive Order. The current letterhead wording and arrangement of \"The White House\" with the word \"Washington\" centered beneath it dates to the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nAlthough the structure was not completed until some years after the presidency of George Washington, there is speculation that the name of the traditional residence of the president of the United States may have been derived from Martha Washington's home, White House Plantation, in Virginia, where the nation's first president courted the first lady in the mid-18th century.\nEvolution of the White House.\nEarly use, 1814 burning, and reconstruction.\nOn Saturday, November 1, 1800, John Adams, who was residing at President's House in Philadelphia, the national capital from 1790 to 1800, became the first president to take residence in the building. The next day he wrote his wife Abigail:\n\"I pray Heaven to bestow the best of blessings on this House, and all that shall hereafter inhabit it. May none but honest and wise men ever rule under this roof.\"\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt had Adams's blessing carved into the mantel in the State Dining Room.\nAdams lived in the house only briefly before Thomas Jefferson moved into the \"pleasant country residence\" in 1801. Despite his complaints that the house was too big (\"big enough for two emperors, one pope, and the grand lama in the bargain\"), Jefferson considered how the White House might be expanded and improved. With Benjamin Henry Latrobe, he helped lay out the design for the East and West Colonnades, small wings that helped conceal the domestic operations of laundry, a stable and storage. Today, Jefferson's colonnades link the residence with the East and West Wings.\nOn August 24, 1814, during the War of 1812, the White House was burned by British forces during the Burning of Washington, in retaliation for acts of destruction by American troops in the Canadas; much of Washington was affected by these fires as well. Only the exterior walls remained, and they had to be torn down and mostly reconstructed because of weakening from the fire and subsequent exposure to the elements, except for portions of the south wall. Of the numerous objects taken from the White House when it was sacked by the British, only three have been recovered.\nWhite House employees and slaves rescued a copy of the Lansdowne portrait, and in 1939 a Canadian man returned a jewelry box to President Franklin Roosevelt, claiming that his grandfather had taken it from Washington; in the same year, a medicine chest that had belonged to President Madison was returned by the descendants of a Royal Navy officer. Some observers allege that most of the spoils of war taken during the sack were lost when a convoy of British ships led by HMS \"Fantome\" sank en route to Halifax off Prospect during a storm on the night of November 24, 1814, even though \"Fantome\" had no involvement in that action.\nAfter the fire, President James Madison resided in the Octagon House from 1814 to 1815, and then in the Seven Buildings from 1815 to the end of his term. Meanwhile, both Hoban and Latrobe contributed to the design and oversight of the reconstruction, which lasted from 1815 until 1817. The south portico was constructed in 1824 during the James Monroe administration. The north portico was built in 1830. Though Latrobe proposed similar porticos before the fire in 1814, both porticos were built as designed by Hoban. An elliptical portico at Ch\u00e2teau de Rastignac in La Bachellerie, France, with nearly identical curved stairs, is speculated as the source of inspiration due to its similarity with the South Portico, although this matter is one of great debate.\nItalian artisans, brought to Washington to help in constructing the U.S. Capitol, carved the decorative stonework on both porticos. Contrary to speculation, the North Portico was not modeled on a similar portico on another Dublin building, the Viceregal Lodge (now \"\u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in\", residence of the president of Ireland), for its portico postdates the White House porticos' design. For the North Portico, a variation on the Ionic Order was devised, incorporating a swag of roses between the volutes. This was done to link the new portico with the earlier carved roses above the entrance.\nOvercrowding and building the West Wing.\nBy the time of the American Civil War, the White House had become overcrowded. The location of the White House, just north of a canal and swampy lands, which provided conditions ripe for malaria and other unhealthy conditions, was questioned. Brigadier General Nathaniel Michler was tasked with proposing solutions to address these concerns. He proposed abandoning the use of the White House as a residence, and he designed a new estate for the first family at Meridian Hill in Washington, D.C. Congress, however, rejected the plan. Another option was Metropolis View, which is now the campus of the Catholic University of America.\nWhen Chester A. Arthur took office in 1881, he ordered renovations to the White House to take place as soon as the recently widowed Lucretia Garfield moved out. Arthur inspected the work almost nightly and made several suggestions. Louis Comfort Tiffany was asked to send selected designers to assist. Over twenty wagonloads of furniture and household items were removed from the building and sold at a public auction. All that was saved were bust portraits of John Adams and Martin Van Buren. A proposal was made to build a new residence south of the White House, but it failed to gain support.\nIn the fall of 1882, work was done on the main corridor, including tinting the walls pale olive and adding squares of gold leaf, and decorating the ceiling in gold and silver, with colorful traceries woven to spell \"USA\". The Red Room was painted a dull Pomeranian red, and its ceiling was decorated with gold, silver, and copper stars and stripes of red, white, and blue. A fifty-foot jeweled Tiffany glass screen, supported by imitation marble columns, replaced the glass doors that separated the main corridor from the north vestibule.\nIn 1891, Benjamin Harrison and wife Caroline proposed major extensions to the White House, including a National Wing on the east for a historical art gallery, and a wing on the west for official functions. An initially unsuccessful plan was devised by Colonel Theodore A. Bingham that reflected the Harrison proposal. The Harrisons originated the annual placement and decoration of a Christmas tree in the house.\nIn 1902, however, Theodore Roosevelt hired McKim, Mead &amp; White to carry out expansions and renovations in a neoclassical style suited to the building's architecture, removing the Tiffany screen and all Victorian additions. Charles McKim himself designed and managed the project, which gave more living space to the president's large family by removing a staircase in the West Hall and moving executive office staff from the second floor of the residence into the new West Wing.\nPresident William Howard Taft enlisted the help of architect Nathan C. Wyeth to add additional space to the West Wing, which included the addition of the Oval Office. In 1925, Congress enacted legislation allowing the White House to accept gifts of furniture and art for the first time.17 The West Wing was damaged by fire on Christmas Eve 1929; Herbert Hoover and his aides moved back into it on April 14, 1930. In the 1930s, a second story was added, as well as a larger basement for White House staff, and President Franklin Roosevelt had the Oval Office moved to its present location: adjacent to the Rose Garden.\nTruman reconstruction.\nDecades of poor maintenance, the construction of a fourth-story attic during the Coolidge administration, and the addition of a second-floor balcony over the south portico for Harry S. Truman took a great toll on the brick and sandstone structure built around a timber frame. By 1948, the house was declared to be in imminent danger of collapse, forcing President Truman to commission a reconstruction and to live across the street at Blair House from 1949 to 1951.\nThe work, completed by the firm of Philadelphia contractor John McShain, required the complete dismantling of the interior spaces, construction of a new load-bearing internal steel frame, and the reconstruction of the original rooms within the new structure. The total cost of the renovations was about $5.7million ($ million in 2024). Some modifications to the floor plan were made, the largest being the repositioning of the grand staircase to open into the Entrance Hall, rather than the Cross Hall. Central air conditioning was added, as well as two additional sub-basements providing space for workrooms, storage, and a bomb shelter. The Trumans moved back into the White House on March 27, 1952.\nWhile the Truman reconstruction preserved the house's structure, much of the new interior finishes were generic and of little historic significance. Much of the original plasterwork, some dating back to the 1814\u20131816 rebuilding, was too damaged to reinstall, as was the original robust Beaux Arts paneling in the East Room. President Truman had the original timber frame sawed into paneling; the walls of the Vermeil Room, Library, China Room, and Map Room on the ground floor of the main residence were paneled in wood from the timbers.\nJacqueline Kennedy restoration.\nJacqueline Kennedy, wife of President John F. Kennedy (1961\u201363), directed a very extensive and historic redecoration of the house. She enlisted the help of Henry Francis du Pont of the Winterthur Museum to assist in collecting artifacts for the mansion, many of which had once been housed there. Other antiques, fine paintings, and improvements from the Kennedy period were donated to the White House by wealthy philanthropists, including the Crowninshield family, Jane Engelhard, Jayne Wrightsman, and the Oppenheimer family.\nSt\u00e9phane Boudin of the House of Jansen, a Paris interior-design firm that had been recognized worldwide, was employed by Jacqueline Kennedy to assist with the decoration. Different periods of the early republic and world history were selected as a theme for each room: the Federal style for the Green Room, French Empire for the Blue Room, American Empire for the Red Room, Louis XVI for the Yellow Oval Room, and Victorian for the president's study, renamed the Treaty Room. Antique furniture was acquired, and decorative fabric and trim based on period documents was produced and installed.\nThe Kennedy restoration resulted in a more authentic White House of grander stature, which recalled the French taste of Madison and Monroe. In the Diplomatic Reception Room, Mrs. Kennedy installed an antique \"Vue de l'Am\u00e9rique Nord\" wallpaper which Zuber &amp; Cie had designed in 1834. The wallpaper had hung previously on the walls of another mansion until 1961 when that house was demolished for a grocery store. Just before the demolition, the wallpaper was salvaged and sold to the White House.\nThe first White House guidebook was produced under the direction of curator Lorraine Waxman Pearce with direct supervision from Mrs. Kennedy. Sales of the guidebook helped finance the restoration.\nIn a televised tour of the house on Valentine's Day in 1962, Kennedy showed her restoration of the White House to the public.\nThe White House since the Kennedy restoration.\nCongress enacted legislation in September 1961 declaring the White House a museum. Furniture, fixtures, and decorative arts could now be declared either historic or of artistic interest by the president. This prevented them from being sold (as many objects in the executive mansion had been in the past 150 years). When not in use or display at the White House, these items were to be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution for preservation, study, storage, or exhibition. The White House retains the right to have these items returned.29\nOut of respect for its historic character, no substantive architectural changes have been made to the Executive Residence since the Truman renovation. Since the Kennedy restoration, every presidential family has made some changes to the residence's private quarters, but the Committee for the Preservation of the White House must approve any modifications to the State Rooms. Charged with maintaining the house's historical integrity, the congressionally authorized committee works with each First Family \u2013 usually represented by the first lady, the White House curator, and the chief usher \u2014 to implement the family's proposals for altering the house.\nDuring the Nixon Administration (1969\u20131974), First Lady Pat Nixon refurbished the Green Room, Blue Room, and Red Room, working with Clement Conger, the curator appointed by President Richard Nixon. Mrs. Nixon's efforts brought more than 600 artifacts to the house, the largest acquisition by any administration. Her husband created the modern press briefing room over Franklin Roosevelt's old swimming pool. Nixon also added a single-lane bowling alley to the White House basement.\nComputers and the house's first laser printer were added during the Carter administration, and the use of computer technology was expanded during the Reagan administration. A Carter-era innovation, a set of solar water heating panels that were mounted on the roof of the White House, was removed during Reagan's presidency. Redecorations were made to the private family quarters and maintenance was made to public areas during the Reagan years. The house was accredited as a museum in 1988.\nIn the 1990s, Bill and Hillary Clinton refurbished some rooms with the assistance of Arkansas decorator Kaki Hockersmith, including the Oval Office, the East Room, Blue Room, State Dining Room, Lincoln Bedroom, and Lincoln Sitting Room. During the administration of George W. Bush, First Lady Laura Bush refurbished the Lincoln Bedroom in a style contemporary with the Lincoln era; the Green Room, Cabinet Room, and theater were also refurbished.\nThe White House became one of the first wheelchair-accessible government buildings in Washington, D.C., when modifications were made during the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt, who used a wheelchair because of his paralytic illness. In the 1990s, Hillary Clinton, at the suggestion of the Visitors Office director, approved the addition of a ramp in the East Wing corridor, affording easier wheelchair access for the public tours and special events that enter through the secure entrance building on the east side.\nIn 2003, the Bush administration reinstalled solar thermal heaters. These units are used to heat water for landscape maintenance personnel and for the presidential pool and spa. One hundred sixty-seven solar photovoltaic grid-tied panels were installed at the same time on the roof of the maintenance facility. The changes were not publicized as a White House spokeswoman said the changes were an internal matter, but the story was covered by industry trade journals. \nIn 2013, President Barack Obama had a set of solar panels installed on the roof of the White House, marking the first time solar power was used for the president's living quarters.\nIn 2025, President Donald Trump had the East Wing demolished and its surrounding grounds cleared for the construction of a new East Wing containing a state ballroom. \nLayout and amenities.\nThe current group of buildings housing the presidency is known as the White House Complex.\nExecutive Residence.\nThe original residence is in the center, including six stories and 55,000 square feet (5,100\u00a0m2) of floor space. Two colonnades\u00a0\u2013 one on the east and one on the west\u00a0\u2013 designed by Jefferson, were added later to connect the East and West Wings to the residence. The Executive Residence houses the president's dwelling, as well as rooms for ceremonies and official entertaining. It has 132 rooms, 35 bathrooms, 412 doors, 147 windows, 28 fireplaces, eight staircases, three elevators, and five full-time chefs.\nThe State Floor of the residence building includes the East Room, Green Room, Blue Room, Red Room, State Dining Room, Family Dining Room, Cross Hall, Entrance Hall, and Grand Staircase. The Ground Floor is made up of the Diplomatic Reception Room, Map Room, China Room, Vermeil Room, Library, the main kitchen, and other offices.\nThe second floor family residence includes the Yellow Oval Room, East and West Sitting Halls, the White House Master Bedroom, President's Dining Room, the Treaty Room, Lincoln Bedroom and Queens' Bedroom, as well as two additional bedrooms, a smaller kitchen, and a private dressing room. The third floor consists of the White House Solarium, Game Room, Linen Room, a Diet Kitchen, and another sitting room (previously used as President George W. Bush's workout room).\nWest Wing.\nThe West Wing houses the president's office (the Oval Office) and offices of his senior staff, with room for about 50 employees. It includes the Cabinet Room, where the president conducts business meetings and where the Cabinet meets, as well as the White House Situation Room, James S. Brady Press Briefing Room, the Roosevelt Room, and a swimming pool. In 2007, work was completed on renovations of the press briefing room, adding fiber optic cables and LCD screens for the display of charts and graphs. The makeover took 11 months and cost of $8million, of which news outlets paid $2million. In September 2010, a two-year project began on the West Wing, creating a multistory underground structure. \nSome members of the president's staff are located in the adjacent Eisenhower Executive Office Building, which was, until 1999, called the Old Executive Office Building and was historically the State, War, and Navy building.\nThe Oval Office, Roosevelt Room, and other portions of the West Wing were partially replicated on a sound stage and used as the setting for \"The West Wing\" television show.\nEast Wing.\nThe East Wing was first built in 1902 as a guest entrance. It was heavily renovated in 1942 to add a second floor, which concealed the construction of an underground bunker, the Presidential Emergency Operations Center.\nAmong its uses, the East Wing has intermittently housed the offices and staff of the first lady and the White House Social Office. In 1977, Rosalynn Carter became the first to place her personal office in the East Wing and to formally call it the \"Office of the First Lady\".\nIn July 2025, the Trump administration announced plans for a new ballroom on White House grounds. The existing East Wing was demolished in October 2025 to make way for a \"modernized\" East Wing including the ballroom. The White House has stated that the costs of construction would be completely covered by private donations.\nGrounds.\nThe White House and grounds cover just over 18 acres (about 7.3 hectares). Before the construction of the North Portico, most public events were entered from the South Lawn, the grading and planting of which was ordered by Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson also drafted a planting plan for the North Lawn that included large trees that would have mostly obscured the house from Pennsylvania Avenue. During the mid-to-late 19th century a series of ever larger greenhouses were built on the west side of the house, where the current West Wing is located. During this period, the North Lawn was planted with ornate carpet-style flowerbeds.\nThe general layout of the White House grounds today is based on the 1935 design by Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. of the Olmsted Brothers firm, commissioned by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. During the Kennedy administration, the White House Rose Garden was redesigned by Rachel Lambert Mellon. The Rose Garden borders the West Colonnade. Bordering the East Colonnade is the Jacqueline Kennedy Garden, which was begun by Jacqueline Kennedy but completed after her husband's assassination. The grounds include a a tennis court, a jogging track, and a putting green.\nOn the weekend of June 23, 2006, a century-old American Elm (\"Ulmus americana\" L.) tree on the north side of the building came down during one of the many storms amid intense flooding. Among the oldest trees on the grounds are several magnolias (\"Magnolia grandiflora\") planted by Andrew Jackson, including the Jackson Magnolia, reportedly grown from a sprout taken from the favorite tree of Jackson's recently deceased wife, the sprout planted after Jackson moved into the White House. The tree stood for over 200 years. In 2017, having become too weak to stand on its own, it was decided it should be removed and replaced with one of its offspring.\nMichelle Obama planted the White House's first organic garden and installed beehives on the South Lawn of the White House, which will supply organic produce and honey to the First Family and for state dinners and other official gatherings. In 2020, First Lady Melania Trump redesigned the Rose Garden. In 2025, President Donald Trump oversaw the installation of an 88-foot flagpole on each lawn and a patio to replace the grass lawn of the Rose Garden.\nPublic access and security.\nThe White House receives up to 30,000 visitors each week. The chief usher coordinates day to day household operations.\nHistorical accessibility.\nLike the English and Irish country houses it was modeled on, the White House was, from the start, open to the public until the early part of the 20th century.\nInspired by Washington's open houses in New York and Philadelphia, John Adams began the tradition of the White House New Year's Reception. Thomas Jefferson permitted public tours of his house, which have continued ever since, except during wartime, and began the tradition of an annual reception on the Fourth of July.\nPresident Jefferson held an open house for his second inaugural in 1805, and many of the people at his swearing-in ceremony at the Capitol followed him home, where he greeted them in the Blue Room. Those open houses sometimes became rowdy: in 1829, President Andrew Jackson had to leave for a hotel when roughly 20,000 people celebrated his inauguration inside the White House. His aides ultimately had to lure the mob outside with washtubs filled with a potent cocktail of orange juice and whiskey. The practice continued until 1885, when newly elected Grover Cleveland arranged for a presidential review of the troops from a grandstand in front of the White House instead of the traditional open house.\nThose receptions ended in the early 1930s. President Bill Clinton briefly revived the New Year's Day open house in his first term.\nAviation incidents.\nIn February 1974, a stolen U.S. Army helicopter landed without authorization on the White House's grounds. Twenty years later, in 1994, a stolen light plane flown by Frank Eugene Corder crashed on White House grounds, instantly killing him.\nDuring the September 11 attacks, shortly after notice of the plane impacts, the White House staff and other occupants were ordered to evacuate by the U.S. Secret Service after a call was made to them from Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport air traffic control staff, stating, \"There is an aircraft coming at you,\" though an aircraft never did show up.\nOn May 12, 2005, as a result of increased security regarding air traffic in the capital, the White House was evacuated after an unauthorized aircraft approached the grounds. After being forced to land by two F-16 fighter jets and a Black Hawk helicopter at a small airport nearby, the pilot was identified to be a student pilot who accidentally breached White House grounds without knowledge.\nOn January 27, 2015, at 3 a.m. an intoxicated man flew a quadcopter drone from his apartment near the White House but lost control of it, prompting it to crash on the southeast side on White House grounds. The White House was temporarily locked down by the Secret Service shortly after an officer reported witnessing \"[a] drone flying at a low altitude.\" Investigators suspected that the drone accidentally flew and breached into the property because of either wind or trees.\nIn June 2023, fighter jets moved to intercept a light aircraft that violated Washington DC airspace near the White House, before it crashed in Virginia. All occupants in the intrusion aircraft were killed.\nClosure of Pennsylvania Avenue.\nOn May 20, 1995, primarily as a response to the Oklahoma City bombing of April 19, 1995, the United States Secret Service closed off Pennsylvania Avenue to vehicular traffic in front of the White House, from the eastern edge of Lafayette Park to 17th Street. Later, the closure was extended an additional block to the east to 15th Street, and East Executive Avenue, a small street between the White House and the Treasury Building.\nAfter September 11, 2001, this change was made permanent, in addition to closing E Street between the South Portico of the White House and the Ellipse. In response to the Boston Marathon bombing, the road was closed to the public in its entirety for a period of two days.\nThe Pennsylvania Avenue closure has been opposed by organized civic groups in Washington, D.C. They argue that the closing impedes traffic flow unnecessarily and is inconsistent with the well-conceived historic plan for the city. As for security considerations, they note that the White House is set much farther back from the street than numerous other sensitive federal buildings are.\nPrior to its inclusion within the fenced compound that now includes the Eisenhower Executive Office Building to the west and the Treasury Building to the east, this sidewalk served as a queuing area for the daily public tours of the White House. These tours were suspended in the wake of the September 11 attacks. In September 2003, they resumed on a limited basis for groups making prior arrangements through their Congressional representatives or embassies in Washington for foreign nationals and submitting to background checks, but the White House remained closed to the public. Due to budget constraints, White House tours were suspended for most of 2013 due to sequestration. The White House reopened to the public in November 2013.\nProtection.\nThe White House Complex is protected by the United States Secret Service and the United States Park Police.\nDuring the 2005 presidential inauguration, NASAMS (Norwegian Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System) units were used to patrol the airspace over Washington, D.C. The same units have since been used to protect the president and all airspace around the White House, which is strictly prohibited to aircraft.\nBirths, deaths and weddings at the White House.\nBirths.\nEighteen children have been born at the White House, including Grover Cleveland's daughter Esther.\nOther children born at the White House:\nDeaths.\nTwo presidents, William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor, and three first ladies, Letitia Tyler, Caroline Harrison, and Ellen Wilson, have died at the White House. Others who have died at the White House include Rebecca Van Buren, granddaughter of Martin Van Buren.\nWeddings.\nThere have been nineteen documented weddings and four separate wedding receptions at the White House. The only president to marry in the White House was Grover Cleveland, who married Frances Folsom on June 2, 1886, in the Blue Room.\nThe children of sitting presidents who married in the White House are Maria Hester Monroe Gouveneur (1820), John Adams II (1828), Elizabeth Tyler (1842), Nellie Grant (1874), Alice Roosevelt Longworth (1906), Jessie Wilson Sayre (1913), Eleanor Wilson McAdoo (1914), and Tricia Nixon Cox (1971). Luci Johnson (1967) and Jenna Bush Hager (2008) held their receptions at the White House.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33059", "revid": "45940103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33059", "title": "Washington DC", "text": ""}
{"id": "33060", "revid": "27318187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33060", "title": "Warren G. Harding", "text": "President of the United States from 1921 to 1923\n \nWarren Gamaliel Harding (November 2, 1865 \u2013 August 2, 1923) was the 29th president of the United States, serving from 1921 until his death in 1923. A member of the Republican Party, he was one of the most popular presidents at the time of his death. After that, a number of scandals were exposed that greatly damaged his reputation.\nHarding lived in rural Ohio all his life, except when political service took him elsewhere. As a young man, he bought \"The Marion Star\" and built it into a successful newspaper. Harding served in the Ohio State Senate from 1900 to 1904, and was lieutenant governor for two years. He was defeated for governor in 1910, but was elected to the United States Senate in 1914\u2014the state's first direct election for that office. Harding ran for the Republican nomination for president in 1920, but was considered a long shot before the convention. When the leading candidates could not garner a majority, and the convention deadlocked, support for Harding increased, and he was nominated on the tenth ballot. He conducted a front porch campaign, remaining mostly in Marion and allowing people to come to him. He promised a return to normalcy of the pre\u2013World War I period, and defeated Democratic nominee James M. Cox in a landslide to become the first sitting senator elected president.\nHarding appointed a number of respected figures to his cabinet, including Andrew Mellon at Treasury, Herbert Hoover at Commerce, and Charles Evans Hughes at the State Department. A major foreign policy achievement came with the Washington Naval Conference of 1921\u20131922, in which the world's major naval powers agreed on a naval limitations program that lasted a decade. Harding released political prisoners who had been arrested for their opposition to World War I. In 1923, Harding died of a heart attack in San Francisco while on a western tour, and was succeeded by Vice President Calvin Coolidge.\nThe subsequent exposure of scandals after his death, including Teapot Dome, as well as an extramarital affair with Nan Britton, eroded his popularity. Harding's interior secretary, Albert B. Fall, and his attorney general, Harry Daugherty, were each later tried for corruption in office; Fall was convicted and Daugherty was not. These trials greatly damaged Harding's posthumous reputation. In historical rankings of U.S. presidents during the decades after his term in office, Harding was often rated among the worst. In the subsequent decades, some historians have begun to reassess Harding's historical record in office.\nEarly life and career.\nChildhood and education.\nWarren Harding was born on November 2, 1865, in Blooming Grove, Ohio. Nicknamed \"Winnie\" as a small child, he was the eldest of eight children born to George Tryon Harding (usually known as Tryon) and Phoebe Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Dickerson) Harding. Phoebe was a state-licensed midwife. Tryon farmed and taught school near Mount Gilead. Through apprenticeship, study, and a year of medical school, Tryon became a doctor and started a small practice. Harding's first ancestor in the Americas was Richard Harding, who arrived from England to Massachusetts Bay around 1624. Harding also had ancestors from Wales and Scotland, and some of his maternal ancestors were Dutch, including the wealthy Van Kirk family.\nIt was rumored by a political opponent in Blooming Grove that one of Harding's great-grandmothers was African American. His great-great-grandfather Amos Harding claimed that a thief, who had been caught in the act by the family, started the rumor in an attempt at extortion or revenge. In 2015, genetic testing of Harding's descendants determined, with more than a 95% chance of accuracy, that he lacked sub-Saharan African forebears within four generations.\nIn 1870, the Harding family, who were abolitionists, moved to Caledonia, where Tryon acquired \"The Argus\", a local weekly newspaper. At \"The Argus\", Harding, from the age of 11, learned the basics of the newspaper business. In late 1879, at age 14, he enrolled at his father's \"alma mater\"\u2014Ohio Central College in Iberia\u2014where he proved an adept student. He and a friend put out a small newspaper, the \"Iberia Spectator\", during their final year at Ohio Central, intended to appeal to both the college and the town. During his final year, the Harding family moved to Marion, about from Caledonia, and when he graduated in 1882, he joined them there.\nOn May 6, 1883, Harding joined the Free Baptist Church in Marion, where he later served as a trustee for 25 years and of which he remained a member until his death. The congregation merged with the Northern Baptist Convention in 1911 and became known as the Trinity Baptist Church in 1912.\nEditor.\nIn Harding's youth, most of the U.S. population still lived on farms and in small towns. Harding spent much of his life in Marion, a small city in rural central Ohio, and became closely associated with it. When he rose to high office, he made clear his love of Marion and its way of life, telling of the many young Marionites who had left and enjoyed success elsewhere, while suggesting that the man, once the \"pride of the school\", who had remained behind and become a janitor, was \"the happiest one of the lot\".\nUpon graduating, Harding had stints as a teacher and as an insurance man, and made a brief attempt at studying law. He then raised $300 () in partnership with others to purchase a failing newspaper, \"The Marion Star\", the weakest of the growing city's three papers and its only daily. The 18-year-old Harding used the railroad pass that came with the paper to attend the 1884 Republican National Convention, where he hobnobbed with better-known journalists and supported the presidential nominee, former Secretary of State James G. Blaine. Harding returned from Chicago to find that the sheriff had reclaimed the paper. During the election campaign, Harding worked for the Marion \"Democratic Mirror\" and was annoyed at having to praise the Democratic presidential nominee, New York Governor Grover Cleveland, who won the election. Afterward, with his father's financial help, Harding gained ownership of the paper.\nThrough the later years of the 1880s, Harding built the \"Star\". The city of Marion tended to vote Republican (as did Ohio), but Marion County was Democratic. Accordingly, Harding adopted a tempered editorial stance, declaring the daily \"Star\" nonpartisan and circulating a weekly edition that was moderately Republican. This policy attracted advertisers and put the town's Republican weekly out of business. According to his biographer, Andrew Sinclair:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe success of Harding with the \"Star\" was certainly in the model of Horatio Alger. He started with nothing, and through working, stalling, bluffing, withholding payments, borrowing back wages, boasting, and manipulating, he turned a dying rag into a powerful small-town newspaper. Much of his success had to do with his good looks, affability, enthusiasm, and persistence, but he was also lucky. As Machiavelli once pointed out, cleverness will take a man far, but he cannot do without good fortune.\nThe population of Marion grew from 4,000 in 1880 to twice that in 1890, and to 12,000 by 1900. This growth helped the \"Star\", and Harding did his best to promote the city, purchasing stock in many local enterprises. A few of these turned out badly, but he was generally successful as an investor, leaving an estate of $850,000 in 1923 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). According to Harding biographer John Dean, Harding's \"civic influence was that of an activist who used his editorial page to effectively keep his nose\u2014and a prodding voice\u2014in all the town's public business\". To date, Harding is the only U.S. president to have had full-time journalism experience. He became an ardent supporter of Governor Joseph B. Foraker, a Republican.\nHarding first came to know Florence Kling, five years older than he, as the daughter of a local banker and developer. Amos Kling was a man accustomed to getting his way, but Harding attacked him relentlessly in the paper. Amos involved Florence in all his affairs, taking her to work from the time she could walk. As hard-headed as her father, Florence came into conflict with him after returning from music college. After she eloped with Pete deWolfe, and returned to Marion without deWolfe and with an infant called Marshall, Amos agreed to raise the boy, but would not support Florence, who made a living as a piano teacher. One of her students was Harding's sister Charity. By 1886, Florence Kling had obtained a divorce, and she and Harding were courting, though who was pursuing whom is uncertain.\nThe budding match snuffed out a truce between the Klings. Amos believed that the Hardings had African American blood, and was also offended by Harding's editorial stances. He started to spread rumors of Harding's supposed black heritage, and encouraged local businessmen to boycott Harding's business interests. When Harding found out what Kling was doing, he warned Kling \"that he would beat the tar out of the little man if he didn't cease.\"\nThe Hardings married on July 8, 1891, at their new home on Mount Vernon Avenue in Marion, which they had designed together in the Queen Anne style. The marriage produced no children. Harding affectionately called his wife \"the Duchess\" for a character in a serial from \"The New York Sun\" who kept a close eye on \"the Duke\" and their money.\nFlorence Harding became deeply involved in her husband's career, both at the \"Star\" and after he entered politics. Exhibiting her father's determination and business sense, she helped turn the \"Star\" into a profitable enterprise through her tight management of the paper's circulation department. She has been credited with helping Harding achieve more than he might have alone; some have suggested that she pushed him all the way to the White House.\nStart in politics.\nSoon after purchasing the \"Star\", Harding turned his attention to politics, supporting Foraker in his first successful bid for governor in 1885. Foraker was part of the war generation that challenged older Ohio Republicans, such as Senator John Sherman, for control of state politics. Harding, always a party loyalist, supported Foraker in the complex internecine warfare that was Ohio Republican politics. Harding was willing to tolerate Democrats as necessary to a two-party system, but had only contempt for those who bolted the Republican Party to join third-party movements. He was a delegate to the Republican state convention in 1888, at the age of 22, representing Marion County, and would be elected a delegate in most years until becoming president.\nHarding's success as an editor took a toll on his health. Five times between 1889 (when he was 23) and 1901, he spent time at the Battle Creek Sanitorium for reasons Sinclair described as \"fatigue, overstrain, and nervous illnesses\". Dean ties these visits to early occurrences of the heart ailment that would kill Harding in 1923. During one such absence from Marion, in 1894, the \"Star\"'s business manager quit. Florence Harding took his place. She became her husband's top assistant at the \"Star\" on the business side, maintaining her role until the Hardings moved to Washington in 1915. Her competence allowed Harding to travel to make speeches\u2014his use of the free railroad pass increased greatly after his marriage. Florence Harding practiced strict economy and wrote of Harding, \"he does well when he listens to me and poorly when he does not.\"\nIn 1892, Harding traveled to Washington, where he met Democratic Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan, and listened to the \"Boy Orator of the Platte\" speak on the floor of the House of Representatives. Harding traveled to Chicago's Columbian Exposition in 1893. Both visits were without Florence. Democrats generally won Marion County's offices; when Harding ran for auditor in 1895, he lost, but did better than expected. The following year, Harding was one of many orators who spoke across Ohio as part of the campaign of the Republican presidential candidate, that state's former governor, William McKinley. According to Dean, \"while working for McKinley [Harding] began making a name for himself through Ohio\".\nRising politician (1897\u20131919).\nState senator.\nHarding wished to try again for elective office. Though a longtime admirer of Foraker (by then a U.S. senator), he had been careful to maintain good relations with the party faction led by the state's other U.S. senator, Mark Hanna, McKinley's political manager and chairman of the Republican National Committee (RNC). Both Foraker and Hanna supported Harding for state Senate in 1899; he gained the Republican nomination and was easily elected to a two-year term.\nHarding began his four years as a state senator as a political unknown; he ended them as one of the most popular figures in the Ohio Republican Party. He always appeared calm and displayed humility, characteristics that endeared him to fellow Republicans even as he passed them in his political rise. Legislative leaders consulted him on difficult problems. It was usual at that time for state senators in Ohio to serve only one term, but Harding gained renomination in 1901. After the assassination of McKinley in September (he was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt), much of the appetite for politics was temporarily lost in Ohio. In November, Harding won a second term, more than doubling his margin of victory to 3,563 votes.\nDuring this period, Harding became a Freemason. In 1901, he was initiated into Marion Lodge No. 7.\nLike most politicians of his time, Harding accepted that patronage and graft would be used to repay political favors. He arranged for his sister Mary (who was legally blind) to be appointed as a teacher at the Ohio School for the Blind, although there were better-qualified candidates. In another trade, he offered publicity in his newspaper in exchange for free railroad passes for himself and his family. According to Sinclair, \"it is doubtful that Harding ever thought there was anything dishonest in accepting the perquisites of position or office. Patronage and favors seemed the normal reward for party service in the days of Hanna.\"\nSoon after Harding's initial election as senator, he met Harry M. Daugherty, who would take a major role in his political career. A perennial candidate for office who served two terms in the state House of Representatives in the early 1890s, Daugherty had become a political fixer and lobbyist in the state capital of Columbus. After first meeting and talking with Harding, Daugherty commented, \"Gee, what a great-looking President he'd make.\"\nOhio state leader.\nIn early 1903, Harding announced he would run for Governor of Ohio, prompted by the withdrawal of the leading candidate, Congressman Charles W. F. Dick. Hanna and George Cox felt that Harding was not electable due to his work with Foraker\u2014as the Progressive Era commenced, the public was starting to take a dimmer view of the trading of political favors and of bosses such as Cox. Accordingly, they persuaded Cleveland banker Myron T. Herrick, a friend of McKinley's, to run. Herrick was also better-placed to take votes away from the likely Democratic candidate, reforming Cleveland Mayor Tom L. Johnson. With little chance at the gubernatorial nomination, Harding sought nomination as lieutenant governor, and both Herrick and Harding were nominated by acclamation. Foraker and Hanna (who died of typhoid fever in February 1904) both campaigned for what was dubbed the Four-H ticket. Herrick and Harding won by overwhelming margins.\nOnce he and Harding were inaugurated, Herrick made ill-advised decisions that turned crucial Republican constituencies against him, alienating farmers by opposing the establishment of an agricultural college. On the other hand, according to Sinclair, \"Harding had little to do, and he did it very well\". His responsibility to preside over the state Senate allowed him to increase his growing network of political contacts. Harding and others envisioned a successful gubernatorial run in 1905, but Herrick refused to stand aside. In early 1905, Harding announced he would accept nomination as governor if offered, but faced with the anger of leaders such as Cox, Foraker and Dick (Hanna's replacement in the Senate), announced he would seek no office in 1905. Herrick was defeated, but his new running mate, Andrew L. Harris, was elected, and succeeded as governor after five months in office on the death of Democrat John M. Pattison. One Republican official wrote to Harding, \"Aren't you sorry Dick wouldn't let you run for Lieutenant Governor?\"\nIn addition to helping pick a president, Ohio voters in 1908 were to choose the legislators who would decide whether to re-elect Foraker. The senator had quarreled with President Roosevelt over the Brownsville Affair. Though Foraker had little chance of winning, he sought the Republican presidential nomination against his fellow Cincinnatian, Secretary of War William Howard Taft, who was Roosevelt's chosen successor. On January 6, 1908, Harding's \"Star\" endorsed Foraker and upbraided Roosevelt for trying to destroy the senator's career over a matter of conscience. On January 22, Harding in the \"Star\" reversed course and declared for Taft, deeming Foraker defeated. According to Sinclair, Harding's change to Taft \"was not\u00a0... because he saw the light but because he felt the heat\". Jumping on the Taft bandwagon allowed Harding to survive his patron's disaster\u2014Foraker failed to gain the presidential nomination, and was defeated for a third term as senator. Also helpful in saving Harding's career was that he was popular with, and had done favors for, the more progressive forces that now controlled the Ohio Republican Party.\nHarding sought and gained the 1910 Republican gubernatorial nomination. At that time, the party was deeply divided between progressive and conservative wings, and could not defeat the united Democrats; he lost the election to incumbent Judson Harmon. Harry Daugherty managed Harding's campaign, but the defeated candidate did not hold the loss against him. Despite the growing rift between them, both President Taft and former president Roosevelt came to Ohio to campaign for Harding, but their quarrels split the Republican Party and helped assure Harding's defeat.\nThe party split grew, and in 1912, Taft and Roosevelt were rivals for the Republican nomination. The 1912 Republican National Convention was bitterly divided. At Taft's request, Harding gave a speech nominating the president, but the angry delegates were not receptive to Harding's oratory. Taft was renominated, but Roosevelt supporters bolted the party. Harding, as a loyal Republican, supported Taft. The Republican vote was split between Taft, the party's official candidate, and Roosevelt, running under the label of the Progressive Party. This allowed the Democratic candidate, New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson, to be elected.\nU.S. Senator.\nElection of 1914.\nCongressman Theodore Burton had been elected as senator by the state legislature in Foraker's place in 1909, and announced that he would seek a second term in the 1914 elections. By this time, the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution had been ratified, giving the people the right to elect senators, and Ohio had instituted primary elections for the office. Foraker and former congressman Ralph D. Cole also entered the Republican primary. When Burton withdrew, Foraker became the favorite, but his Old Guard Republicanism was deemed outdated, and Harding was urged to enter the race. Daugherty claimed credit for persuading Harding to run: \"I found him like a turtle sunning himself on a log, and I pushed him into the water.\" According to Harding biographer Randolph Downes, \"he put on a campaign of such sweetness and light as would have won the plaudits of the angels. It was calculated to offend nobody except Democrats.\" Although Harding did not attack Foraker, his supporters had no such scruples. Harding won the primary by 12,000 votes over Foraker.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRead \"The Menace\" and get the dope,Go to the polls and beat the Pope.\nSlogan written on Ohio walls and fences, 1914\nHarding's general election opponent was Ohio Attorney General Timothy Hogan, who had risen to statewide office despite widespread prejudice against Roman Catholics in rural areas. In 1914, the start of World War I and the prospect of a Catholic senator from Ohio increased nativist sentiment. Propaganda sheets with names like \"The Menace\" and \"The Defender\" contained warnings that Hogan was the vanguard in a plot led by Pope Benedict XV through the Knights of Columbus to control Ohio. Harding did not attack Hogan (an old friend) on this or most other issues, but he did not denounce the nativist hatred for his opponent.\nHarding's conciliatory campaigning style aided him; one Harding friend deemed the candidate's stump speech during the 1914 fall campaign as \"a rambling, high-sounding mixture of platitudes, patriotism, and pure nonsense\". Dean notes, \"Harding used his oratory to good effect; it got him elected, making as few enemies as possible in the process.\" Harding won by over 100,000 votes in a landslide that also swept into office a Republican governor, Frank B. Willis.\nJunior senator.\nWhen Harding joined the U.S. Senate, the Democrats controlled both houses of Congress, and were led by President Wilson. As a junior senator in the minority, Harding received unimportant committee assignments, but carried out those duties assiduously. He was a safe, conservative, Republican vote. As during his time in the Ohio Senate, Harding came to be widely liked.\nOn two issues, women's suffrage, and the prohibition of alcohol, where picking the wrong side would have damaged his presidential prospects in 1920, he prospered by taking nuanced positions. As senator-elect, he indicated that he could not support votes for women until Ohio did. Increased support for suffrage there and among Senate Republicans meant that by the time Congress voted on the issue, Harding was a firm supporter. Harding, who drank, initially voted against banning alcohol. He voted for the Eighteenth Amendment, which imposed prohibition, after successfully moving to modify it by placing a time limit on ratification, which was expected to kill it. Once it was ratified anyway, Harding voted to override Wilson's veto of the Volstead Bill, which implemented the amendment, assuring the support of the Anti-Saloon League.\nHarding, as a politician respected by both Republicans and Progressives, was asked to be temporary chairman of the 1916 Republican National Convention and to deliver the keynote address. He urged delegates to stand as a united party. The convention nominated Justice Charles Evans Hughes. Harding reached out to Roosevelt once the former president declined the 1916 Progressive nomination, a refusal that effectively scuttled that party. In the November 1916 presidential election, despite increasing Republican unity, Hughes was narrowly defeated by Wilson.\nHarding spoke and voted in favor of the resolution of war requested by Wilson in April 1917 that plunged the United States into World War I. In August, Harding argued for giving Wilson almost dictatorial powers, stating that democracy had little place in time of war. Harding voted for most war legislation, including the Espionage Act of 1917, which restricted civil liberties, though he opposed the excess profits tax as anti-business. In May 1918, Harding, less enthusiastic about Wilson, opposed a bill to expand the president's powers.\nIn the 1918 midterm congressional elections, held just before the armistice, Republicans narrowly took control of the Senate. Harding was appointed to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Wilson took no senators with him to the Paris Peace Conference, confident that he could force what became the Treaty of Versailles through the Senate by appealing to the people. When he returned with a single treaty establishing both peace and a League of Nations, the country was overwhelmingly on his side. Many senators disliked Article X of the League Covenant, that committed signatories to the defense of any member nation that was attacked, seeing it as forcing the United States to war without the assent of Congress. Harding was one of 39 senators who signed a round-robin letter opposing the League. When Wilson invited the Foreign Relations Committee to the White House to informally discuss the treaty, Harding ably questioned Wilson about Article X; the president evaded his inquiries. The Senate debated Versailles in September 1919, and Harding made a major speech against it. By then, Wilson had suffered a stroke while on a speaking tour. With an incapacitated president in the White House and less support in the country, the treaty was defeated.\nPresidential election of 1920.\nPrimary campaign.\nWith most Progressives having rejoined the Republican Party, their former leader, Theodore Roosevelt, was deemed likely to make a third run for the White House in 1920, and was the overwhelming favorite for the Republican nomination. These plans ended when Roosevelt suddenly died on January 6, 1919. A number of candidates quickly emerged, including General Leonard Wood, Illinois Governor Frank Lowden, California Senator Hiram Johnson, and a host of relatively minor possibilities such as Herbert Hoover (renowned for his World War I relief work), Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge, and General John J. Pershing.\nHarding, while he wanted to be president, was as much motivated in entering the race by his desire to keep control of Ohio Republican politics, enabling his re-election to the Senate in 1920. Among those coveting Harding's seat were former governor Willis (he had been defeated by James M. Cox in 1916) and Colonel William Cooper Procter (head of Procter &amp; Gamble). On December 17, 1919, Harding made a low-key announcement of his presidential candidacy. Leading Republicans disliked Wood and Johnson, both of the progressive faction of the party, and Lowden, who had an independent streak, was deemed little better. Harding was far more acceptable to the \"Old Guard\" leaders of the party.\nDaugherty, who became Harding's campaign manager, was sure none of the other candidates could garner a majority. His strategy was to make Harding an acceptable choice to delegates once the leaders faltered. Daugherty established a \"Harding for President\" campaign office in Washington (run by his confidant, Jess Smith), and worked to manage a network of Harding friends and supporters, including Frank Scobey of Texas (clerk of the Ohio State Senate during Harding's years there). Harding worked to shore up his support through incessant letter-writing. Despite the candidate's work, according to Russell, \"without Daugherty's Mephistophelean efforts, Harding would never have stumbled forward to the nomination.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmerica's present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate; not experiment, but equipoise; not submergence in internationality, but sustainment in triumphant nationality.\nWarren G. Harding, speech before the Home Market Club, Boston, May 14, 1920\nThere were only 16 presidential primary states in 1920, of which the most crucial to Harding was Ohio. Harding had to have some loyalists at the convention to have any chance of nomination, and the Wood campaign hoped to knock Harding out of the race by taking Ohio. Wood campaigned in the state, and his supporter, Procter, spent large sums; Harding spoke in the non-confrontational style he had adopted in 1914. Harding and Daugherty were so confident of sweeping Ohio's 48 delegates that the candidate went on to the next state, Indiana, before the April 27 Ohio primary. Harding carried Ohio by only 15,000 votes over Wood, taking less than half the total vote, and won only 39 of 48 delegates. In Indiana, Harding finished fourth, with less than ten percent of the vote, and failed to win a single delegate. He was willing to give up and have Daugherty file his re-election papers for the Senate, but Florence Harding grabbed the phone from his hand, \"Warren Harding, what are you doing? Give up? Not until the convention is over. Think of your friends in Ohio!\" On learning that Daugherty had left the phone line, the future First Lady retorted, \"Well, you tell Harry Daugherty for me that we're in this fight until Hell freezes over.\"\nAfter he recovered from the shock of the poor results, Harding traveled to Boston, where he delivered a speech that according to Dean, \"would resonate throughout the 1920 campaign and history.\" There, he said that \"America's present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration.\" Dean notes, \"Harding, more than the other aspirants, was reading the nation's pulse correctly.\"\nConvention.\nThe 1920 Republican National Convention opened at the Chicago Coliseum on June 8, 1920, assembling delegates who were bitterly divided, most recently over the results of a Senate investigation into campaign spending, which had just been released. That report found that Wood had spent $1.8 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024), lending substance to Johnson's claims that Wood was trying to buy the presidency. Some of the $600,000 that Lowden had spent had wound up in the pockets of two convention delegates. Johnson had spent $194,000, and Harding $113,000. Johnson was deemed to be behind the inquiry, and the rage of the Lowden and Wood factions put an end to any possible compromise among the frontrunners. Of the almost 1,000 delegates, 27 were women\u2014the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, guaranteeing women the vote, was within one state of ratification, and would pass before the end of August. The convention had no boss, most uninstructed delegates voted as they pleased, and with a Democrat in the White House, the party's leaders could not use patronage to get their way.\nReporters deemed Harding unlikely to be nominated due to his poor showing in the primaries, and relegated him to a place among the dark horses. Harding, who like the other candidates was in Chicago supervising his campaign, had finished sixth in the final public opinion poll, behind the three main candidates as well as former Justice Hughes and Herbert Hoover, and only slightly ahead of Coolidge.\nAfter the convention dealt with other matters, the nominations for president opened on the morning of Friday, June 11. Harding had asked Willis to place his name in nomination, and the former governor responded with a speech popular among the delegates, both for its folksiness and for its brevity in the intense Chicago heat. Reporter Mark Sullivan, who was present, called it a splendid combination of \"oratory, grand opera, and hog calling.\" Willis confided, leaning over the podium railing, \"Say, boys\u2014and girls too\u2014why not name Warren Harding?\" The laughter and applause that followed created a warm feeling for Harding.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI don't expect Senator Harding to be nominated on the first, second, or third ballots, but I think we can well afford to take chances that about eleven minutes after two o'clock on Friday morning at the convention, when fifteen or twenty men, somewhat weary, are sitting around a table, some one of them will say: \"Who will we nominate?\" At that decisive time, the friends of Senator Harding can suggest him and afford to abide by the result.\nHarry M. Daugherty\nFour ballots were taken on the afternoon of June 11, and they revealed a deadlock. With 493 votes needed to nominate, Wood was the closest with 314&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442; Lowden had 289&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442. The best Harding had done was 65&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442. Chairman Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, the Senate Majority Leader, adjourned the convention about 7\u00a0p.m.\nThe night of June 11\u201312, 1920 would become famous in political history as the night of the \"smoke-filled room\", in which, legend has it, party elders agreed to force the convention to nominate Harding. Historians have focused on the session held in the suite of Republican National Committee (RNC) Chairman Will Hays at the Blackstone Hotel, at which senators and others came and went, and numerous possible candidates were discussed. Utah Senator Reed Smoot, before his departure early in the evening, backed Harding, telling Hays and the others that as the Democrats were likely to nominate Governor Cox, they should pick Harding to win Ohio. Smoot also told \"The New York Times\" that there had been an agreement to nominate Harding, but that it would not be done for several ballots yet. This was not true: a number of participants backed Harding (others supported his rivals), but there was no pact to nominate him, and the senators had little power to enforce any agreement. Two other participants in the smoke-filled room discussions, Kansas Senator Charles Curtis and Colonel George Brinton McClellan Harvey, a close friend of Hays, predicted to the press that Harding would be nominated because of the liabilities of the other candidates.\nHeadlines in the morning newspapers suggested intrigue. Historian Wesley M. Bagby wrote, \"Various groups actually worked along separate lines to bring about the nomination\u2014without combination and with very little contact.\" Bagby said that the key factor in Harding's nomination was his wide popularity among the rank and file of the delegates.\nThe reassembled delegates had heard rumors that Harding was the choice of a cabal of senators. Although this was not true, delegates believed it, and sought a way out by voting for Harding. When balloting resumed on the morning of June 12, Harding gained votes on each of the next four ballots, rising to 133&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 as the two front runners saw little change. Lodge then declared a three-hour recess, to the outrage of Daugherty, who raced to the podium, and confronted him, \"You cannot defeat this man this way! The motion was not carried! You cannot defeat this man!\" Lodge and others used the break to try to stop the Harding momentum and make RNC Chairman Hays the nominee, a scheme Hays refused to have anything to do with. The ninth ballot, after some initial suspense, saw delegation after delegation break for Harding, who took the lead with 374&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 votes to 249 for Wood and 121&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 for Lowden (Johnson had 83). Lowden released his delegates to Harding, and the tenth ballot, held at 6\u00a0p.m., was a mere formality, with Harding finishing with 672&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20445 votes to 156 for Wood. The nomination was made unanimous. The delegates, desperate to leave town before they incurred more hotel expenses, then proceeded to the vice presidential nomination. Harding wanted Senator Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin, who was unwilling to run, but before Lenroot's name could be withdrawn and another candidate decided on, Oregon delegate Wallace McCamant proposed Governor Coolidge and received a roar of approval. Coolidge, popular for his role in breaking the Boston police strike of 1919, was nominated for vice president, receiving two and a fraction votes more than Harding had. James Morgan wrote in \"The Boston Globe\": \"The delegates would not listen to remaining in Chicago over Sunday\u00a0... the President makers did not have a clean shirt. On such things, Rollo, turns the destiny of nations.\"\nGeneral election campaign.\nThe Harding/Coolidge ticket was quickly backed by Republican newspapers, but those of other viewpoints expressed disappointment. The \"New York World\" found Harding the least-qualified candidate since James Buchanan, deeming the Ohio senator a \"weak and mediocre\" man who \"never had an original idea.\" The Hearst newspapers called Harding \"the flag-bearer of a new Senatorial autocracy.\" \"The New York Times\" described the Republican presidential candidate as \"a very respectable Ohio politician of the second class.\"\nThe Democratic National Convention opened in San Francisco on June 28, 1920, under a shadow cast by Woodrow Wilson, who wished to be nominated for a third term. Delegates were convinced Wilson's health would not permit him to serve, and looked elsewhere for a candidate. Former Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo was a major contender, but he was Wilson's son-in-law, and refused to consider a nomination so long as the president wanted it. Many at the convention voted for McAdoo anyway, and a deadlock ensued with Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. On the 44th ballot, the Democrats nominated Governor Cox for president, with his running mate Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt. As Cox was a newspaper owner and editor, this placed two Ohio editors against each other for the presidency, and some complained there was no real political choice as both Cox and Harding were seen as economic conservatives. But ideologically, the candidates were distinctly different, with Cox a liberal and Harding a conservative.\nHarding elected to conduct a front porch campaign, like McKinley in 1896. Some years earlier, Harding had had his front porch remodeled to resemble McKinley's, which his neighbors felt signified presidential ambitions. The candidate remained at home in Marion, and gave addresses to visiting delegations. In the meantime, Cox and Roosevelt stumped the nation, giving hundreds of speeches. Coolidge spoke in the Northeast, later on in the South, and was not a significant factor in the election.\nIn Marion, Harding ran his campaign. As a newspaperman himself, he fell into easy camaraderie with the press covering him, enjoying a relationship few presidents have equaled. His \"return to normalcy\" theme was aided by the atmosphere that Marion provided, an orderly place that induced nostalgia in many voters. The front porch campaign allowed Harding to avoid mistakes, and as time dwindled towards the election, his strength grew. The travels of the Democratic candidates eventually caused Harding to make several short speaking tours, but for the most part, he remained in Marion. The United States had no need for another Wilson, Harding argued, appealing for a president \"near the normal\".\nHarding's vague oratory irritated some; McAdoo described a typical Harding speech as \"an army of pompous phrases moving over the landscape in search of an idea. Sometimes these meandering words actually capture a straggling thought and bear it triumphantly, a prisoner in their midst, until it died of servitude and over work.\" H. L. Mencken concurred, \"it reminds me of a string of wet sponges, it reminds me of tattered washing on the line; it reminds me of stale bean soup, of college yells, of dogs barking idiotically through endless nights. It is so bad that a kind of grandeur creeps into it. It drags itself out of the dark abysm\u00a0... of pish, and crawls insanely up the topmost pinnacle of tosh. It is rumble and bumble. It is balder and dash.\" \"The New York Times\" took a more positive view of Harding's speeches, writing that in them the majority of people could find \"a reflection of their own indeterminate thoughts.\"\nWilson had said that the 1920 election would be a \"great and solemn referendum\" on the League of Nations, making it difficult for Cox to maneuver on the issue\u2014although Roosevelt strongly supported the League, Cox was less enthusiastic. Harding opposed entry into the League of Nations as negotiated by Wilson, but favored an \"association of nations,\" based on the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. This was general enough to satisfy most Republicans, and only a few bolted the party over this issue. By October, Cox had realized there was widespread public opposition to Article X, and said that reservations to the treaty might be necessary; this shift allowed Harding to say no more on the subject.\nThe RNC hired Albert Lasker, an advertising executive from Chicago, to publicize Harding, and Lasker unleashed a broad-based advertising campaign that used many now-standard advertising techniques for the first time in a presidential campaign. Lasker's approach included newsreels and sound recordings. Visitors to Marion had their photographs taken with Senator and Mrs. Harding, and copies were sent to their hometown newspapers. Billboard posters, newspapers and magazines were employed in addition to motion pictures. Telemarketers were used to make phone calls with scripted dialogues to promote Harding.\nDuring the campaign, opponents spread old rumors that Harding's great-great-grandfather was a West Indian black person and that other blacks might be found in his family tree. Harding's campaign manager rejected the accusations. Wooster College professor William Estabrook Chancellor publicized the rumors, based on supposed family research, but perhaps reflecting no more than local gossip.\nBy Election Day, November 2, 1920, few had any doubts that the Republican ticket would win. Harding received 60.2\u00a0percent of the popular vote, the highest percentage since the evolution of the two-party system, and 404 electoral votes. Cox received 34\u00a0percent of the national vote and 127 electoral votes. Campaigning from a federal prison where he was serving a sentence for opposing the war, Socialist Eugene V. Debs received 3\u00a0percent of the national vote. The Republicans greatly increased their majority in each house of Congress.\nPresidency (1921\u20131923).\nInauguration and appointments.\nHarding was inaugurated on March 4, 1921, in the presence of his wife and father. Harding preferred a subdued inauguration without the customary parade, leaving only the actual ceremony and a brief reception at the White House. In his inaugural address, he declared, \"Our most dangerous tendency is to expect too much from the government and at the same time do too little for it.\"\nAfter the election, Harding announced that no decisions about appointments would be made until he returned from a vacation in December. He traveled to Texas, where he fished and played golf with his friend Frank Scobey (soon to be director of the Mint) and then sailed for the Panama Canal Zone. He visited Washington when Congress opened in early December, and he was afforded a hero's welcome as the first sitting senator to be elected to the White House. Back in Ohio, Harding planned to consult with the country's best minds, who visited Marion to offer their counsel regarding appointments.\nHarding chose pro-League Charles Evans Hughes as Secretary of State, ignoring the advice of Senator Lodge and others. After Charles G. Dawes declined the Treasury position, he chose Pittsburgh banker Andrew W. Mellon, one of the richest people in the country. He appointed Herbert Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. RNC chairman Will Hays was made Postmaster General, then a cabinet post; he left after a year in the position to become chief censor to the motion-picture industry.\nThe two Harding cabinet appointees who darkened the reputation of his administration by their involvement in scandal were Harding's Senate friend Albert B. Fall of New Mexico, the Interior Secretary, and Daugherty, the attorney general. Fall was a Western rancher and former miner who favored development. He was opposed by conservationists such as Gifford Pinchot, who wrote, \"it would have been possible to pick a worse man for Secretary of the Interior, but not altogether easy.\" \"The New York Times\" mocked the Daugherty appointment, writing that rather than selecting one of the best minds, Harding had been content \"to choose merely a best friend.\" Eugene P. Trani and David L. Wilson, in their volume on Harding's presidency, suggest that the appointment made sense then, as Daugherty was \"a competent lawyer well-acquainted with the seamy side of politics\u00a0... a first-class political troubleshooter and someone Harding could trust.\"\nForeign policy.\nEuropean relations and formally ending the war.\nHarding made it clear when he appointed Hughes as Secretary of State that the former justice would run foreign policy, a change from Wilson's hands-on management of international affairs. Hughes had to work within some broad outlines; after taking office, Harding hardened his stance on the League of Nations, deciding the U.S. would not join even a scaled-down version of the League. With the Treaty of Versailles unratified by the Senate, the U.S. remained technically at war with Germany, Austria, and Hungary. Peacemaking began with the Knox\u2013Porter Resolution, declaring the U.S. at peace and reserving any rights granted under Versailles. Treaties with Germany, Austria and Hungary, each containing many of the non-League provisions of the Treaty of Versailles, were ratified in 1921.\nThis still left the question of relations between the U.S. and the League. Hughes's State Department initially ignored communications from the League, or tried to bypass it through direct contacts with member nations. By 1922, though, the U.S., through its consul in Geneva, was dealing with the League, and though the U.S. refused to participate in any meeting with political implications, it sent observers to sessions on technical and humanitarian matters.\nBy the time Harding took office, there were calls from foreign governments for reduction of the massive war debt owed to the United States, and the German government sought to reduce the reparations that it was required to pay. The U.S. refused to consider any multilateral settlement. Harding sought passage of a plan proposed by Mellon to give the administration broad authority to reduce war debts in negotiation, but Congress, in 1922, passed a more restrictive bill. Hughes negotiated an agreement for Britain to pay off its war debt over 62 years at low interest, reducing the present value of the obligations. This agreement, approved by Congress in 1923, served as a model for negotiations with other nations. Talks with Germany on reduction of reparations payments resulted in the Dawes Plan of 1924.\nA pressing issue not resolved by Wilson was U.S. policy towards Bolshevik Russia. The U.S. had been among the nations that sent troops there after the Russian Revolution. Afterwards, Wilson refused to recognize the Russian SFSR. Harding's Commerce Secretary Hoover, with considerable experience in Russian affairs, took the lead on policy. When famine struck Russia in 1921, Hoover had the American Relief Administration, which he had headed, negotiate with the Russians to provide aid. Leaders of the U.S.S.R. (established in 1922) hoped in vain that the agreement would lead to recognition. Hoover supported trade with the Soviets, fearing U.S. companies would be frozen out of the Soviet market, but Hughes opposed this, and the matter was not resolved under Harding's presidency.\nDisarmament.\nHarding urged disarmament and lower defense costs during the campaign, but it had not been a major issue. He gave a speech to a joint session of Congress in April 1921, setting out his legislative priorities. Among the few foreign policy matters he mentioned was disarmament; he said the government could not \"be unmindful of the call for reduced expenditure\" on defense.\nIdaho Senator William Borah had proposed a conference at which the major naval powers, the U.S., Britain, and Japan, would agree to cuts in their fleets. Harding concurred, and after diplomatic discussions, representatives of nine nations convened in Washington in November 1921. Most of the diplomats first attended Armistice Day ceremonies at Arlington National Cemetery, where Harding spoke at the entombment of the Unknown Soldier of World War I, whose identity, \"took flight with his imperishable soul. We know not whence he came, only that his death marks him with the everlasting glory of an American dying for his country.\"\nHughes, in his speech at the opening session of the conference on November 12, 1921, made the American proposal\u2014the U.S. would decommission or not build 30 warships if Great Britain did likewise for 19 vessels, and Japan for 17. Hughes was generally successful, with agreements reached on this and other points, including settlement of disputes over islands in the Pacific, and limitations on the use of poison gas. The naval agreement applied only to battleships, and to some extent aircraft carriers, and ultimately did not prevent rearmament. Nevertheless, Harding and Hughes were widely applauded in the press for their work. Senator Lodge and the Senate Minority Leader, Alabama's Oscar Underwood, were part of the U.S. delegation, and they helped ensure the treaties made it through the Senate mostly unscathed, though that body added reservations to some.\nThe U.S. had acquired over a thousand vessels during World War I, and still owned most of them when Harding took office. Congress had authorized their disposal in 1920, but the Senate would not confirm Wilson's nominees to the Shipping Board. Harding appointed Albert Lasker as its chairman; the advertising executive undertook to run the fleet as profitably as possible until it could be sold. Few ships were marketable at anything approaching the government's cost. Lasker recommended a large subsidy to the merchant marine to facilitate sales, and Harding repeatedly urged Congress to enact it. The resulting bill was unpopular in the Midwest, and though it passed the House, it was defeated by a filibuster in the Senate, and most government ships were eventually scrapped.\nLatin America.\nIntervention in Latin America had been a minor campaign issue, though Harding spoke against Wilson's decision to send U.S. troops to the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and attacked the Democratic vice presidential candidate, Franklin Roosevelt, for his role in the Haitian intervention. Once Harding was sworn in, Hughes worked to improve relations with Latin American countries who were wary of the American use of the Monroe Doctrine to justify intervention; at the time of Harding's inauguration, the U.S. also had troops in Cuba and Nicaragua. The troops stationed in Cuba were withdrawn in 1921, but U.S. forces remained in the other three nations throughout Harding's presidency. In April 1921, Harding gained the ratification of the Thomson\u2013Urrutia Treaty with Colombia, granting that nation $25 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) as settlement for the U.S.-provoked Panamanian revolution of 1903. The Latin American nations were not fully satisfied, as the U.S. refused to renounce interventionism, though Hughes pledged to limit it to nations near the Panama Canal, and to make it clear what the U.S. aims were.\nThe U.S. had intervened repeatedly in Mexico under Wilson, and had withdrawn diplomatic recognition, setting conditions for reinstatement. The Mexican government under President \u00c1lvaro Obreg\u00f3n wanted recognition before negotiations, but Wilson and his final Secretary of State, Bainbridge Colby, refused. Both Hughes and Fall opposed recognition; Hughes instead sent a draft treaty to the Mexicans in May 1921, which included pledges to reimburse Americans for losses in Mexico since the 1910 revolution there. Obreg\u00f3n was unwilling to sign a treaty before being recognized, and worked to improve the relationship between American business and Mexico, reaching agreement with creditors, and mounting a public relations campaign in the United States. This had its effect, and by mid-1922, Fall was less influential than he had been, lessening the resistance to recognition. The two presidents appointed commissioners to reach a deal, and the U.S. recognized the Obreg\u00f3n government on August 31, 1923, just under a month after Harding's death, substantially on the terms proffered by Mexico.\nDomestic policy.\nPostwar recession and recovery.\nWhen Harding took office on March 4, 1921, the nation was in the midst of a postwar economic decline. At the suggestion of legislative leaders, Harding called a special session of Congress, to convene April 11. When Harding addressed the joint session the following day, he urged the reduction of income taxes (raised during the war), an increase in tariffs on agricultural goods to protect the American farmer, as well as more wide-ranging reforms, such as support for highways, aviation, and radio. It was not until May 27 that Congress passed an emergency tariff increase on agricultural products. An act authorizing a Bureau of the Budget followed on June 10, and Harding appointed Charles Dawes as bureau director with a mandate to cut expenditures.\nMellon's tax cuts.\nTreasury Secretary Mellon also recommended that Congress cut income tax rates, and that the corporate excess profits tax be abolished. The House Ways and Means Committee endorsed Mellon's proposals, but some congressmen wanting to raise corporate tax rates fought the measure. Harding was unsure what side to endorse, telling a friend, \"I can't make a damn thing out of this tax problem. I listen to one side, and they seem right, and then\u2014God!\u2014I talk to the other side, and they seem just as right.\" Harding tried compromise, and gained passage of a bill in the House after the end of the excess profits tax was delayed a year. In the Senate, the bill became entangled in efforts to vote World War I veterans a soldier's bonus. Frustrated by the delays, on July 12, Harding appeared before the Senate to urge passage of the tax legislation without the bonus. It was not until November that the revenue bill finally passed, with higher rates than Mellon had proposed.\nIn opposing the veterans' bonus, Harding argued in his Senate address that much was already being done for them by a grateful nation, and that the bill would \"break down our Treasury, from which so much is later on to be expected\". The Senate sent the bonus bill back to committee, but the issue returned when Congress reconvened in December 1921. A bill providing a bonus, though unfunded, was passed by both houses in September 1922, but Harding's veto was narrowly sustained. A non-cash bonus for soldiers passed over Coolidge's veto in 1924.\nIn his first annual message to Congress, Harding sought the power to adjust tariff rates. The passage of the tariff bill in the Senate, and in conference committee became a feeding frenzy of lobby interests. When Harding signed the Fordney\u2013McCumber Tariff Act on September 21, 1922, he made a brief statement, praising the bill only for giving him some power to change rates. According to Trani and Wilson, the bill was \"ill-considered. It wrought havoc in international commerce and made the repayment of war debts more difficult.\"\nMellon ordered a study that demonstrated historically that, as income tax rates were increased, money was driven underground or abroad, and he concluded that lower rates would increase tax revenues. Based on his advice, Harding's revenue bill cut taxes, starting in 1922. The top marginal rate was reduced annually in four stages from 73% in 1921 to 25% in 1925. Taxes were cut for lower incomes starting in 1923, and the lower rates substantially increased the money flowing to the treasury. They also pushed massive deregulation, and federal spending as a share of GDP fell from 6.5% to 3.5%. By late 1922, the economy began to turn around. Unemployment was pared from its 1921 high of 12% to an average of 3.3% for the remainder of the decade. The misery index, a combined measure of unemployment and inflation, had its sharpest decline in U.S. history under Harding. Wages, profits, and productivity all made substantial gains; annual GDP increases averaged at over 5% during the 1920s. Libertarian historians Larry Schweikart and Michael Allen argue that, \"Mellon's tax policies set the stage for the most amazing growth yet seen in America's already impressive economy.\"\nEmbracing new technologies.\nThe 1920s were a time of modernization for America\u2014use of electricity became increasingly common. Mass production of motorized vehicles stimulated other industries as well, such as highway construction, rubber, steel, and building, as hotels were erected to accommodate the tourists venturing upon the roads. This economic boost helped bring the nation out of the recession. To improve and expand the nation's highway system, Harding signed the Federal Highway Act of 1921. From 1921 to 1923, the federal government spent $162\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024) on America's highway system, infusing the U.S. economy with a large amount of capital. In 1922, Harding proclaimed that America was in the age of the \"motor car\", which \"reflects our standard of living and gauges the speed of our present-day life\".\nHarding urged regulation of radio broadcasting in his April 1921 speech to Congress. Commerce Secretary Hoover took charge of this project, and convened a conference of radio broadcasters in 1922, which led to a voluntary agreement for licensing of radio frequencies through the Commerce Department. Both Harding and Hoover realized something more than an agreement was needed, but Congress was slow to act, not imposing radio regulation until 1927.\nHarding also wished to promote aviation, and Hoover again took the lead, convening a national conference on commercial aviation. The discussions focused on safety matters, inspection of airplanes, and licensing of pilots. Harding again promoted legislation but nothing was done until 1926, when the Air Commerce Act created the Bureau of Aeronautics within Hoover's Commerce Department.\nBusiness and labor.\nHarding's attitude toward business was that government should aid it as much as possible. He was suspicious of organized labor, viewing it as a conspiracy against business. He sought to get them to work together at a conference on unemployment that he called to meet in September 1921 at Hoover's recommendation. Harding warned in his opening address that no federal money would be available. No important legislation came as a result, though some public works projects were accelerated.\nWithin broad limits, Harding allowed each cabinet secretary to run his department as he saw fit. Hoover expanded the Commerce Department to make it more useful to business. This was consistent with Hoover's view that the private sector should take the lead in managing the economy. Harding greatly respected his Commerce Secretary, often asked his advice, and backed him to the hilt, calling Hoover \"the smartest 'gink' I know\".\nWidespread strikes marked 1922, as labor sought redress for falling wages and increased unemployment. In April, 500,000 coal miners, led by John L. Lewis, struck over wage cuts. Mining executives argued that the industry was seeing hard times; Lewis accused them of trying to break the union. As the strike became protracted, Harding offered compromise to settle it. As Harding proposed, the miners agreed to return to work, and Congress created a commission to look into their grievances.\nOn July 1, 1922, 400,000 railroad workers went on strike. Harding recommended a settlement that made some concessions, but management objected. Attorney General Daugherty convinced Judge James H. Wilkerson to issue a sweeping injunction to break the strike. Although there was public support for the Wilkerson injunction, Harding felt it went too far, and had Daugherty and Wilkerson amend it. The injunction succeeded in ending the strike; however, tensions remained high between railroad workers and management for years.\nBy 1922, the eight-hour day had become common in American industry. One exception was in steel mills, where workers labored through a twelve-hour workday, seven days a week. Hoover considered this practice barbaric and got Harding to convene a conference of steel manufacturers with a view to ending the system. The conference established a committee under the leadership of U. S. Steel chairman Elbert Gary, which in early 1923 recommended against ending the practice. Harding sent a letter to Gary deploring the result, which was printed in the press, and public outcry caused the manufacturers to reverse themselves and standardize the eight-hour day.\nCivil rights and immigration.\nAlthough Harding's first address to Congress called for passage of anti-lynching legislation, he initially seemed inclined to do no more for African Americans than Republican presidents of the recent past had; he asked Cabinet officers to find places for blacks in their departments. Sinclair suggested that the fact that Harding received two-fifths of the Southern vote in 1920 led him to see political opportunity for his party in the Solid South. On October 26, 1921, Harding gave a speech in Birmingham, Alabama, to a segregated audience of 20,000 Whites and 10,000 Blacks. Harding, while saying that the social and racial differences between Whites and Blacks could not be bridged, urged equal political rights for the latter. Many African-Americans at that time voted Republican, especially in the Democratic South, and Harding said he did not mind seeing that support end if the result was a strong two-party system in the South. He was willing to see literacy tests for voting continue, if applied fairly to White and Black voters. \"Whether you like it or not,\" Harding told his segregated audience, \"unless our democracy is a lie, you must stand for that equality.\" The White section of the audience listened in silence, while the Black section cheered. Three days after the Tulsa race massacre of 1921, Harding spoke at the all-Black Lincoln University in Pennsylvania. He declared, \"Despite the demagogues, the idea of our oneness as Americans has risen superior to every appeal to mere class and group. And so, I wish it might be in this matter of our national problem of races.\" Speaking directly about the events in Tulsa, he said, \"God grant that, in the soberness, the fairness, and the justice of this country, we never see another spectacle like it.\"\nHarding supported Congressman Leonidas Dyer's federal anti-lynching bill, which passed the House of Representatives in January 1922. When it reached the Senate floor in November 1922, it was filibustered by Southern Democrats, and Lodge withdrew it to allow the ship subsidy bill Harding favored to be debated, though it was likewise blocked. Blacks blamed Harding for the Dyer bill's defeat; Harding biographer Robert K. Murray noted that it was hastened to its end by Harding's desire to have the ship subsidy bill considered.\nWith the public suspicious of immigrants, especially those who might be socialists or communists, Congress passed the Per Centum Act of 1921, signed by Harding on May 19, 1921, as a quick means of restricting immigration. The act reduced the numbers of immigrants to 3% of those from a given country living in the U.S., based on the 1910 census. This would, in practice, not restrict immigration from Ireland and Germany, but would bar many Italians and eastern European Jews. Harding and Secretary of Labor James Davis believed that enforcement had to be humane, and at the Secretary's recommendation, Harding allowed almost 1,000 deportable immigrants to remain. Coolidge later signed the Immigration Act of 1924, permanently restricting immigration to the U.S.\nEugene Debs and political prisoners.\nHarding's Socialist opponent in the 1920 election, Eugene Debs, was serving a ten-year sentence in the Atlanta Penitentiary for speaking against the war. Wilson had refused to pardon him before leaving office. Daugherty met with Debs, and was deeply impressed. There was opposition from veterans, including the American Legion, and also from Florence Harding. The president did not feel he could release Debs until the war was officially over, but once the peace treaties were signed, commuted Debs's sentence on December 23, 1921. At Harding's request, Debs visited the president at the White House before going home to Indiana.\nHarding released 23 other war opponents at the same time as Debs, and continued to review cases and release political prisoners throughout his presidency. Harding defended his prisoner releases as necessary to return the nation to normalcy.\nJudicial appointments.\nHarding appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. When Chief Justice Edward Douglass White died in May 1921, Harding was unsure whether to appoint former president Taft or former Utah senator George Sutherland\u2014he had promised seats on the court to both men. After briefly considering awaiting another vacancy and appointing them both, he chose Taft as Chief Justice. Sutherland was appointed to the court in 1922, to be followed by two other economic conservatives, Pierce Butler and Edward Terry Sanford, in 1923.\nHarding also appointed six judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, 42 judges to the United States district courts, and two judges to the United States Court of Customs Appeals.\nPolitical setbacks and western tour.\nEntering the 1922 midterm congressional election campaign, Harding and the Republicans had followed through on many of their campaign promises. But some of the fulfilled pledges, like cutting taxes for the well-off, did not appeal to the electorate. The economy had not returned to normalcy, with unemployment at 11\u00a0percent, and organized labor angry over the outcome of the strikes. From 303 Republicans elected to the House in 1920, the new 68th Congress saw that party fall to a 221\u2013213 majority. In the Senate, the Republicans lost eight seats, and had 51 of 96 senators in the new Congress, which Harding did not survive to meet.\nA month after the election, the lame-duck session of the outgoing 67th Congress met. Harding then believed his early view of the presidency\u2014that it should propose policies, but leave their adoption to Congress\u2014was no longer enough, and he lobbied Congress, although in vain, to get his ship subsidy bill through. Once Congress left town in early March 1923, Harding's popularity began to recover. The economy was improving, and the programs of Harding's more able Cabinet members, such as Hughes, Mellon and Hoover, were showing results. Most Republicans realized that there was no practical alternative to supporting Harding in 1924 for his re-election campaign.\nIn the first half of 1923, Harding did two things that were later said to indicate foreknowledge of death: he sold the \"Star\" (though undertaking to remain as a contributing editor for ten years after his presidency), and he made a new will. Harding had long suffered occasional health problems, but when he was not experiencing symptoms, he tended to eat, drink and smoke too much. By 1919, he was aware he had a heart condition. Stress caused by the presidency and by Florence Harding's own chronic kidney condition debilitated him, and he never fully recovered from an episode of influenza in January 1923. After that, Harding, an avid golfer, had difficulty completing a round. In June 1923, Ohio Senator Willis met with Harding, but brought to the president's attention only two of the five items he intended to discuss. When asked why, Willis responded, \"Warren seemed so tired.\"\nIn early June 1923, Harding set out on a journey, which he dubbed the \"Voyage of Understanding\". The president planned to cross the country, go north to Alaska Territory, journey south along the West Coast, then travel by a U.S. Navy ship from San Diego along the Mexican and Central America West Coast, through the Panama Canal, to Puerto Rico, and return to Washington at the end of August. Harding loved to travel and had long contemplated a trip to Alaska. The trip would allow him to speak widely across the country, to politic and bloviate in advance of the 1924 campaign, and give him some rest away from Washington's oppressive summer heat.\nHarding's political advisers had given him a physically demanding schedule, even though the president had ordered it cut back. In Kansas City, Harding spoke on transportation issues; in Hutchinson, Kansas, agriculture was the theme. In Denver, he spoke on his support of Prohibition, and continued west making a series of speeches not matched by any president until Franklin Roosevelt. Harding had become a supporter of the World Court, and wanted the U.S. to become a member. In addition to making speeches, he visited Yellowstone and Zion National Parks, and dedicated a monument on the Oregon Trail at a celebration organized by venerable pioneer Ezra Meeker and others.\nOn July 5, Harding embarked on in Washington state. He was the first president to visit Alaska, and spent hours watching the dramatic landscapes from the deck of the \"Henderson\". After several stops along the coast, the presidential party left the ship at Seward to take the Alaska Railroad to McKinley Park and Fairbanks, where he addressed a crowd of 1,500 in heat. The party was to return to Seward by the Richardson Trail, but due to Harding's fatigue, they went by train.\nOn July 26, 1923, Harding toured Vancouver, British Columbia as the first sitting American president to visit Canada. He was welcomed by the Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia Walter Nichol, Premier of British Columbia John Oliver, and the Mayor of Vancouver, and spoke to a crowd of over 50,000. Two years after his death, a memorial to Harding was unveiled in Stanley Park. Harding visited a golf course, but completed only six holes before becoming fatigued. After resting for an hour, he played the 17th and 18th holes so it would appear he had completed the round. He did not succeed in hiding his exhaustion; one reporter thought he looked so tired that a rest of mere days would be insufficient to refresh him.\nIn Seattle the next day, Harding kept up his busy schedule, giving a speech to 25,000 people at the stadium at the University of Washington. In the final speech he gave, Harding predicted statehood for Alaska. The president rushed through his speech, not waiting for applause from the audience.\nDeath and state funeral.\nHarding went to bed early the evening of July 27, 1923, a few hours after giving the speech at the University of Washington. Later that night, he called for his physician Charles E. Sawyer, complaining of pain in the upper abdomen. Sawyer thought that it was a recurrence of stomach upset, but Dr. Joel T. Boone suspected a heart problem. The press was told Harding had experienced an \"acute gastrointestinal attack\" and his scheduled weekend in Portland was cancelled. He felt better the next day, as the train rushed to San Francisco, where they arrived the morning of July 29. He insisted on walking from the train to the car, and was then rushed to the Palace Hotel, where he suffered a relapse. Doctors found that not only was his heart causing problems, but also that he had pneumonia, and he was confined to bed rest in his hotel room. Doctors treated him with liquid caffeine and digitalis, and he seemed to improve. Hoover released Harding's foreign policy address advocating membership in the World Court, and the president was pleased that it was favorably received. By the afternoon of August 2, Harding's condition still seemed to be improving and his doctors allowed him to sit up in bed. At around 7:30 that evening, Florence was reading to him \"A Calm Review of a Calm Man\", a flattering article about him from \"The Saturday Evening Post\"; she paused and he told her, \"That's good. Go on, read some more.\" Those were to be his last words. She resumed reading when, a few seconds later, Harding twisted convulsively and collapsed back in the bed, gasping. Florence Harding immediately called the doctors into the room, but they were unable to revive him with stimulants. Harding was pronounced dead a few minutes later, at the age of 57. Harding's death was initially attributed to a cerebral hemorrhage, as doctors at the time did not generally understand the symptoms of cardiac arrest. Florence Harding did not consent to have the president autopsied.\nHarding's unexpected death came as a great shock to the nation. He was liked and admired, both the press and public had followed his illness closely, and had been reassured by his apparent recovery. Harding's body was carried to his train in a casket for a journey across the nation, which was followed closely in the newspapers. Nine million people lined the railroad tracks as the train carrying his body proceeded from San Francisco to Washington, D.C., where he lay in state at the United States Capitol rotunda. After funeral services there, Harding's body was transported to Marion, Ohio, for burial.\nIn Marion, Harding's body was placed on a horse-drawn hearse, which was followed by President Coolidge and Chief Justice Taft, then by Harding's widow and his father. They followed the hearse through the city, past the \"Star\" building and finally to the Marion Cemetery where the casket was placed in the cemetery's receiving vault. Funeral guests included inventor Thomas Edison and industrialist businessmen Henry Ford and Harvey Firestone. Warren Harding and Florence Harding, who died the following year, rest in the Harding Tomb, which was dedicated in 1931 by U.S. President Herbert Hoover.\nScandals.\nHarding appointed friends and acquaintances to federal positions. Some served competently, such as Charles E. Sawyer, the Hardings' personal physician from Marion who attended to them in the White House, and alerted Harding to the Veterans' Bureau scandal. Others proved ineffective in office, such as Daniel R. Crissinger, a Marion lawyer whom Harding made Comptroller of the Currency and later a governor of the Federal Reserve Board; another was Harding's old friend Frank Scobey, Director of the Mint, who Trani and Wilson noted \"did little damage during his tenure.\" Still others of these associates proved corrupt and were later dubbed the \"Ohio Gang\".\nMost of the scandals that have marred the reputation of Harding's administration did not emerge until after his death. The Veterans' Bureau scandal was known to Harding in January 1923 but, according to Trani and Wilson, \"the president's handling of it did him little credit.\" Harding allowed the corrupt director of the bureau, Charles R. Forbes, to flee to Europe, though he later returned and served prison time. Harding had learned that Daugherty's factotum at the Justice Department, Jess Smith, was involved in corruption. The president ordered Daugherty to get Smith out of Washington and removed his name from the upcoming presidential trip to Alaska. Smith committed suicide on May 30, 1923. It is uncertain how much Harding knew about Smith's illicit activities. Murray noted that Harding was not involved in the corruption and did not condone it.\nHoover accompanied Harding on the Western trip and later wrote that Harding asked what Hoover would do if he knew of some great scandal, whether to publicize it or bury it. Hoover replied that Harding should publish and get credit for integrity, and asked for details. Harding said that it had to do with Smith but, when Hoover enquired as to Daugherty's possible involvement, Harding refused to answer.\nTeapot Dome.\nThe scandal which has likely done the greatest damage to Harding's reputation is Teapot Dome. Like most of the administration's scandals, it came to light after Harding's death, and he was not aware of the illegal aspects. Teapot Dome involved an oil reserve in Wyoming which was one of three set aside for use by the Navy in a national emergency. There was a longstanding argument that the reserves should be developed; Wilson's first Interior Secretary Franklin Knight Lane was an advocate of this position. When the Harding administration took office, Interior Secretary Fall took up Lane's argument and Harding signed an executive order in May 1921 transferring the reserves from the Navy Department to Interior. This was done with the consent of Navy Secretary Edwin C. Denby.\nThe Interior Department announced in July 1921 that Edward Doheny had been awarded a lease to drill along the edges of the Elk Hills naval reserve in California. The announcement attracted little controversy, as the oil would have been lost to wells on adjacent private land. Wyoming Senator John Kendrick had heard from constituents that Teapot Dome had also been leased, but no announcement had been made. The Interior Department refused to provide documentation, so he secured the passage of a Senate resolution compelling disclosure. The department sent a copy of the Teapot Dome lease granting drilling rights to Harry Sinclair's Mammoth Oil Company, along with a statement that there had been no competitive bidding because military preparedness was involved\u2014Mammoth was to build oil tanks for the Navy as part of the deal. This satisfied some people, but some conservationists, such as Gifford Pinchot, Harry A. Slattery, and others, pushed for a full investigation into Fall and his activities. They got Wisconsin Senator Robert M. La Follette to begin a Senate investigation into the oil leases. La Follette persuaded Democratic Montana Senator Thomas J. Walsh to lead the investigation, and Walsh read through the truckload of material provided by the Interior Department through 1922 into 1923. The documents included a letter from Harding stating that the transfer and leases had been with his knowledge and approval.\nHearings into Teapot Dome began in October 1923, two months after Harding's death. Fall had left office earlier that year, and he denied receiving any money from Sinclair or Doheny; Sinclair agreed. The following month, Walsh learned that Fall had spent lavishly on expanding and improving his New Mexico ranch. Fall reappeared and said that the money had come as a loan from Harding's friend and \"Washington Post\" publisher Edward B. McLean, but McLean denied it when he testified. Doheny told the committee that he had given Fall the money in cash as a personal loan out of regard for their past association, but Fall invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination when he was compelled to appear again, rather than answer questions.\nInvestigators found that Fall and a relative had received a total of about $400,000 from Doheny and Sinclair, and that the transfers were contemporaneous with the controversial leases. Fall was convicted in 1929 of accepting bribes, and in 1931 became the first U.S. cabinet member to be imprisoned for crimes committed in office. Sinclair was convicted only of contempt of court for jury tampering. Doheny was brought to trial before a jury in April 1930 for giving the bribe that Fall had been convicted of accepting, but he was acquitted.\nJustice Department.\nHarding's appointment of Harry M. Daugherty as Attorney General received more criticism than any other. Daugherty's Ohio lobbying and back-room maneuvers were considered to disqualify him for his office. When details of the various scandals emerged in 1923 and 1924, Daugherty's many enemies were delighted at the prospect of connecting him with the dishonesty, and assumed he had taken part in Teapot Dome, though Fall and Daugherty were not friends. In February 1924, the Senate voted to investigate the Justice Department, where Daugherty remained Attorney General.\nDemocratic Montana Senator Burton K. Wheeler was on the investigating committee and assumed the role of prosecutor when hearings began on March 12, 1924. Jess Smith had engaged in influence peddling, conspiring with two other Ohioans, Howard Mannington and Fred A. Caskey, to accept payoffs from alcohol bootleggers to secure either immunity from prosecution or the release of liquor from government warehouses. Mannington and Caskey's residence became infamous as the Little Green House on K Street. Some witnesses, such as Smith's divorced wife Roxy Stinson, and corrupt former FBI agent Gaston Means, alleged that Daugherty was personally involved. Coolidge requested Daugherty's resignation when the Attorney General indicated that he would not allow Wheeler's committee access to Justice Department records, and Daugherty complied on March 28, 1924.\nThe illicit activity that caused Daugherty the most problems was a Smith deal with Colonel Thomas W. Miller, a former Delaware congressman, whom Harding had appointed Alien Property Custodian. Smith and Miller received a payoff of almost half a million dollars for getting a German-owned firm, the American Metal Company, released to new U.S. owners. Smith deposited $50,000 in a joint account with Daugherty, used for political purposes. Records relating to that account were destroyed by Daugherty and his brother. Miller and Daugherty were indicted for defrauding the government. The first trial, in September 1926, resulted in a hung jury; at the second, early in 1927, Miller was convicted and served prison time, but the jury again hung as to Daugherty. Though charges against Daugherty were then dropped, and he was never convicted of any offense, his refusal to take the stand in his own defense devastated what was left of his reputation. The former Attorney General remained defiant, blaming his troubles on his enemies in the labor movement and on the Communists, and wrote that he had \"done nothing that prevents my looking the whole world in the face.\"\nVeterans' Bureau.\nCharles R. Forbes, the energetic director of the Veterans' Bureau, sought to consolidate control of veterans' hospitals and their construction in his bureau. At the start of Harding's presidency, this power was vested in the Treasury Department. The politically powerful American Legion backed Forbes and denigrated those who opposed him, like Secretary Mellon, and in April 1922, Harding agreed to transfer control to the Veterans' Bureau. Forbes's main task was to ensure that new hospitals were built around the country to help the 300,000 wounded World War I veterans.\nNear the beginning of 1922, Forbes had met Elias Mortimer, agent for the Thompson-Black Construction Company of St. Louis, which wanted to construct the hospitals. The two men became close, and Mortimer paid for Forbes's travels through the West, looking at potential hospital sites for the wounded World War I veterans. Forbes was also friendly with Charles F. Hurley, owner of the Hurley-Mason Construction Company of Washington state. Harding had ordered that all contracts be pursuant to public notice, but Forbes and the contractors worked out a deal whereby the two companies would get the contracts with the profits divided three ways. Some of the money went to the bureau's chief counsel, Charles F. Cramer. Forbes defrauded the government, increasing construction costs from $3,000 to $4,000 per bed. A tenth of the inflated construction billings were set aside for the conspirators, with Forbes receiving a third of the take. The graft then spread to land acquisition, with Forbes authorizing the purchase of a San Francisco tract worth less than $20,000 for $105,000. At least $25,000 of the resulting financial excess was divided between Forbes and Cramer.\nIntent on making more money, Forbes in November 1922 began selling valuable hospital supplies warehoused under his control at the Perryville Depot in Maryland. The government had stockpiled huge quantities of hospital supplies during the first World War, which Forbes unloaded for a fraction of their cost to the Boston firm of Thompson and Kelly, at a time when the Veterans' Bureau was buying supplies for the hospitals at a much higher price.\nThe check on Forbes's authority at Perryville was Dr. Sawyer, Harding's physician and chairman of the Federal Hospitalization Board. Sawyer told Harding that Forbes was selling valuable hospital supplies to an insider contractor. At first Harding did not believe it, but Sawyer secured proof in January 1923. A shocked Harding, who alternated between rage and despondency over the corruption in his administration, summoned Forbes to the White House and demanded his resignation. Harding did not want an open scandal and allowed Forbes to flee to Europe, from where he resigned on February 15, 1923. In spite of Harding's efforts, gossip about Forbes's activities resulted in the Senate ordering an investigation two weeks later, and in mid-March, Cramer committed suicide.\nMortimer was willing to tell all, as Forbes had been in an affair with his wife, which also broke up the Forbeses' marriage. The construction executive was the star witness at the hearings in late 1923, after Harding's death. Forbes returned from Europe to testify, but convinced few, and in 1924, he and John W. Thompson, of Thompson\u2013Black, were tried in Chicago for conspiracy to defraud the government. Both were convicted and sentenced to two years in prison. Forbes began to serve his sentence in 1926; Thompson, who had a bad heart, died that year before commencing his. According to Trani and Wilson, \"One of the most troublesome aspects of the Harding presidency was that he appeared to be far more concerned with political liabilities of a scandal than in securing justice.\"\nExtramarital affairs.\nHarding had an extramarital affair with Carrie Fulton Phillips of Marion, which lasted about 15 years before ending in 1920. The affair was revealed when Harding biographer Francis Russell, while researching his book in 1963, discovered letters from Harding to Phillips. The letters were donated to the Ohio Historical Society, and some there wanted the letters destroyed to preserve what remained of Harding's reputation. A lawsuit ensued, with Harding's heirs claiming copyright over the letters. The case was ultimately settled in 1971, with the letters donated to the Library of Congress. They were sealed until 2014, but before their opening, historians used copies at the Western Reserve Historical Society (Kenneth W. Duckett Papers) and in Russell's papers at the University of Wyoming. Russell concluded from the letters that Phillips was the love of Harding's life\u2014\"the enticements of his mind and body combined in one person,\" but historian Justin P. Coffey in his 2014 review of Harding biographies criticizes him for \"obsess[ing] over Harding's sex life.\"\nHarding fathered Elizabeth Ann Blaesing out of wedlock with his mistress Nan Britton. In 2015, DNA testing proved Blaesing was his daughter. Harding had vigorously denied paternity. According to family lore, he was infertile and could not have fathered a child, having suffered from mumps in childhood, and his siblings, nieces, and nephews maintained this position for 90 years.\nIn 1927, Britton, who was also from Marion, published \"The President's Daughter\", writing that Harding had fathered her child Elizabeth Ann Blaesing. The book, which was dedicated to \"all unwedded mothers\" and \"their innocent children whose fathers are usually not known to the world\", was sold, like pornography, door-to-door, wrapped in brown paper. Harding's reputation had deteriorated since his death in 1923, and many believed Britton. The public was tantalized by salacious details such as Britton's claim that the two had sex in a closet near the Oval Office, with Secret Service agents posted to ward off intruders.\nDespite being widely believed, Britton lost a libel lawsuit against a rebuttal of her book. She said that Harding had provided child support of $500 per month for the daughter he never met, but that she had destroyed romantic correspondence from him at his request. Writing before Britton's claim was verified, Russell believed it unquestioningly, while Dean, having reviewed Britton's papers at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), regarded it as unproven.\nSinclair suggested that a harsher standard was applied to Harding than to Grover Cleveland, who was elected president in 1884, although it was known he had a mistress and may have fathered a son out of wedlock.\nHistorical views.\nUpon his death, Harding was deeply mourned\u2014not only in the United States, but around the world. He was called a man of peace in many European newspapers. American journalists praised him lavishly, with some describing him as having given his life for his country. His associates were stunned by his demise. Daugherty wrote, \"I can hardly write about it or allow myself to think about it yet.\" Hughes stated, \"I cannot realize that our beloved Chief is no longer with us.\"\nHagiographic accounts of Harding's life quickly followed his death, such as Joe Mitchell Chapple's \"Life and Times of Warren G. Harding, Our After-War President\" (1924). By then, the scandals were breaking, and the Harding administration soon became a byword for corruption in the view of the public. Works written in the late 1920s helped shape Harding's dubious historical reputation: \"Masks in a Pageant\", by William Allen White, mocked and dismissed Harding, as did Samuel Hopkins Adams' fictionalized account of the Harding administration, \"Revelry\". These books depicted Harding's time in office as one of great presidential weakness. The publication of Nan Britton's bestselling book disclosing they had had an affair also lowered the late president in public esteem. President Coolidge, wishing to distance himself from his predecessor, refused to dedicate the Harding Tomb. Hoover, Coolidge's successor, was similarly reluctant, but eventually presided over the dedication in 1931 with Coolidge in attendance. By that time, with the Great Depression in full swing, Hoover was nearly as discredited as Harding.\nAdams continued to shape the negative view of Harding with several nonfiction works in the 1930s, culminating with \"The Incredible Era: The Life and Times of Warren G. Harding\" (1939) in which he called his subject \"an amiable, well-meaning third-rate Mr. Babbitt, with the equipment of a small-town semi-educated journalist\u00a0... It could not work. It did not work.\"\nDean views the works of White and Adams \"remarkably unbalanced and unfair accounts, exaggerating the negative, assigning responsibility to Harding for all wrongs, and denying him credit for anything done right. Today there is considerable evidence refuting their portrayals of Harding. Yet the myth has persisted.\"\nThe opening of Harding's papers for research in 1964 sparked a small spate of biographies, of which the most controversial was Russell's \"The Shadow of Blooming Grove\" (1968), which concluded that the rumors of black ancestry (the \"shadow\" of the title) deeply affected Harding in his formative years, causing both Harding's conservatism and his desire to get along with everyone. Coffey faults Russell's methods, and deems the biography \"largely critical, though not entirely unsympathetic.\" Murray's \"The Harding Era\" (1969) took a more positive view of the president, and put him in the context of his times. Trani and Wilson faulted Murray for \"a tendency to go overboard\" in trying to connect Harding with the successful policies of his cabinet officers, and for asserting, without sufficient evidence, that a new, more assertive Harding had emerged by 1923.\nLater decades saw revisionist books published on Harding. Robert Ferrell's \"The Strange Deaths of President Harding\" (1996), according to Coffey, \"spends almost the entire work challenging every story about Harding and concludes that almost everything that is read and taught about his subject is wrong.\" In 2004, John Dean, noted for his involvement in another presidential scandal, Watergate, wrote the Harding volume in \"The American Presidents\" series of short biographies, edited by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. Coffey considered that book the most revisionist to date, and faults Dean for glossing over some unfavorable episodes in Harding's life, like his silence during the 1914 Senate campaign, when his opponent Hogan was being attacked for his faith.\nTrani faults Harding's own lack of depth and decisiveness as bringing about his tarnished legacy.\nHarding has traditionally been ranked as one of the worst presidents. In a 1948 poll conducted by Harvard University, historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr. conducted a survey of scholars' opinions of the presidents, ranking Harding last among the 29 presidents considered. He has also been last in many other polls since then.\nFerrell attributes Harding's negative ratings to scholars who read little that is substantive, and who focus more on sensational accounts of Harding.\nCoffey believes \"the academic lack of interest in Harding has cost him his reputation, as scholars still rank Harding as nearly dead last among presidents.\"\nReassessment.\nIn historical rankings of the U.S. presidents during the decades after his term in office, Harding was often rated among the worst. However, in recent decades, some authors and historians have begun to reassess the conventional views of Harding's historical record in office. In \"The Spoils of War\" (2016), Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Alastair Smith place Harding first in a combined ranking of fewest wartime deaths and highest annual per capita income growth during each president's time in office.\nMurray argued in his book \"The Harding Era\" that Harding deserves more credit than historians have given: \"He was certainly the equal of a Franklin Pierce, an Andrew Johnson, a Benjamin Harrison, or even a Calvin Coolidge. In concrete accomplishments, his administration was superior to a sizable portion of those in the nation's history.\"\nMurray notes some general points regarding Harding's poor standing which illustrate the relatively obscure and weak basis for negative critiques of Harding in general. Namely, the conventional views often entail omission of an actual critique or analysis of Harding's actions, and often consist of a relatively limited and arbitrary focus on the nature of Harding's appointees, to the omission and detriment of a broader analysis of larger historical facts. Murray states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the American system, there is no such thing as an innocent bystander in the White House. If Harding can rightly claim the achievements of a Hughes in State or a Hoover in Commerce, he must also shoulder responsibility for a Daugherty in Justice and a Fall in Interior. Especially must he bear the onus of his lack of punitive action against such men as Forbes and Smith. By his inaction, he forfeited whatever chance he had to maintain the integrity of his position and salvage a favorable image for himself and his administration. As it was, the subsequent popular and scholarly negative verdict was inevitable, if not wholly deserved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33061", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33061", "title": "Warren G. Harding Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "33062", "revid": "50892075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33062", "title": "Whist", "text": "Trick-taking card game\nWhist is a classic English trick-taking card game which was widely played in the 18th and 19th centuries. Although the rules are simple, there is scope for strategic play.\nHistory.\nIn 1674, \"The Complete Gamester\" described the game Ruff and Honours as the most popular descendant of Triumph played in England during the 17th century. Whist is described as a simpler, more staid, version of Ruff and Honours with the twos removed instead of having a stock. In the 18th century, Whist, played with a 52-card pack, superseded Ruff and Honours. The game takes its name from the 17th-century word \"whist\" (or \"wist\") meaning \"quiet\", \"silent\", \"attentive\", which is the root of the modern \"wistful\".\nWhist was first played on scientific principles by gentlemen in the Crown Coffee House in Bedford Row, London, around 1728, according to Daines Barrington. Edmond Hoyle, suspected to be a member of this group, began to tutor wealthy young gentlemen in the game and published \"A Short Treatise on the Game of Whist\" in 1742. It became the standard text and rules for the game for the next hundred years.\nIn 1862, Henry Jones, writing under the pseudonym \"Cavendish\", published \"The Principles of Whist Stated and Explained, and Its Practice Illustrated on an Original System, by Means of Hands Played Completely Through\", which became the standard text. In his book, Jones outlined a comprehensive history of Whist, and suggested that its ancestors could include a game called Trionf, mentioned by a sixteenth century Italian poet named Berni, and a game called Trump (or Triumph), mentioned in Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\".\nMany subsequent editions and enlargements of Jones's book were published using the simpler title \"Cavendish on Whist\". Whist by now was governed by elaborate and rigid rules covering the laws of the game, etiquette, and play, which took time to study and master.\nIn the early 1890s, Whist was quickly replaced by the new game of Bridge in clubs. Whist was still played as a social game, in club individual duplicate cardplay competitions, and later at charitable social events called \"whist drives\". There are many modern variants of whist still played for fun, though whist can still be played online following the same rules as 300 years ago.\nRules.\nA standard 52-card pack is used and the game is played clockwise. By the time of Whist, the ace had been promoted to top honour, so the cards are ranked: A K Q J 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2. Whist is played by four players who draw cards to decide partnerships and the dealer. The two lowest cards play together, and choose their seats facing each other. Highest card is dealer and second highest is his partner.\nShuffling and dealing.\nDealer chooses a pack, which their side will deal throughout, and passes it to the player on their left to be shuffled. Dealer then picks up the pack, and may give it a last shuffle, before passing to the player on their right to cut. Dealer then completes the cut and deals 13 cards to each player one at a time, dealing their last card face up to set trumps.\nPlay.\nThe play at Whist is the simplest form of triumph and has been used by many other games. Eldest hand, the player on dealer's left, leads to the first trick. Dealer picks up the trump card when it is their turn to play. Players must follow suit if they can, and if they can't follow suit may discard or play a trump. The trick is won by the highest card of the suit led, unless trumps are played to the trick, when the highest trump wins.\nBefore the next trick starts, a player may ask to review the cards from the last trick. The winner of the trick leads to the next trick.\nScoring.\nA point is scored for each odd trick (trick in excess of six) won by a pair.\nShort Whist in Britain was played with a game five odd tricks and the first pair to win two games won the rubber. Honours were optional with a pair holding three of the top four honours getting one trick bonus, and all four top honours a two trick bonus. \nIn America the game was seven odd tricks. Long Whist was also played where the game was 9 or 10 odd tricks, usually played with honours.\nModern Short Whist is commonly played with three honours worth two points and all four honours worth four points. \nA pair with four points is unable to win game by honours and needs to make an odd trick.\nWhen playing for stakes a game is one point. Game where opponents score 1 or 2 tricks is a double game and game where opponents don't score any tricks is a triple game. There is a two-point bonus for winning the rubber.\nWhist can be scored with a pen and paper, or with whist markers.\nVariants.\nAs Whist is the simplest form of Triumph played with full 52-card pack and developed formal rules, it formed the basis of many subsequent trick-taking games. McLeod classifies this family into a number of sub-groups: the auction whist, Boston, classic whist and exact bidding groups, and games played by numbers of players other than four. The following is a selection within each sub-group.\nAuction whist group.\nThe auction whist group is a family of games with the characteristics of whist \u2013 an auction for the right to choose trumps won by the highest contract or largest number of tricks \u2013 and fixed partnerships.\nWhist drive.\nA whist drive is a social event at which progressive games of whist are played across a number of tables which are numbered or ordered into a sequence.\nIn it, the winning (or sometimes losing, dependent on the local custom) pair of a hand \"progress\" around the room, i.e. one person moves up the table sequence and one person moves down. On arriving at the new table, the next hand is played.\nBy convention the pair who sits has shuffled and deals after the arriving pair has cut the pack.\nA progressive whist drive is normally 24 hands, with each hand being a different trump. Trumps normally follow the sequence: hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades.\nSometimes a break for refreshments is taken after 12 hands.\nIn popular culture.\nLiterary references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His only pastime was reading the papers and playing whist. He frequently won at this quiet game, so very appropriate to his nature\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the sound of that name, falling unexpectedly into this annoying affair, the Assistant Commissioner dismissed brusquely the vague remembrance of his daily whist party at his club. It was the most comforting habit of his life, in a mainly successful display of his skill without the assistance of any subordinate. He entered his club to play from five to seven, before going home to dinner, forgetting for those two hours whatever was distasteful in his life, as though the game were a beneficent drug for allaying the pangs of moral discontent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33063", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33063", "title": "Wailuku", "text": ""}
{"id": "33065", "revid": "47542812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33065", "title": "William Withering", "text": "English scientist (1741\u20131799)\nWilliam Withering FRS (17 March 1741 \u2013 6 October 1799) was an English botanist, geologist, chemist, physician and first systematic investigator of the bioactivity of digitalis.\nWithering was born in Wellington, Shropshire, the son of a surgeon. He trained as a physician and studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh Medical School. He worked at Birmingham General Hospital from 1779. The story is that he noticed a person with dropsy (swelling from congestive heart failure) improve remarkably after taking a traditional herbal remedy; Withering became famous for recognising that the active ingredient in the mixture came from the foxglove plant. The active ingredient is now known as digoxin, after the plant's scientific name. In 1785, Withering published \"An Account of the Foxglove and some of its Medical Uses\", which contained reports on clinical trials and notes on digitalis's effects and toxicity.\nBiography.\nBorn in England, Withering attended Edinburgh Medical School from 1762 to 1766. In 1767 he started as a consultant at Stafford Royal Infirmary. He married Helena Cookes (an amateur botanical illustrator, and a former patient of his) in 1772; they had three children (the first, Helena was born in 1775 but died a few days later, William was born in 1776, and Charlotte in 1778). In 1775 he was appointed physician to Birmingham General Hospital (at the suggestion of Erasmus Darwin, a physician and founder member of the Lunar Society), but in 1783 he diagnosed himself as having pulmonary tuberculosis and went twice to Portugal hoping the better winter climate would improve his health; it did not. On the way home from his second trip there, the ship he was in was chased by pirates. In 1785 he was elected a Fellow of the prestigious Royal Society and also published his \"Account of the Foxglove\" (see below). The following year he leased Edgbaston Hall, in Birmingham. He was one of the members of the Lunar Society. During the Birmingham riots of 1791 (in which Joseph Priestley's home was demolished) he prepared to flee from Edgbaston Hall, but his staff kept the rioters at bay until the military arrived. In 1799 he decided that he could not tolerate another winter in the cold and draughty Hall, so he bought \"The Larches\" in the nearby Sparkbrook area; his wife did not feel up to the move and remained at Edgbaston Hall. After moving to The Larches on 28 September, he died on 6 October 1799.\nBotany.\nIn 1776, he published \"The botanical arrangement of all the vegetables naturally growing in Great Britain\", an early and influential British Flora. It was the first in English based on the then new Linnaean taxonomy \u2014 a classification of all living things \u2014 devised by the Swedish botanist and physician Carl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778). At the time he was criticised for having produced a bowdlerised version of Linnaeus, deliberately omitting any references to sexual reproduction, out of a desire to protect 'female modesty', notably by 'A Botanical Society, at Lichfield' - almost always incorrectly named as The Botanical Society of Lichfield or the Lichfield Botanical Society. Withering explained on the title page and his introduction that he avoided being explicit to allow his book to be used without any problems by a wider audience and in particular women. However he found support for his position, and botany was considered a subject suitable for many women during the next century. A talented illustrator herself, his wife, Helena, sketched plants he collected.\nWithering wrote two more editions of this work in 1787 and 1792, in collaboration with fellow Lunar Society member Jonathan Stokes, and after his death his son (also William) published four more. It continued being published under various authors until 1877. Withering senior also carried out pioneering work into the identification of fungi and invented a folding pocket microscope for use on botanical field trips. He also introduced to the general audience the screw down plant press and the vasculum. In 1787 he was elected a Fellow of the Linnaean Society in recognition of his contribution to botany. Subsequently, the plant \"Witheringia solanacea\" was named in his honour, and he became known on the continent of Europe as \"The English Linnaeus\". The William Withering Chair in Medicine at the University of Birmingham Medical School is named after him, as is the medical school's annual William Withering Lecture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation With. is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nDiscovery of digitalis.\nAllegedly, Withering first learned of the use of digitalis in treating \"dropsy\" (\u0153dema) from \"Mother Hutton\", an old woman who practised as a folk herbalist in Shropshire, who used the plant as part of a polyherbal formulation containing over 20 different ingredients to successfully treat this condition. Withering deduced that digitalis was the active ingredient in the formulation, and over the ensuing nine years he carefully tried out different preparations of various parts of the plant (collected in different seasons) documenting 156 cases where he had employed digitalis, and describing the effects and the best - and safest - way of using it. At least one of these cases was a patient for whom Erasmus Darwin had asked Withering for his second opinion. In January 1785 Darwin submitted a paper entitled \"An Account of the Successful Use of Foxglove in Some Dropsies and in Pulmonary Consumption\" to the College of Physicians in London; it was presented by Darwin in March of that year. A postscript at the end of the published volume of transactions containing Darwin's paper states that \"Whilst the last pages of this volume were in the press, Dr Withering of Birmingham... published a numerous collection of cases in which foxglove has been given, and frequently with good success\". After this, Darwin and Withering became increasingly estranged, and eventually an argument broke out apparently resulting from Robert Darwin having accused Withering of unprofessional behaviour by effectively poaching patients. This is a very early example of medical academic plagiarism. \nIn reality \"Mother Hutton\" was created in 1928 in an illustration by William Meade Prince as part of an advertising campaign by Parke-Davis who marketed digitalis preparations. There is no mention of a Mother Hutton in Withering's works or anyone else's and no mention of him meeting any old woman directly. In his account he states that he is merely asked to comment on a family recipe that was originally an old woman's receipt or recipe (that she had long kept secret) by a colleague. Since 1928, Mother Hutton's status has grown from being an image in an advertising poster to an acclaimed wise woman, herbalist, pharmacist and medical practitioner in Shropshire who was cheated out of her true recognition by Dr. Withering's unscrupulous methods. The story often written around this is also totally apocryphal. Withering was in fact informed of the Brasenose College, Oxford case by one of his medical colleagues Dr. Ash at Birmingham Hospital and the Dean was treated with digitalis root not leaves. The myth of Mother Hutton and how Withering chased her around Shropshire has been created by authors not going back to primary sources but instead copying and then embellishing the unreferenced work of others. See \"Withering and The Foxglove; the making of a myth\" by D.M. Krikler (British Heart Journal, 1985, 54: 256\u2013257). In Withering's \"Account of the Foxglove\" printed in 1785 Withering mentions seven different occasions when foxglove was brought to his attention. Recognising that foxglove was the active ingredient in a family recipe (that was long kept secret by an old woman in Shropshire) would not have been difficult with his expert botanical knowledge. Withering had first published his \"Botanical Arrangement\" in 1776 and in it suggested foxglove deserved looking at in more detail. Erasmus Darwin tried to take the credit for foxglove and failed. Erasmus Darwin then attempted to try and discredit Withering behind the scenes with the unwitting help of his son Robert having earlier used the thesis of his dead son Charles to try and establish priority. Charles Darwin in fact had been friendly with Withering (as had Robert) and had talked in Edinburgh University about Withering's experiments with foxglove. Erasmus Darwin was probably jealous that Withering had become the most famous and sought-after doctor outside London and that Withering's English Botanical Arrangement became the standard reference source and far exceeded the botanical publications of Erasmus (all published semi-anonymously) in popularity. Withering's Botanical Arrangement, although now almost forgotten, became the standard reference for English Botany for almost the next 100 years.\nChemistry and geology.\nWithering was an enthusiastic chemist and geologist. He conducted a series of experiments on \"Terra Ponderosa\", a heavy ore from Cumberland, England. He deduced that it contained a hitherto undescribed element which he was unable to characterise. It was later shown to be barium carbonate and in 1789 the German geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner named the mineral \"Witherite\" in his honour. The Matthew Boulton mineral collection of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery may contain one of the earliest known specimens of witherite. A label in Boulton's handwriting records; \"No. 2 Terra Ponderosa Aerata, given me by Dr. Withering\"\nWithering also undertook analyses of the mineral content of a number of spa waters in England and abroad, notably at the medicinal spa at Caldas da Rainha in Portugal. This latter undertaking occurred during the winter of 1793\u20134, and he was subsequently elected to the Fellowship of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Portugal.\nMemorials.\nHe was buried on 10 October 1799 in Edgbaston Old Church next to Edgbaston Hall, Birmingham, although the exact site of his grave is unknown. The memorial stone, now moved inside the church, has foxgloves and \"Witheringia solanaceae\" carved upon it to commemorate his discovery and his wider contribution to botany. He is also remembered by one of the Lunar Society Moonstones in Birmingham and by a blue plaque at Edgbaston Hall. Birmingham University School of Medicine established a Chair of Medicine post in his honour, named after him.\nIn July 2011 a J D Wetherspoon public house opened in Withering's birthplace, Wellington, and has been named after him.\nPublications.\nThis list is drawn from Sheldon, 2004:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33067", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33067", "title": "White elephant", "text": "Idiom for impractical possessions that are expensive to maintain but cannot be disposed of\nA white elephant is a possession that its owner cannot dispose of without extreme difficulty, and whose cost, particularly that of maintenance, is out of proportion to its usefulness. In modern usage, it is a metaphor used to describe an object, construction project, scheme, business venture, facility, etc. considered expensive but without equivalent utility or value relative to its capital (acquisition) and/or operational (maintenance) costs.\nHistorical background.\nThe term derives from the sacred white elephants kept by Southeast Asian monarchs in Burma, Thailand (Siam), Laos and Cambodia. To possess a white elephant was regarded\u2014and is still regarded in Thailand and Burma\u2014as a sign that the monarch reigned with justice and power, and that the kingdom was blessed with peace and prosperity. The opulence expected of anyone who owned a beast of such stature was great. Monarchs often exemplified their possession of white elephants in their formal titles (e.g., Hsinbyushin, lit.\u2009'Lord of the White Elephant' and the third monarch of the Konbaung dynasty). Because the animals were considered sacred and laws protected them from labor, receiving a gift of a white elephant from a monarch was simultaneously a blessing and a curse. It was a blessing because the animal was sacred and a sign of the monarch's favour, and a curse because the recipient now had an animal that was expensive to maintain, could not be given away, and could not be put to much practical use.\nIn the West, the term \"white elephant\", relating to an expensive burden that fails to meet expectations, was first used in the 17th century and became widespread in the 19th century. According to one source it was popularized following P. T. Barnum's experience with an elephant named \"Toung Taloung\" that he billed as the \"Sacred White Elephant of Burma\". After much effort and great expense, Barnum finally acquired the animal from the King of Siam only to discover that his \"white elephant\" was actually dirty grey in color with a few pink spots.\nThe expressions \"white elephant\" and \"gift of a white elephant\" came into common use in the middle of the nineteenth century. The phrase was attached to \"white elephant swaps\" and \"white elephant sales\" in the early twentieth century. Many church bazaars held \"white elephant sales\" where donors could unload unwanted bric-\u00e0-brac, generating profit from the phenomenon that \"one man's trash is another man's treasure\" and the term has continued to be used in this context.\nModern usage.\nIn modern usage, the term now often refers in addition to an extremely expensive building project that fails to deliver on its function or becomes very costly to maintain. Examples include prestigious but uneconomic infrastructure projects such as airports, dams, bridges, shopping malls and football stadiums.\nRail transport projects are also sometimes deemed white elephants. In Japan, it was feared that the Yurikamome at Odaiba would end up as a multibillion-yen white elephant. In Singapore, paper cutouts of white elephants were placed next to the completed but unopened Buangkok MRT station on the North East Line in 2005 to protest its non-opening. (The station eventually opened the following year.)\nThe American Oakland Athletics baseball team has used a white elephant as a symbol and usually its main or alternative logo since 1902, originally in sarcastic defiance of John McGraw's 1902 characterization of the new team as a \"white elephant\". The Al Maktoum International Airport on the outskirts of Dubai has also been named a white elephant. The Roman-styled Boothtown Aqueduct in Sydney, which was opened in 1888, has been referred to as a \"white elephant\" for its failure to operate as a long-serving aqueduct.\nThe term has also been applied to outdated or under-performing military projects like the U.S. Navy's \"Alaska\"-class cruiser. In Austria, the term \"white elephant\" means workers who have little or no use, but cannot be dismissed.\nA former Polish astronomical observatory built in the Carpathian Mountains (now part of Ukraine) in 1938 is nicknamed White Elephant due to its appearance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33082", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33082", "title": "World War II/Plymouth", "text": ""}
