{"id": "30660", "revid": "50459348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30660", "title": "Tucana", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nTucana (The Toucan) is a constellation in the southern sky, named after the toucan, a South American bird. It is one of twelve constellations conceived in the late sixteenth century by Petrus Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman. Tucana first appeared on a celestial globe published in 1598 in Amsterdam by Plancius and Jodocus Hondius and was depicted in Johann Bayer's star atlas \"Uranometria\" of 1603. French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille gave its stars Bayer designations in 1756. The constellations Tucana, Grus, Phoenix and Pavo are collectively known as the \"Southern Birds\".\nTucana is not a prominent constellation as all of its stars are third magnitude or fainter; the brightest is Alpha Tucanae with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.87. Beta Tucanae is a star system with six member stars, while Kappa is a quadruple system. The constellation contains 47 Tucanae, one of the brightest globular clusters in the sky, and most of the Small Magellanic Cloud.\nHistory.\nTucana is one of the twelve constellations established by the astronomer Petrus Plancius from the observations of the southern sky by the Dutch explorers Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman, who had sailed on the first Dutch trading expedition, known as the \"Eerste Schipvaart\", to the East Indies. It first appeared on a celestial globe published in 1598 in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius. The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in the German cartographer Johann Bayer's \"Uranometria\" of 1603. Both Plancius and Bayer depict it as a toucan. De Houtman included it in his southern star catalogue the same year under the Dutch name \"Den Indiaenschen Exster, op Indies Lang ghenaemt\" \"the Indian magpie, named Lang in the Indies\", by this meaning a particular bird with a long beak\u2014a hornbill, a bird native to the East Indies. A 1603 celestial globe by Willem Blaeu depicts it with a casque. It was interpreted on Chinese charts as \"Ni\u01ceohu\u00ec\" \"bird's beak\", and in England as \"Brasilian Pye\", while Johannes Kepler and Giovanni Battista Riccioli termed it \"Anser Americanus\" \"American Goose\", and Caesius as \"Pica Indica\". Tucana and the nearby constellations Phoenix, Grus and Pavo are collectively called the \"Southern Birds\".\nCharacteristics.\nIrregular in shape, Tucana is bordered by Hydrus to the east, Grus and Phoenix to the north, Indus to the west and Octans to the south. Covering 295 square degrees, it ranks 48th of the 88 constellations in size. The recommended three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Tuc\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 10 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 22h 08.45m and 01h 24.82m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221256.31\u00b0 and \u221275.35\u00b0. As one of the deep southern constellations, it remains below the horizon at latitudes north of the 30th parallel in the Northern Hemisphere, and is circumpolar at latitudes south of the 50th parallel in the Southern Hemisphere.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nAlthough he depicted Tucana on his chart, Bayer did not assign its stars Bayer designations. French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille labelled them Alpha to Rho in 1756, but omitted Omicron and Xi, and labelled a pair of stars close together Lambda Tucanae, and a group of three stars Beta Tucanae. In 1879, American astronomer Benjamin Gould designated a star Xi Tucanae\u2014this had not been given a designation by Lacaille who had recognized it as nebulous, and it is now known as the globular cluster 47 Tucanae. Mu Tucanae was dropped by Francis Baily, who felt the star was too faint to warrant a designation, and Kappa's two components came to be known as Kappa1 and Kappa2.\nThe layout of the brighter stars of Tucana has been likened to a kite. Within the constellation's boundaries are around 80 stars brighter than an apparent magnitude of 7. At an apparent magnitude of 2.86, Alpha Tucanae (the proper name is Lang-Exster since 19 September 2024) is the brightest star in the constellation and marks the toucan's head. It is an orange subgiant of spectral type K3III around 199 light-years distant from the Solar System. A cool star with a surface temperature of 4300 K, it is 424 times as luminous as the Sun and 37 times its diameter. It is 2.5 to 3 times as massive. Alpha Tucanae is a spectroscopic binary, which means that the two stars have not been individually resolved using a telescope, but the presence of the companion has been inferred from measuring changes in the spectrum of the primary. The orbital period of the binary system is 4197.7\u00a0days (11.5 years). Nothing is known about the companion. Two degrees southeast of Alpha is the red-hued Nu Tucanae, of spectral type M4III and lying around 290 light-years distant. It is classified as a semiregular variable star and its brightness varies from magnitude +4.75 to +4.93. Described by Richard Hinckley Allen as bluish, Gamma Tucanae is a yellow-white sequence star of spectral type F4V and an apparent magnitude of 4.00 located around 75 light-years from Earth. It also marks the toucan's beak.\nBeta, Delta and Kappa are multiple star systems containing six, two and four stars respectively. Located near the tail of the toucan, Beta Tucanae's two brightest components, Beta1 and Beta2 are separated by an angle of 27 arcseconds and have apparent magnitudes of 4.4 and 4.5 respectively. They can be separated in small telescopes. A third star, Beta3 Tucanae, is separated by 10 arcminutes from the two, and able to be seen as a separate star with the unaided eye. Each star is itself a binary star, making six in total. Lying in the southwestern corner of the constellation around 251 light-years away from Earth, Delta Tucanae consists of a blue-white primary contrasting with a yellowish companion. Delta Tucanae A is a main sequence star of spectral type B9.5V and an apparent magnitude of 4.49. The companion has an apparent magnitude of 9.3. The Kappa Tucanae system shines with a combined apparent magnitude of 4.25, and is located around 68 light-years from the Solar System. The brighter component is a yellowish star, known as Kappa Tucanae A with an apparent magnitude of 5.33 and spectral type F6V, while the fainter lies 5 arcseconds to the northwest. Known as Kappa Tucanae B, it has an apparent magnitude of 7.58 and spectral type K1V. Five arcminutes to the northwest is a fainter star of apparent magnitude 7.24\u2014actually a pair of orange main sequence stars of spectral types K2V and K3V, which can be seen individually as stars one arcsecond apart with a telescope such as a Dobsonian with high power.\nLambda Tucanae is an optical double\u2014that is, the name is given to two stars (Lambda1 and Lambda2) which appear close together from the Earth, but are in fact far apart in space. Lambda1 is itself a binary star, with two components\u2014a yellow-white star of spectral type F7IV-V and an apparent magnitude of 6.22, and a yellow main sequence star of spectral type G1V and an apparent magnitude of 7.28. The system is 186 light-years distant. Lambda2 is an orange subgiant of spectral type K2III that is expanding and cooling and has left the main sequence. Of apparent magnitude 5.46, it is approximately 220 light-years distant from Earth.\nEpsilon Tucanae traditionally marks the toucan's left leg. A B-type subgiant, it has a spectral type B9IV and an apparent magnitude of 4.49. It is approximately 373 light-years from Earth. It is around four times as massive as the Sun.\nTheta Tucanae is a white A-type star around 423 light-years distant from Earth, which is actually a close binary system. The main star is classified as a Delta Scuti variable\u2014a class of short period (six hours at most) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study asteroseismology. It is around double the Sun's mass, having siphoned off one whole solar mass from its companion, now a hydrogen-depleted dwarf star of around only 0.2 solar masses. The system shines with a combined light that varies between magnitudes 6.06 to 6.15 every 70 to 80 minutes.\nZeta Tucanae is a yellow-white main sequence star of spectral type F9.5V and an apparent magnitude of 4.20 located 28 light-years away from the Solar System. Despite having a slightly lower mass, this star is more luminous than the Sun. The composition and mass of this star are very similar to the Sun, with a slightly lower mass and an estimated age of three billion years. The solar-like qualities make it a target of interest for investigating the possible existence of a life-bearing planet. It appears to have a debris disk orbiting it at a minimum radius of 2.3 astronomical units. As of 2009, no planet has been discovered in orbit around this star.\nFive star systems have been found to have planets, four of which have been discovered by the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS) in Chile. HD 4308 is a star with around 83% of the Sun's mass located 72 light-years away with a super-Earth planet with an orbital period of around 15 days. HD 215497 is an orange star of spectral type K3V around 142 light-years distant. It is orbited by a hot super-Earth every 3 days and a second planet around the size of Saturn with a period of around 567 days. HD 221287 has a spectral type of F7V and lies 173 light-years away, and has a super-Jovian planet. HD 7199 has spectral type KOIV/V and is located 117 light-years away. It has a planet with around 30% the mass of Jupiter that has an orbital period of 615 days. HD 219077 has a planet around 10 times as massive as Jupiter in a highly eccentric orbit.\nDeep-sky objects.\nThe second-brightest globular cluster in the sky after Omega Centauri, 47 Tucanae (NGC 104) lies just west of the Small Magellanic Cloud. Only 14,700 light-years distant from Earth, it is thought to be around 12 billion years old. Mostly composed of old, yellow stars, it does possess a contingent of blue stragglers, hot stars that are hypothesized to form from binary star mergers. 47 Tucanae has an apparent magnitude of 3.9, meaning that it is visible to the naked eye; it is a Shapley class III cluster, which means that it has a clearly defined nucleus. Near to 47 Tucana on the sky, and often seen in wide-field photographs showing it, are two much more distant globular clusters associated with the SMC: NGC 121, 10 arcminutes away from the bigger cluster's edge, and Lindsay 8.\nNGC 362 is another globular cluster in Tucana with an apparent magnitude of 6.4, 27,700 light-years from Earth. Like neighboring 47 Tucanae, NGC 362 is a Shapley class III cluster and among the brightest globular clusters in the sky. Unusually for a globular cluster, its orbit takes it very close to the center of the Milky Way\u2014approximately 3,000 light-years. It was discovered in the 1820s by James Dunlop. Its stars become visible at 180x magnification through a telescope.\nLocated at the southern end of Tucana, the Small Magellanic Cloud is a dwarf galaxy that is one of the nearest neighbors to the Milky Way galaxy at a distance of 210,000 light-years. Though it probably formed as a disk shape, tidal forces from the Milky Way have distorted it. Along with the Large Magellanic Cloud, it lies within the Magellanic Stream, a cloud of gas that connects the two galaxies. NGC 346 is a star-forming region located in the Small Magellanic Cloud. It has an apparent magnitude of 10.3. Within it lies the triple star system HD 5980, each of its members among the most luminous stars known.\nThe Tucana Dwarf galaxy, which was discovered in 1990, is a dwarf spheroidal galaxy of type dE5 that is an isolated member of the Local Group. It is located from the Solar System and around from the barycentre of the Local Group\u2014the second most remote of all member galaxies after the Sagittarius Dwarf Irregular Galaxy.\nThe barred spiral galaxy NGC 7408 is located 3 degrees northwest of Delta Tucanae, and was initially mistaken for a planetary nebula.\nIn 1998, part of the constellation was the subject of a two-week observation program by the Hubble Space Telescope, which resulted in the Hubble Deep Field South. The potential area to be covered needed to be at the poles of the telescope's orbit for continuous observing, with the final choice resting upon the discovery of a quasar, QSO J2233-606, in the field.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30662", "revid": "34017952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30662", "title": "Triangulum Australe", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nTriangulum Australe is a small constellation in the far Southern Celestial Hemisphere. Its name is Latin for \"the southern triangle\", which distinguishes it from Triangulum in the northern sky and is derived from the acute, almost equilateral pattern of its three brightest stars. It was first depicted on a celestial globe as Triangulus Antarcticus by Petrus Plancius in 1589, and later with more accuracy and its current name by Johann Bayer in his 1603 \"Uranometria\". The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted and gave the brighter stars their Bayer designations in 1756.\nAlpha Trianguli Australis, known as Atria, is a second-magnitude orange giant and the brightest star in the constellation, as well as the 42nd-brightest star in the night sky. Completing the triangle are the two white main sequence stars Beta and Gamma Trianguli Australis. Although the constellation lies in the Milky Way and contains many stars, deep-sky objects are not prominent. Notable features include the open cluster NGC 6025 and planetary nebula NGC 5979.\nThe Great Attractor, the gravitational center of the Laniakea Supercluster which includes the Milky Way galaxy, straddles Triangulum Australe and the neighboring constellation Norma.\nHistory.\nItalian navigator Amerigo Vespucci explored the New World at the beginning of the 16th century. He learnt to recognize the stars in the southern hemisphere and made a catalogue for his patron king Manuel I of Portugal, which is now lost. As well as the catalogue, Vespucci wrote descriptions of the southern stars, including a triangle which may be either Triangulum Australe or Apus. This was sent to his patron in Florence, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, and published as \"Mundus Novus\" in 1504. The first depiction of the constellation was provided in 1589 by Flemish astronomer and clergyman Petrus Plancius on a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;32+1\u20442-cm diameter celestial globe published in Amsterdam by Dutch cartographer Jacob van Langren, where it was called Triangulus Antarcticus and incorrectly portrayed to the south of Argo Navis. His student Petrus Keyzer, along with Dutch explorer Frederick de Houtman, coined the name Den Zuyden Trianghel. Triangulum Australe was more accurately depicted in Johann Bayer's celestial atlas \"Uranometria\" in 1603, where it was also given its current name.\nNicolas Louis de Lacaille portrayed the constellations of Norma, Circinus and Triangulum Australe as a set square and ruler, a compass, and a surveyor's level respectively in a set of draughtsman's instruments in his 1756 map of the southern stars. Also depicting it as a surveyor's level, German Johann Bode gave it the alternate name of Libella in his \"Uranographia\".\nGerman poet and author Philippus Caesius saw the three main stars as representing the Three Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (with Atria as Abraham). The Wardaman people of the Northern Territory in Australia perceived the stars of Triangulum Australe as the tail of the Rainbow Serpent, which stretched out from near Crux across to Scorpius. Overhead in October, the Rainbow Serpent \"gives Lightning a nudge\" to bring on the wet season rains in November.\nCharacteristics.\nTriangulum Australe is a small constellation bordered by Norma to the north, Circinus to the west, Apus to the south and Ara to the east. It lies near the Pointers (Alpha and Beta Centauri), with only Circinus in between. The constellation is located within the Milky Way, and hence has many stars. A roughly equilateral triangle, it is easily identifiable. Triangulum Australe lies too far south in the celestial southern hemisphere to be visible from Europe, yet is circumpolar from most of the southern hemisphere. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"TrA\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 18 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 14h 56.4m and 17h 13.5m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221260.26\u00b0 and \u221270.51\u00b0. Triangulum Australe culminates each year at 9 p.m. on 23 August.\nNotable features.\nBright stars.\nIn defining the constellation, Lacaille gave twelve stars Bayer designations of Alpha through to Lambda, with two close stars called Eta (one now known by its Henry Draper catalogue number), while Lambda was later dropped due to its dimness. The three brightest stars, Alpha, Beta and Gamma, make up the triangle. Readily identified by its orange hue, Alpha Trianguli Australis is a bright giant star of spectral type K2\u00a0IIb-IIIa with an apparent magnitude of +1.91 that is the 42nd-brightest star in the night sky. It lies away and has an absolute magnitude of \u22123.68 and is 5,500 times more luminous than the Sun. With a diameter 130 times that of the Sun, it would almost reach the orbit of Venus if placed at the centre of the Solar System. The proper name Atria is a contraction of its Bayer designation. Beta Trianguli Australis is a double star, the primary being a F-type main-sequence star with a stellar classification of F1V, and an apparent magnitude of 2.85. Lying only away, it has an absolute magnitude of 2.38. Its companion, almost 3 arcminutes away, is a 13th-magnitude star which may or may not be in orbit around Beta. The remaining member of the triangle is Gamma Trianguli Australis with an apparent magnitude of 2.87. It is an A-type main sequence star of spectral class A1\u00a0V, which lies away.\nLocated outside the triangle near Beta, Delta Trianguli Australis is the fourth-brightest star at apparent magnitude +3.8. It is a yellow giant of spectral type G2Ib-II and lies away. Lying halfway between Beta and Gamma, Epsilon Trianguli Australis is an optical double. The brighter star, Epsilon Trianguli Australis A, is an orange K-type sub-giant of spectral type K1.5III with an apparent magnitude of +4.11. The optical companion, Epsilon Trianguli Australis B (or HD 138510), is a white main sequence star of spectral type A9IV/V which has an apparent magnitude of +9.32. Zeta Trianguli Australis appears as a star of apparent magnitude +4.91 and spectral class F9V, but is actually a spectroscopic binary with a near companion, probably a red dwarf. The pair orbit each other once every 13 days. A young star, its proper motion indicates it is a member of the Ursa Major moving group. Iota Trianguli Australis shows itself to be a multiple star system composed of a yellow and a white star when seen though a 7.5\u00a0cm telescope. The brighter star has a spectral type of F4IV and is a spectroscopic binary whose components are two yellow-white stars which orbit each other every 39.88 days. The primary is a Gamma Doradus variable, pulsating over a period of 1.45 days. The fainter star is not associated with the system, hence the system is an optical double. HD 147018 is a Sun-like star of apparent magnitude 8.3 and spectral type G9V, which was found to have two exoplanets, HD 147018 b and HD 147018 c, in 2009.\nOf apparent magnitude 5.11, the yellow bright giant Kappa Trianguli Australis of spectral type G5IIa lies around distant from the Solar System. Eta Trianguli Australis (or Eta1 Trianguli Australis) is a Be star of spectral type B7IVe which is from Earth, with an apparent magnitude of 5.89. Lacaille named a close-by star as Eta as well, which was inconsistently followed by Francis Baily, who used the name for the brighter or both stars in two different publications. Despite their faintness, Benjamin Gould upheld their Bayer designation as they were closer than 25 degrees to the south celestial pole. The second Eta is now designated as HD 150550. It is a variable star of average magnitude 6.53 and spectral type A1III.\nVariable stars.\nTriangulum Australe contains several cepheid variables, all of which are too faint to be seen with the naked eye: R Trianguli Australis ranges from apparent magnitude 6.4 to 6.9 over a period of 3.389 days, S Trianguli Australis varies from magnitude 6.1 to 6.8 over 6.323 days, and U Trianguli Australis' brightness changes from 7.5 to 8.3 over 2.568 days. All three are yellow-white giants of spectral type F7Ib/II, F8II, and F8Ib/II respectively. RT Trianguli Australis is an unusual cepheid variable which shows strong absorption bands in molecular fragments of C2, \u2af6CH and \u22c5CN, and has been classified as a carbon cepheid of spectral type R. It varies between magnitudes 9.2 and 9.97 over 1.95 days. Lying nearby Gamma, X Trianguli Australis is a variable carbon star with an average magnitude of 5.63. It has two periods of around 385 and 455 days, and is of spectral type C5, 5(Nb).\nEK Trianguli Australis, a dwarf nova of the SU Ursae Majoris type, was first noticed in 1978 and officially described in 1980. It consists of a white dwarf and a donor star which orbit each other every 1.5 hours. The white dwarf sucks matter from the other star onto an accretion disc and periodically erupts, reaching magnitude 11.2 in superoutbursts, 12.1 in normal outbursts and remaining at magnitude 16.7 when quiet. NR Trianguli Australis was a slow nova which peaked at magnitude 8.4 in April 2008, before fading to magnitude 12.4 by September of that year.\nDeep-sky objects.\nTriangulum Australe has few deep-sky objects\u2014one open cluster and a few planetary nebulae and faint galaxies. NGC 6025 is an open cluster with about 30 stars ranging from 7th to 9th magnitude. Located 3 degrees north and 1 east of Beta Trianguli Australis, it lies about away and is about in diameter. Its brightest star is MQ Trianguli Australis at apparent magnitude 7.1. NGC 5979, a planetary nebula of apparent magnitude 12.3, has a blue-green hue at higher magnifications, while Henize 2-138 is a smaller planetary nebula of magnitude 11.0. NGC 5938 is a remote spiral galaxy around 300 million light-years (90 megaparsecs) away. It is located 5 degrees south of Epsilon Trianguli Australis. ESO 69-6 is a pair of merging galaxies located about 600 million light-years (185 megaparsecs) away. Their contents have been dragged out in long tails by the interaction.\nIn culture.\nTriangulum Australe appears on the flag of Brazil, symbolizing the three states of the South Region.\nIt also appears as the only constellation used for the flag of secessionist movement The South Is My Country.\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30664", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30664", "title": "Telescopium", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nTelescopium is a minor constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere, one of twelve named in the 18th century by French astronomer Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille and one of several depicting scientific instruments. Its name is a Latinized form of the Greek word for telescope. Telescopium was later much reduced in size by Francis Baily and Benjamin Gould.\nThe brightest star in the constellation is Alpha Telescopii, a blue-white subgiant with an apparent magnitude of 3.5, followed by the orange giant star Zeta Telescopii at magnitude 4.1. Eta and PZ Telescopii are two young star systems with debris disks and brown dwarf companions. Telescopium hosts two unusual stars with very little hydrogen that are likely to be the result of two merged white dwarfs: PV Telescopii, also known as HD 168476, is a hot blue extreme helium star, while RS Telescopii is an R Coronae Borealis variable. RR Telescopii is a cataclysmic variable that brightened as a nova to magnitude 6 in 1948.\nIt had been hypothesized in 2020 that Telescopium would also host the first known visible star system with a black hole, QV Telescopii (HR 6819), however observations in 2022 indicated that this is a binary system of two main-sequence stars without a black hole instead.\nHistory.\nTelescopium was introduced in 1751\u201352 by Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille with the French name \"le Telescope\", depicting an aerial telescope, after he had observed and catalogued 10,000 southern stars during a two-year stay at the Cape of Good Hope. He devised 14 new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe. All but one honored instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment. Covering 40 degrees of the night sky, the telescope stretched out northwards between Sagittarius and Scorpius. Lacaille had Latinised its name to \"Telescopium\" by 1763.\nThe constellation was known by other names. It was called \"Tubus Astronomicus\" in the eighteenth century, during which time three constellations depicting telescopes were recognised\u2014Tubus Herschelii Major between Gemini and Auriga and Tubus Herschelii Minor between Taurus and Orion, both of which had fallen out of use by the nineteenth century. Johann Bode called it the \"Astronomische Fernrohr\" in his 1805 \"Gestirne\" and kept its size, but later astronomers Francis Baily and Benjamin Gould subsequently shrank its boundaries. The much-reduced constellation lost several brighter stars to neighbouring constellations: Beta Telescopii became Eta Sagittarii, which it had been before Lacaille placed it in Telescopium, Gamma was placed in Scorpius and renamed G Scorpii by Gould, Theta Telescopii reverted to its old appellation of d Ophiuchi, and Sigma Telescopii was placed in Corona Australis. Initially uncatalogued, the latter is now known as HR 6875. The original object Lacaille had named Eta Telescopii\u2014the open cluster Messier 7\u2014was in what is now Scorpius, and Gould used the Bayer designation for a magnitude 5 star, which he felt warranted a letter.\nCharacteristics.\nA small constellation, Telescopium is bordered by Sagittarius and Corona Australis to the north, Ara to the west, Pavo to the south, and Indus to the east, cornering on Microscopium to the northeast. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Tel\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a quadrilateral. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 18h 09.1m and 20h 29.5m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221245.09\u00b0 and \u221256.98\u00b0. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 33\u00b0N.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nWithin the constellation's borders, there are 57 stars brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5. With a magnitude of 3.5, Alpha Telescopii is the brightest star in the constellation. It is a blue-white subgiant of spectral type B3IV which lies around 250 light-years away. It is radiating nearly 800 times the Sun's luminosity, and is estimated to be 5.2\u00b10.4 times as massive and have 3.3\u00b10.5 times the Sun's radius. Close by Alpha Telescopii are the two blue-white stars sharing the designation of Delta Telescopii. Delta\u00b9 Telescopii is of spectral type B6IV and apparent magnitude 4.9, while Delta\u00b2 Telescopii is of spectral type B3III and magnitude 5.1. They form an optical double, as the stars are estimated to be around 710 and 1190 light-years away respectively. The faint (magnitude 12.23) Gliese 754, a red dwarf of spectral type M4.5V, is one of the nearest 100 stars to Earth at 19.3 light-years distant. Its eccentric orbit around the Galaxy indicates that it may have originated in the Milky Way's thick disk.\nAt least four of the fifteen stars visible to the unaided eye are orange giants of spectral class K. The second brightest star in the constellation\u2014at apparent magnitude 4.1\u2014is Zeta Telescopii, an orange subgiant of spectral type K1III-IV. Around 1.53 times as massive as the Sun, it shines with 512 times its luminosity. Located 127 light years away from Earth, it has been described as yellow or reddish in appearance. Epsilon Telescopii is a binary star system: the brighter component, Epsilon Telescopii A, is an orange giant of spectral type K0III with an apparent magnitude of +4.52, while the 13th magnitude companion, Epsilon Telescopii B, is 21 arcseconds away from the primary, and just visible with a 15\u00a0cm aperture telescope on a dark night. The system is 417 light-years away. Iota Telescopii and HD 169405\u2014magnitude 5 orange giants of spectral types K0III and K0.5III respectively\u2014make up the quartet. They are around 370 and 497 light-years away from the Sun respectively. Another ageing star, Kappa Telescopii is a yellow giant with a spectral type G9III and apparent magnitude of 5.18. Around 1.87 billion years old, this star of around 1.6 solar masses has swollen to 11 times the Sun's diameter. It is approximately 293 light-years from Earth, and is another optical double.\nXi Telescopii is an irregular variable star that ranges between magnitudes 4.89 and 4.94. Located 1079 light-years distant, it is a red giant of spectral type M2III that has a diameter around 5.6 times the Sun's, and a luminosity around 2973 times that of the Sun. Another irregular variable, RX Telescopii is a red supergiant that varies between magnitudes 6.45 and 7.47, just visible to the unaided eye under good viewing conditions. BL Telescopii is an Algol-like eclipsing binary system that varies between apparent magnitudes 7.09 and 9.08 over a period of just over 778 days (2 years 48 days). The primary is a yellow supergiant that is itself intrinsically variable. Dipping from its baseline magnitude of 9.6 to 16.5, RS Telescopii is a rare R Coronae Borealis variable\u2014an extremely hydrogen-deficient supergiant thought to have arisen as the result of the merger of two white dwarfs; fewer than 100 have been discovered as of 2012. The dimming is thought to be caused by carbon dust expelled by the star. As of 2012, four dimmings have been observed. PV Telescopii is a class B-type (blue) extreme helium star that is the prototype of a class of variables known as PV Telescopii variables. First discovered in 1952, it was found to have a very low level of hydrogen. One theory of its origin is that it is the result of a merger between a helium- and a carbon-oxygen white dwarf. If the combined mass does not exceed the Chandrasekhar limit, the former will accrete onto the latter star and ignite to form a supergiant. Later this will become an extreme helium star before cooling to become a white dwarf.\nWhile RR Telescopii, also designated \"Nova Telescopii 1948\", is often called a slow nova, it is now classified as a symbiotic nova system composed of an M5III pulsating red giant and a white dwarf; between 1944 and 1948 it brightened by about 7 magnitudes before being noticed at apparent magnitude 6.0 in mid-1948. It has since faded slowly to about apparent magnitude 12. QS Telescopii is a binary system composed of a white dwarf and main sequence donor star, in this case the two are close enough to be tidally locked, facing one another. Known as polars, material from the donor star does not form an accretion disk around the white dwarf, but rather streams directly onto it. This is due to the presence of the white dwarf's strong magnetic field.\nAlthough no star systems in Telescopium have confirmed planets, several have been found to have brown dwarf companions. A member of the 12-million-year-old Beta Pictoris moving group of stars that share a common proper motion through space, Eta Telescopii is a young white main sequence star of magnitude 5.0 and spectral type A0V. It has a debris disk and brown dwarf companion of spectral type M7V or M8V that is between 20 and 50 times as massive as Jupiter. The system is complex, as it has a common proper motion with (and is gravitationally bound to) the star HD 181327, which has its own debris disk. This latter star is a yellow-white main sequence star of spectral type F6V of magnitude 7.0. PZ Telescopii is another young star with a debris disk and substellar brown dwarf companion, though at 24 million years of age appears too old to be part of the Beta Pictoris moving group. HD 191760 is a yellow subgiant\u2014a star that is cooling and expanding off the main sequence\u2014of spectral type G3IV/V. Estimated to be just over four billion years old, it is slightly (1.1 to 1.3 times) more massive as the Sun, 2.69 times as luminous, and has around 1.62 times its radius. Using the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS) instrument on the ESO 3.6 m Telescope, it was found to have a brown dwarf around 38 times as massive as Jupiter orbiting at an average distance of 1.35 AU with a period of 505 days. This is an unusually close distance from the star, within a range that has been termed the brown-dwarf desert.\nDeep sky objects.\nThe Telescopium group is a group of twelve galaxies spanning three degrees in the northeastern part of the constellation, lying around 37 megaparsecs (120 million light-years) from our own galaxy. The brightest member is the elliptical galaxy NGC 6868, and to the west lies the spiral galaxy (or, perhaps, lenticular galaxy) NGC 6861. These are the brightest members of two respective subgroups within the galaxy group, and are heading toward a merger in the future.\nThe globular cluster NGC 6584 lies near Theta Arae and is 45,000 light-years distant from Earth. It is an Oosterhoff type I cluster, and contains at least 69 variable stars, most of which are RR Lyrae variables. The planetary nebula IC 4699 is of 13th magnitude and lies midway between Alpha and Epsilon Telescopii. IC 4889 is an elliptical galaxy of apparent magnitude 11.3, which can be found 2 degrees north-north-west of 5.3-magnitude Nu Telescopii. Observing it through a 40\u00a0cm telescope will reveal its central region and halo.\nOccupying an area of around 4' \u00d7 2', NGC 6845 is an interacting system of four galaxies\u2014two spiral and two lenticular galaxies\u2014that is estimated to be around 88 megaparsecs (287 million light-years) distant. SN 2008da was a type II supernova observed in one of the spiral galaxies, NGC 6845A, in June 2008. SN 1998bw was a luminous supernova observed in the spiral arm of the galaxy ESO184-G82 in April 1998, and is notable in that it is highly likely to be the source of the gamma-ray burst GRB 980425. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30666", "revid": "44141905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30666", "title": "Trivium", "text": "First three liberal arts of traditional education\nThe trivium is the lower division of the seven liberal arts and comprises grammar, logic, and rhetoric.\nThe trivium is implicit in (\"On the Marriage of Philology and Mercury\") by Martianus Capella, but the term was not used until the Carolingian Renaissance, when it was coined in imitation of the earlier quadrivium. Grammar, logic, and rhetoric were essential to a classical education, as explained in Plato's dialogues. The three subjects together were denoted by the word \"trivium\" during the Middle Ages, but the tradition of first learning those three subjects was established in ancient Greece, by rhetoricians such as Isocrates. Contemporary iterations have taken various forms, including those found in certain British and American universities (some being part of the Classical education movement) and at the independent Oundle School in the United Kingdom.\nEtymology.\nEtymologically, the Latin word means \"the place where three roads meet\" ( + ); hence, the subjects of the trivium are the foundation for the quadrivium, the upper (or \"further\") division of the medieval education in the liberal arts, which consists of arithmetic (numbers as abstract concepts), geometry (numbers in space), music (numbers in time), and astronomy (numbers in space and time). Educationally, the trivium and the quadrivium imparted to the student the seven liberal arts of classical antiquity.\nDescription.\nGrammar teaches the mechanics of language to the student. This is the step where the student \"comes to terms\", defining the objects and information perceived by the five senses. Hence, the law of identity: \"a tree is a tree, and not a cat\".\nLogic (also dialectic) is the \"mechanics\" of thought and of analysis, the process of composing sound arguments and identifying fallacious arguments and statements, and so systematically removing contradictions, thereby producing factual knowledge that can be trusted. Its aim is to calculate what is certainly true or false.\nRhetoric is the application of language in order to instruct and to persuade the listener and the reader. It is the knowledge (grammar) now understood (logic) and being transmitted outwards as wisdom (rhetoric). Its aim is to identify what is most probably true or false where logical certainty is not possible.\nAristotle defined rhetoric as \"the power of perceiving in every thing that which is capable of producing persuasion\".\nSister Miriam Joseph, in \"The Trivium: The Liberal Arts of Logic, Grammar, and Rhetoric\" (2002), described the trivium as follows:\nGrammar is the art of inventing symbols and combining them to express thought; logic is the art of thinking; and rhetoric is the art of communicating thought from one mind to another, the adaptation of language to circumstance.\nGrammar is concerned with the thing as-it-is-symbolized. Logic is concerned with the thing as-it-is-known. Rhetoric is concerned with the thing as-it-is-communicated.\nJohn Ayto wrote in the \"Dictionary of Word Origins\" (1990) that study of the trivium (grammar, logic, and rhetoric) was requisite preparation for study of the quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy). For the medieval student, the trivium was the curricular beginning of the acquisition of the seven liberal arts; as such, it was the principal undergraduate course of study. The word \"trivial\" arose from the contrast between the simpler trivium and the more difficult quadrivium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30667", "revid": "50236370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30667", "title": "Last Supper", "text": "Meal that Jesus shared with his apostles before his crucifixion\nThe Last Supper is the final meal that, in the Gospel accounts, Jesus shared with his apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion. The Last Supper is commemorated by Christians especially on Holy Thursday. The Last Supper provides the scriptural basis for the Eucharist, also known as \"Holy Communion\" or \"The Lord's Supper\". Jesus having a final meal with his disciples is almost beyond dispute among scholars, and belongs to the framework of the narrative of Jesus' life.\nThe New Testament mentions the Last Supper in four of its books. The First Epistle to the Corinthians (I Cor. 11:23\u201325) contains the earliest known mention. The four canonical gospels state that the Last Supper took place in the week of Passover, days after Jesus's triumphal entry into Jerusalem, and before Jesus was crucified on Good Friday (Matthew 26:17\u201329; Mark 14:12\u201325; Luke 22:7\u201338). During the meal, Jesus predicts his betrayal by one of the apostles present, and foretells that before the next morning, Peter will thrice deny knowing him.\nThe three Synoptic Gospels and the First Epistle to the Corinthians include the account of the institution of the Eucharist in which Jesus takes bread, breaks it and gives it to those present, saying \"This is my body given to you\". The Gospel of John tells of Jesus washing the feet of the apostles, giving the new commandment \"to love one another as I have loved you\", and includes the detailed Farewell Discourse by Jesus, calling the apostles who follow his teachings \"friends and not servants\", as he prepares them for his departure.\nSome scholars have looked to the Last Supper as the source of early Christian Eucharistic traditions. Others see the account of the Last Supper as derived from 1st-century eucharistic practice as described by Paul in the mid-50s.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Last Supper\" does not appear in the New Testament, but traditionally many Christians refer to such an event. The term \"Lord's Supper\" refers both to the biblical event and the act of \"Holy Communion\" and Eucharistic (\"thanksgiving\") celebration within their liturgy. Evangelical Protestants also use the term \"Lord's Supper\", but most do not use the terms \"Eucharist\" or the word \"Holy\" with the name \"Communion\".\nThe Eastern Orthodox use the term \"Mystical Supper\" which refers both to the biblical event and the act of Eucharistic celebration within liturgy. The Russian Orthodox also use the term \"Secret Supper\" (, \"Taynaya vecherya\").\nScriptural basis.\nThe last meal that Jesus shared with his apostles is described in all four canonical Gospels as having taken place in the week of the Passover. This meal later became known as the Last Supper. The Last Supper was likely a retelling of the events of the last meal of Jesus among the early Christian community, and became a ritual which recounted that meal.\nPaul's First Epistle to the Corinthians, which was likely written before the Gospels, includes a reference to the Last Supper but emphasizes the theological basis rather than giving a detailed description of the event or its background.\nBackground and setting.\nThe overall narrative that is shared in all Gospel accounts that leads to the Last Supper is that after the triumphal entry into Jerusalem early in the week, and encounters with various people and the Jewish elders, Jesus and his disciples share a meal towards the end of the week. After the meal, Jesus is betrayed, arrested, tried, and then crucified.\nKey events in the meal are the preparation of the disciples for the departure of Jesus, the predictions about the impending betrayal of Jesus, and the foretelling of the upcoming denial of Jesus by Apostle Peter.\nPrediction of Judas' betrayal.\nIn Matthew 26:24\u201325, Mark 14:18\u201321, Luke 22:21\u201323 and John 13:21\u201330, during the meal, Jesus predicted that one of the apostles present would betray him. Jesus is described as reiterating, despite each apostle's assertion that he would not betray Jesus, that the betrayer would be one of those who were present, and saying that there would be \"woe to the man who betrays the Son of man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.\"\nIn Matthew 26:23\u201325 and John 13:26\u201327, Judas is specifically identified as the traitor. In the Gospel of John, when asked about the traitor, Jesus states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish.\" Then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him.\nInstitution of the Eucharist.\nThe three Synoptic Gospel accounts describe the Last Supper as a Passover meal. St\u00e9phane Saulnier argues they disagree with John, though Brant Pitre argues the Gospels can be reconciled in his \"Passover hypothesis\", taking the Gospel of John's allusions to the Passover lamb as applying to the seven-day festival rather than the meal. Each gives somewhat different versions of the order of the meal. In chapter 26 of the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus prays thanks for the bread, divides it, and hands the pieces of bread to his disciples, saying \"Take, eat, this is my body.\" Later in the meal Jesus takes a cup of wine, offers another prayer, and gives it to those present, saying \"Drink from it, all of you; for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. I tell you, I will never again drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.\"\nIn chapter 22 of the Gospel of Luke, however, the wine is blessed and distributed before the bread, followed by the bread, then by a second, larger cup of wine, as well as somewhat different wordings. Additionally, according to Paul and Luke, he tells the disciples \"do this in remembrance of me.\" This event has been regarded by Christians of most denominations as the institution of the Eucharist. There is recorded celebration of the Eucharist by the early Christian community in Jerusalem.\nThe institution of the Eucharist is recorded in the three Synoptic Gospels and in Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians. As noted above, Jesus's words differ slightly in each account. In addition, Luke 22:19b\u201320 is a disputed text which does not appear in some of the early manuscripts of Luke. Some scholars, therefore, believe that it is an interpolation, while others have argued that it is original.\nA comparison of the accounts given in the Gospels and 1 Corinthians is shown in the table below, with text from the ASV. The disputed text from Luke 22:19b\u201320 is in italics.\nJesus' actions in sharing the bread and wine have been linked with Isaiah 53:12 which refers to a blood sacrifice that, as recounted in Exodus 24:8, Moses offered in order to seal a covenant with God. Some scholars interpret the description of Jesus' action as asking his disciples to consider themselves part of a sacrifice, where Jesus is the one due to physically undergo it.\nAlthough the Gospel of John does not include a description of the bread and wine ritual during the Last Supper, most scholars agree that John 6:58\u201359 (the Bread of Life Discourse) has a Eucharistic nature and resonates with the \"words of institution\" used in the Synoptic Gospels and the Pauline writings on the Last Supper.\nPrediction of Peter's denial.\nIn Matthew 26:33\u201335, Mark 14:29\u201331, Luke 22:33\u201334 and John 13:36\u201338, Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him, stating that Peter will disown him three times before the rooster crows the next morning. The three Synoptic Gospels mention that after the arrest of Jesus, Peter denied knowing him three times, but after the third denial, heard the rooster crow and recalled the prediction as Jesus turned to look at him. Peter then began to cry bitterly.\nElements unique to the Gospel of John.\nJohn 13 includes the account of the washing the feet of the Apostles by Jesus before the meal. In this episode, Apostle Peter objects and does not want to allow Jesus to wash his feet, but Jesus answers him, \"Unless I wash you, you have no part with me\", after which Peter agrees.\nIn the Gospel of John, after the departure of Judas from the Last Supper, Jesus tells his remaining disciples that he will be with them for only a short time, then gives them a New Commandment, stating: \"A new command I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another. By this everyone will know that you are my disciples if you love one another.\" Two similar statements also appear later in John 15:12: \"My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you\", and John 15:17: \"This is my command: Love each other.\"\nAt the Last Supper in the Gospel of John, Jesus gives an extended sermon to his disciples. This discourse resembles farewell speeches called testaments, in which a father or religious leader, often on the deathbed, leaves instructions for his children or followers.\nThis sermon is referred to as the Farewell Discourse of Jesus, and has historically been considered a source of Christian doctrine, particularly on the subject of Christology. John 17:1\u201326 is generally known as the \"Farewell Prayer\" or the \"High Priestly Prayer\", given that it is an intercession for the coming Church. The prayer begins with Jesus's petition for his glorification by the Father, given that completion of his work and continues to an intercession for the success of the works of his disciples and the community of his followers.\nTime and place.\nDate.\nHistorians estimate that the date of the crucifixion fell in the range AD 30\u201336. Isaac Newton and Colin Humphreys have ruled out the years 31, 32, 35, and 36 on astronomical grounds, leaving 7 April AD 30 and 3 April AD 33 as possible crucifixion dates. proposes narrowing down the date of the Last Supper as having occurred in the evening of Wednesday, 1 April AD 33, by revising Annie Jaubert's double-Passover theory.\nHistorically, various attempts to reconcile the three synoptic accounts with John have been made, some of which are indicated in the Last Supper by Francis Mershman in the 1912 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\". The Maundy Thursday church tradition assumes that the Last Supper was held on the evening before the crucifixion day (although, strictly speaking, in no Gospel is it unequivocally said that this meal took place on the night before Jesus died).\nA new approach to resolve this contrast was undertaken in the wake of the excavations at Qumran in the 1950s when Annie Jaubert argued that there were two Passover feast dates: while the official Jewish lunar calendar had Passover begin on a Friday evening in the year that Jesus died, a solar calendar was also used, for instance by the Essene community at Qumran, which always had the Passover feast begin on a Tuesday evening. According to Jaubert, Jesus would have celebrated the Passover on Tuesday, and the Jewish authorities three days later, on Friday.\nHumphreys has disagreed with Jaubert's proposal on the grounds that the Qumran solar Passover would always fall after the official Jewish lunar Passover. He agrees with the approach of two Passover dates, and argues that the Last Supper took place on the evening of Wednesday 1 April 33, based on his recent discovery of the Essene, Samaritan, and Zealot lunar calendar, which is based on Egyptian reckoning.\nIn a review of Humphreys' book, the Bible scholar William R Telford points out that the non-astronomical parts of his argument are based on the assumption that the chronologies described in the New Testament are historical and based on eyewitness testimony. In doing so, Telford says, Humphreys has built an argument upon unsound premises which \"does violence to the nature of the biblical texts, whose mixture of fact and fiction, tradition and redaction, history and myth all make the rigid application of the scientific tool of astronomy to their putative data a misconstrued enterprise.\"\nLocation.\nAccording to later tradition, the Last Supper took place in what is today called The Room of the Last Supper on Mount Zion, just outside the walls of the Old City of Jerusalem, and is traditionally known as The Upper Room. This is based on the account in the Synoptic Gospels that states that Jesus had instructed two disciples (Luke 22:8 specifies that Jesus sent Peter and John) to go to \"the city\" to meet \"a man carrying a jar of water\", who would lead them to a house, where they would find \"a large upper room furnished and ready\". In this upper room they \"prepare the Passover\".\nNo more specific indication of the location is given in the New Testament, and the \"city\" referred to may be a suburb of Jerusalem, such as Bethany, rather than Jerusalem itself.\nA structure on Mount Zion in Jerusalem is currently called the Cenacle and is purported to be the location of the Last Supper. Bargil Pixner claims the original site is located beneath the current structure of the Cenacle on Mount Zion.\nThe traditional location is in an area that, according to archaeology, had a large Essene community, a point made by scholars who suspect a link between Jesus and the group.\nSaint Mark's Syrian Orthodox Church in Jerusalem is another possible site for the room in which the Last Supper was held, and contains a Christian stone inscription testifying to early reverence for that spot. Certainly the room they have is older than that of the current cenaculum (crusader \u2013 12th century) and as the room is now underground the relative altitude is correct (the streets of 1st century Jerusalem were at least lower than those of today, so any true building of that time would have even its upper story currently under the earth). They also have a revered Icon of the Virgin Mary, reputedly painted from life by St Luke.\nTheology of the Last Supper.\nPeter often displays amazement in feet washing depictions, as in John 13:8. St. Thomas Aquinas viewed The Father, Christ, and the Holy Spirit as teachers and masters who provide lessons, at times by example. For Aquinas, the Last Supper and the Cross form the summit of the teaching that wisdom flows from intrinsic grace, rather than external power. For Aquinas, at the Last Supper Christ taught by example, showing the value of humility (as reflected in John's foot washing narrative) and self-sacrifice, rather than by exhibiting external, miraculous powers.\nAquinas stated that based on John 15:15 (in the Farewell Discourse), in which Jesus said: \"No longer do I call you servants; ... but I have called you friends\", those who are followers of Christ and partake in the sacrament of the Eucharist become his friends, as those gathered at the table of the Last Supper. For Aquinas, at the Last Supper Christ made the promise to be present in the sacrament of the Eucharist, and to be with those who partake in it, as he was with his disciples at the Last Supper.\nJohn Calvin believed only in the two sacraments of Baptism and the \"Lord's Supper\" (i.e., Eucharist). Thus, his analysis of the Gospel accounts of the Last Supper was an important part of his entire theology. Calvin related the Synoptic Gospel accounts of the Last Supper with the Bread of Life Discourse in John 6:35 that states: \"I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never go hungry.\"\nCalvin also believed that the acts of Jesus at the Last Supper should be followed as an example, stating that just as Jesus gave thanks to the Father before breaking the bread, those who go to the Lord's table to receive the sacrament of the Eucharist must give thanks for the \"boundless love of God\" and celebrate the sacrament with both joy and thanksgiving.\nRemembrances.\nThe institution of the Eucharist at the Last Supper is remembered by Roman Catholics as one of the Luminous Mysteries of the Rosary, the First Station of a so-called New Way of the Cross and by Christians as the \"inauguration of the New Covenant\", mentioned by the prophet Jeremiah, fulfilled at the last supper when Jesus \"took bread, and after blessing it broke it and gave it to them, and said, 'Take; this is my body.' And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said to them, 'This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many.'\" Other Christian groups consider the Bread and Wine remembrance to be a change to the Passover ceremony, as Jesus Christ has become \"our Passover, sacrificed for us\", and hold that partaking of the Passover Communion (or fellowship) is now the sign of the New Covenant, when properly understood by the practicing believer.\nThese meals evolved into more formal worship services and became codified as the Mass in the Catholic Church, and as the Divine Liturgy in the Eastern Orthodox Church; at these liturgies, Catholics and Eastern Orthodox celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist. The name \"Eucharist\" is from the Greek word \"\u03b5\u1f50\u03c7\u03b1\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03af\u03b1\" (eucharistia) which means \"thanksgiving\".\nEarly Christianity observed a ritual meal known as the \"agape feast\" These \"love feasts\" were apparently a full meal, with each participant bringing food, and with the meal eaten in a common room. They were held on Sundays, which became known as the Lord's Day, to recall the resurrection, the appearance of Christ to the disciples on the road to Emmaus, the appearance to Thomas and the Pentecost which all took place on Sundays after the Passion.\nPassover parallels.\nSince the late 20th century, with growing consciousness of the Jewish character of the early church and the improvement of Jewish-Christian relations, it became common among some evangelical groups to borrow Seder customs, like Haggadahs, and incorporated them in new rituals meant to mimic the Last Supper. As the earliest elements in the current Passover Seder (\"a fortiori\" the full-fledged ritual, which is first recorded in full only in the ninth century) are a rabbinic enactment instituted in remembrance of the Temple, which was still standing during the Last Supper, the Seder in Jesus' time would have been celebrated quite differently, however.\nIn Islam.\nThe fifth chapter in the Quran, \"Al-Ma'ida\" (the table) contains a reference to a meal (Sura 5:114) with a table sent down from God to \u02bf\u012as\u00e1 (i.e., Jesus) and the apostles (Hawariyyin). However, there is nothing in Sura 5:114 to indicate that Jesus was celebrating that meal regarding his impending death, especially as the Quran states that Jesus was never crucified to begin with. Thus, although Sura 5:114 refers to \"a meal\", there is no indication that it is the Last Supper. However, some scholars believe that Jesus' manner of speech during which the table was sent down suggests that it was an affirmation of the apostles' resolves and to strengthen their faiths as the impending trial was about to befall them.\nHistoricity.\nAccording to John P. Meier and E. P. Sanders, Jesus having a final meal with his disciples is almost beyond dispute among scholars, and belongs to the framework of the narrative of Jesus' life. I. Howard Marshall states that any doubt about the historicity of the Last Supper should be abandoned.\nSome Jesus Seminar scholars consider the Last Supper to have derived not from Jesus' last supper with the disciples but rather from the gentile tradition of memorial dinners for the dead. In their view, the Last Supper is a tradition associated mainly with the gentile churches that Paul established, rather than with the earlier, Jewish congregations. Such views echo that of 20th century Protestant theologian Rudolf Bultmann, who also believed the Eucharist to have originated in Gentile Christianity.\nOn the other hand, an increasing number of scholars have reasserted the historicity of the institution of the Eucharist, reinterpreting it from a Jewish eschatological point of view: according to Lutheran theologian Joachim Jeremias, for example, the Last Supper should be seen as a climax of a series of Messianic meals held by Jesus in anticipation of a new Exodus. Similar views are echoed in more recent works by Catholic biblical scholars such as John P. Meier and Brant Pitre, and by Anglican scholar N.T. Wright.\nArtistic depictions.\nThe Last Supper has been a popular subject in Christian art. Such depictions date back to early Christianity and can be seen in the Catacombs of Rome. Byzantine artists frequently focused on the Apostles receiving Communion, rather than the reclining figures having a meal. By the Renaissance, the Last Supper was a favorite topic in Italian art.\nThere are three major themes in the depictions of the Last Supper: the first is the dramatic and dynamic depiction of Jesus's announcement of his betrayal. The second is the moment of the institution of the tradition of the Eucharist. The depictions here are generally solemn and mystical. The third major theme is the farewell of Jesus to his disciples, in which Judas Iscariot is no longer present, having left the supper. The depictions here are generally melancholy, as Jesus prepares his disciples for his departure. There are also other, less frequently depicted scenes, such as the washing of the feet of the disciples.\nThe best known depiction of the Last Supper is Leonardo da Vinci's \"The Last Supper\", which is considered the first work of High Renaissance art, due to its high level of harmony.\nAmong other representations, Tintoretto's depiction is unusual in that it includes secondary characters carrying or taking the dishes from the table, and Salvador Dali's depiction combines the typical Christian themes with modern approaches of Surrealism.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30668", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30668", "title": "The Lord's Supper", "text": ""}
{"id": "30669", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30669", "title": "Tunguska event", "text": "1908 air burst explosion in Siberia, Russia\nThe Tunguska event was a large explosion of between 3 and 50 megatons TNT equivalent that occurred near the Podkamennaya Tunguska River in Yeniseysk Governorate (now Krasnoyarsk Krai), Russia, on the morning of 30 June 1908. \nThe explosion over the sparsely populated East Siberian taiga felled a large number of trees, over an area of of forest, and eyewitness accounts suggest up to three people may have died.&lt;ref name=\"SAO/NASA \u2013 ADS\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The explosion is attributed to a meteor air burst, the atmospheric explosion of a stony asteroid about wide. \nThe asteroid approached from the east-south-east, probably with a relatively high speed of about . Though the incident is classified as an impact event, the object is thought to have exploded at an altitude of rather than hitting the Earth's surface, leaving no impact crater.\nThe Tunguska event is the largest impact event on Earth in recorded history, though much larger impacts are believed to have occurred in prehistoric times. An explosion of this magnitude would be capable of destroying a large metropolitan area. The event has been depicted in numerous works of fiction. The equivalent Torino scale rating for the impactor is 8: a certain collision with local destruction.\nDescription.\nOn 30 June 1908 N.S. (cited as 17 June 1908 O.S. before the implementation of the Soviet calendar in 1918), at around 7:17 a.m. local time, Evenki natives and Russian settlers in the hills northwest of Lake Baikal observed a bluish light, nearly as bright as the Sun, moving across the sky and leaving a thin trail. Closer to the horizon, there was a flash producing a billowing cloud, followed by a pillar of fire that cast a red light on the landscape. The pillar split in two and faded, turning to black. About ten minutes later, there was a sound similar to artillery fire. Eyewitnesses closer to the explosion reported that the source of the sound moved from the east to the north of them. The sounds were accompanied by a shock wave that knocked people off their feet and broke windows hundreds of kilometres away.\nThe explosion registered at seismic stations across Eurasia, and air waves from the blast were detected in Germany, Denmark, Croatia, and the United Kingdom \u2013 and as far away as Batavia, Dutch East Indies, and Washington, D.C. It is estimated that, in some places, the resulting shock wave was equivalent to an earthquake measuring 5.0 on the Richter scale. \nOver the next few days, night skies in Asia and Europe were aglow. There are contemporaneous reports of brightly lit photographs being successfully taken at midnight (without the aid of flashbulbs) in Sweden and Scotland. It has been theorized that this sustained glowing effect was due to light passing through high-altitude ice particles that had formed at extremely low temperatures as a result of the explosion \u2013 a phenomenon that decades later was reproduced by Space Shuttles. In the United States, a Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory program at the Mount Wilson Observatory in California observed a months-long decrease in atmospheric transparency consistent with an increase in suspended dust particles.\nSelected eyewitness reports.\nThough the region of Siberia in which the explosion occurred was very sparsely populated in 1908, there are accounts of the event from eyewitnesses, and regional newspapers reported the event shortly after it occurred.\nThe testimony of S. Semenov, as recorded by Russian mineralogist Leonid Kulik's expedition in 1930:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At breakfast time I was sitting by the house at Vanavara Trading Post [approximately south of the explosion], facing north. [...] I suddenly saw that directly to the north, over Onkoul's Tunguska Road, the sky split in two and fire appeared high and wide over the forest [as Semenov showed, about 50 degrees up \u2013 expedition note]. The split in the sky grew larger, and the entire northern side was covered with fire. At that moment I became so hot that I couldn't bear it as if my shirt was on fire; from the northern side, where the fire was, came strong heat. I wanted to tear off my shirt and throw it down, but then the sky shut closed, and a strong thump sounded, and I was thrown a few metres. I lost my senses for a moment, but then my wife ran out and led me to the house. After that such noise came, as if rocks were falling or cannons were firing, the Earth shook, and when I was on the ground, I pressed my head down, fearing rocks would smash it. When the sky opened up, hot wind raced between the houses, like from cannons, which left traces in the ground like pathways, and it damaged some crops. Later we saw that many windows were shattered, and in the barn, a part of the iron lock snapped.\nTestimony of Chuchan of the Shanyagir tribe, as recorded by I. M. Suslov in 1926:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We had a hut by the river with my brother Chekaren. We were sleeping. Suddenly we both woke up at the same time. Somebody shoved us. We heard whistling and felt strong wind. Chekaren said \"Can you hear all those birds flying overhead?\" We were both in the hut, couldn't see what was going on outside. Suddenly, I got shoved again, this time so hard I fell into the fire. I got scared. Chekaren got scared too. We started crying out for father, mother, brother, but no one answered. There was noise beyond the hut, we could hear trees falling down. Chekaren and I got out of our sleeping bags and wanted to run out, but then the thunder struck. This was the first thunder. The Earth began to move and rock, the wind hit our hut and knocked it over. My body was pushed down by sticks, but my head was in the clear. Then I saw a wonder: trees were falling, the branches were on fire, it became mighty bright, how can I say this, as if there was a second sun, my eyes were hurting, I even closed them. It was like what the Russians call lightning. And immediately there was a loud thunderclap. This was the second thunder. The morning was sunny, there were no clouds, our Sun was shining brightly as usual, and suddenly there came a second one!\nChekaren and I had some difficulty getting out from under the remains of our hut. Then we saw that above, but in a different place, there was another flash, and loud thunder came. This was the third thunder strike. Wind came again, knocked us off our feet, struck the fallen trees.\nWe looked at the fallen trees, watched the tree tops get snapped off, watched the fires. Suddenly Chekaren yelled \"Look up\" and pointed with his hand. I looked there and saw another flash, and it made another thunder. But the noise was less than before. This was the fourth strike, like normal thunder.\nNow I remember well there was also one more thunder strike, but it was small, and somewhere far away, where the Sun goes to sleep.\n\"Sibir\" newspaper, 2 July 1908:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the morning of 17th of June, around 9:00, we observed an unusual natural occurrence. In the north Karelinski village [200 verst () north of Kirensk] the peasants saw to the northwest, rather high above the horizon, some strangely bright (impossible to look at) bluish-white heavenly body, which for 10 minutes moved downwards. The body appeared as a \"pipe\", i.e., a cylinder. The sky was cloudless, only a small dark cloud was observed in the general direction of the bright body. It was hot and dry. As the body neared the ground (forest), the bright body seemed to smudge, and then turned into a giant billow of black smoke, and a loud knocking (not thunder) was heard as if large stones were falling, or artillery was fired. All buildings shook. At the same time the cloud began emitting flames of uncertain shapes. All villagers were stricken with panic and took to the streets, women cried, thinking it was the end of the world.\nThe author of these lines was meantime in the forest about 6 versts [6.4\u00a0km] north of Kirensk and heard to the north-east some kind of artillery barrage, that repeated at intervals of 15 minutes at least 10 times. In Kirensk in a few buildings in the walls facing north-east window glass shook.\n\"Siberian Life\" newspaper, 27 July 1908:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the meteorite fell, strong tremors in the ground were observed, and near the Lovat village of the Kansk uezd two strong explosions were heard, as if from large-calibre artillery.\n\"Krasnoyaretz\" newspaper, 13 July 1908:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Kezhemskoye village. On the 17th an unusual atmospheric event was observed. At 7:43 the noise akin to a strong wind was heard. Immediately afterward a horrific thump sounded, followed by an earthquake that literally shook the buildings as if they were hit by a large log or a heavy rock. The first thump was followed by a second, and then a third. Then the interval between the first and the third thumps was accompanied by an unusual underground rattle, similar to a railway upon which dozens of trains are travelling at the same time. Afterward, for 5 to 6 minutes an exact likeness of artillery fire was heard: 50 to 60 salvoes in short, equal intervals, which got progressively weaker. After 1.5\u20132 minutes after one of the \"barrages\" six more thumps were heard, like cannon firing, but individual, loud and accompanied by tremors.\nThe sky, at the first sight, appeared to be clear. There was no wind and no clouds. Upon closer inspection to the north, i.e. where most of the thumps were heard, a kind of an ashen cloud was seen near the horizon, which kept getting smaller and more transparent and possibly by around 2\u20133 p.m. completely disappeared.\nScientific investigation.\nSince the 1908 event, an estimated 1,000 scholarly papers (most in Russian) have been published about the Tunguska explosion. Owing to the site's remoteness and the limited instrumentation available at the time of the event, modern scientific interpretations of its cause and magnitude have relied chiefly on damage assessments and geological studies conducted many years after the event. Estimates of its energy have ranged from .\nNot until more than a decade after the event did any scientific analysis of the region take place, in part due to the area's isolation and significant political upheaval affecting Russia in the 1910s. In 1921, the Russian mineralogist Leonid Kulik led a team to the Podkamennaya Tunguska River basin to conduct a survey for the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Although they never visited the central blast area, the many local accounts of the event led Kulik to believe that a giant meteorite impact had caused the event. Upon returning, he persuaded the Soviet government to fund an expedition to the suspected impact zone, based on the prospect of salvaging meteoric iron.\nKulik led a scientific expedition to the Tunguska blast site in 1927. He hired local Evenki hunters to guide his team to the centre of the blast area, where they expected to find an impact crater. To their surprise, there was no crater at ground zero. Instead, they found a zone, roughly across, where the trees were scorched and devoid of branches, but still standing upright. Trees farther from the centre had been partly scorched and knocked down away from the centre, creating a large radial pattern of downed trees.\nIn the 1960s, it was established that the zone of levelled forest occupied an area of , its shape resembling a gigantic spread-eagled butterfly with a \"wingspan\" of and a \"body length\" of . Upon closer examination, Kulik found holes that he erroneously concluded were meteorite holes; he did not have the means at that time to excavate the holes.\nDuring the next 10 years, there were three more expeditions to the area. Kulik found several dozen little \"pothole\" bogs, each in diameter, that he thought might be meteoric craters. After a laborious exercise in draining one of these bogs (the so-called \"Suslov's crater\", in diameter), he found an old tree stump on the bottom, ruling out the possibility that it was a meteoric crater. In 1938, Kulik arranged for an aerial photographic survey of the area covering the central part of the leveled forest (). The original negatives of these aerial photographs (1,500 negatives, each ) were burned in 1975 by order of Yevgeny Krinov, then Chairman of the Committee on Meteorites of the USSR Academy of Sciences, as part of an initiative to dispose of increasingly flammable nitrate film. Positive prints were preserved for further study in Tomsk.\nExpeditions sent to the area in the 1950s and 1960s found microscopic silicate and magnetite spheres in siftings of the soil. Similar spheres were predicted to exist in the felled trees, although they could not be detected by contemporary means. Later expeditions did identify such spheres in the resin of the trees. Chemical analysis showed that the spheres contained high proportions of nickel relative to iron, which is also found in meteorites, leading to the conclusion they were of extraterrestrial origin. The concentration of the spheres in different regions of the soil was also found to be consistent with the expected distribution of debris from a meteor air burst. Later studies of the spheres found unusual ratios of numerous other metals relative to the surrounding environment, which was taken as further evidence of their extraterrestrial origin.\nChemical analysis of peat bogs from the area also revealed numerous anomalies considered consistent with an impact event. The isotopic signatures of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen at the layer of the bogs corresponding to 1908 were found to be inconsistent with the isotopic ratios measured in the adjacent layers, and this abnormality was not found in bogs outside the area. The region of the bogs showing these anomalous signatures also contains an unusually high proportion of iridium, similar to the iridium layer found in the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene boundary. These unusual proportions are believed to result from debris from the falling body that deposited in the bogs. The nitrogen is believed to have been deposited as acid rain, a suspected fallout from the explosion.\nOther scientists disagree: \"Some papers report that hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen isotopic compositions with signatures similar to those of CI and CM carbonaceous chondrites were found in Tunguska peat layers dating from the TE (Kolesnikov et al. 1999, 2003) and that iridium anomalies were also observed (Hou et al. 1998, 2004). Measurements performed in other laboratories have not confirmed these results (Rocchia et al. 1990; Tositti et al. 2006).\"\nResearcher John Anfinogenov has suggested that a boulder found at the event site, known as John's stone, is a remnant of the meteorite, but oxygen isotope analysis of the quartzite suggests that it is of hydrothermal origin, and probably related to Permian-Triassic Siberian Traps magmatism.\nIn 2013, a team of researchers published the results of an analysis of micro-samples from a peat bog near the centre of the affected area, which show fragments that may be of extraterrestrial origin.\nAlthough it is widely claimed the impact resulted in the felling of over 80 million trees, this was based on a preliminary guess multiplying tree density by impacted area that overestimated the area of devastation by a factor of four, so is likely to be incorrect. The largest accurately recorded felled trees are around in trunk diameter and not around that has been claimed by some sources.\nThe observation of decreased atmospheric transparency at the Mount Wilson Observatory in California have been used to calculate that roughly a million tons of dust were released into the stratosphere. Further modelling suggests that shock waves from the falling meteor generated up to 30 million tons of nitric oxide (NO) in the stratosphere and mesosphere which resulted in a peak ozone depletion of 35-45% for early 1909 and ones of ~30% in 1910 and ~15% in 1911 and a tripling of UV-B intensity at the ground at latitude 30\u00b0N. \nEarth impactor model.\nThe leading scientific explanation for the explosion is a meteor air burst by an asteroid above the Earth's surface.\nMeteoroids enter Earth's atmosphere from outer space every day, travelling at a speed of at least , the escape velocity of the Earth. The heat generated by compression of air in front of the body (ram pressure) as it travels through the atmosphere is immense and most meteoroids burn up or explode before they reach the ground. Early estimates of the energy of the Tunguska air burst ranged from to 30 megatons of TNT (130 PJ), depending on the exact height of the burst as estimated when the scaling laws from the effects of nuclear weapons are employed. More recent calculations that include the effect of the object's momentum find that more of the energy was focused downward than would be the case from a nuclear explosion and estimate that the air burst had an energy range from 3 to 5 megatons of TNT (13 to 21\u00a0PJ). The 15-megaton (Mt) estimate represents an energy about 1,000 times greater than that of the Trinity nuclear test, and roughly equal to that of the United States' Castle Bravo nuclear test in 1954 (which measured 15.2 Mt) and one third that of the Soviet Union's Tsar Bomba test in 1961. A 2019 paper suggests the explosive power of the Tunguska event may have been around 20\u201330 megatons.\nSince the second half of the 20th century, close monitoring of Earth's atmosphere through infrasound and satellite observation has shown that asteroid air bursts with energies comparable to those of nuclear weapons routinely occur, although Tunguska-sized events, on the order of 5\u201315 megatons, are much rarer. Eugene Shoemaker estimated that 20-kiloton events occur annually and that Tunguska-sized events occur about once every 300 years. More recent estimates place Tunguska-sized events at about once every thousand years, with 5-kiloton air bursts averaging about once per year. Most of these are thought to be caused by asteroid impactors, as opposed to mechanically weaker cometary materials, based on their typical penetration depths into the Earth's atmosphere. The largest asteroid air burst observed with modern instrumentation was the 500-kiloton Chelyabinsk meteor in 2013, which shattered windows and produced meteorites.\nGlancing impact hypothesis.\nIn 2020, a group of Russian scientists used a range of computer models to calculate the passage of asteroids with diameters of 200, 100, and 50 metres at oblique angles across Earth's atmosphere. They used a range of assumptions about the object's composition as if it was made of iron, rock, or ice. The model that most closely matched the observed event was an iron asteroid up to 200 metres in diameter, travelling at 11.2\u00a0km per second, that glanced off the Earth's atmosphere and returned into solar orbit.\nBlast pattern.\nThe explosion's effect on the trees near the explosion's hypocentre was similar to the effects of the conventional Operation Blowdown. These effects are caused by the blast wave produced by large air-burst explosions. The trees directly below the explosion are stripped as the blast wave moves vertically downward, but remain standing upright, while trees farther away are knocked over because the blast wave is travelling closer to horizontal when it reaches them.\nSoviet experiments performed in the mid-1960s, with model forests (made of matches on wire stakes) and small explosive charges slid downward on wires, produced butterfly-shaped blast patterns similar to the pattern found at the Tunguska site. The experiments suggested that the object had approached at an angle of roughly 30 degrees from the ground and 115 degrees from north and had exploded in midair.\nAsteroid or comet.\nIn 1930, the British meteorologist and mathematician F. J. W. Whipple suggested that the Tunguska body was a small comet. A comet is composed of dust and volatiles, such as water ice and frozen gases, and could have been completely vaporised by the impact with Earth's atmosphere, leaving no obvious traces. The comet hypothesis was further supported by the glowing skies (or \"skyglows\" or \"bright nights\") observed across Eurasia for several evenings after the impact, which are possibly explained by dust and ice that had been dispersed from the comet's tail across the upper atmosphere. The cometary hypothesis gained a general acceptance among Soviet Tunguska investigators by the 1960s.\nIn 1978, Slovak astronomer \u013dubor Kres\u00e1k suggested that the body was a fragment of Comet Encke, a periodic comet with a period of just over three years that stays entirely within Jupiter's orbit. It is also responsible for the Beta Taurids, an annual meteor shower with a maximum activity around 28\u201329 June. The Tunguska event coincided with that shower's peak activity, the Tunguska object's approximate trajectory is consistent with what would be expected from a fragment of Comet Encke, and a hypothetical risk corridor has now been calculated demonstrating that if the impactor had arrived a few minutes earlier it would have exploded over the US or Canada. It is now known that bodies of this kind explode at frequent intervals tens to hundreds of kilometres above the ground. Military satellites have been observing these explosions for decades. In 2019 astronomers searched for hypothesized asteroids ~100 metres in diameter from the Taurid swarm between 5\u201311 July, and 21 July \u2013 10 August. As of \u00a02020[ [update]], there have been no reports of discoveries of any such objects.\nIn 1983, astronomer Zden\u011bk Sekanina published a paper criticising the comet hypothesis. He pointed out that a body composed of cometary material, travelling through the atmosphere along such a shallow trajectory, ought to have disintegrated, whereas the Tunguska body apparently remained intact into the lower atmosphere. Sekanina also argued that the evidence pointed to a dense rocky object, probably of asteroidal origin. This hypothesis was further boosted in 2001, when Farinella, Foschini, \"et al.\" released a study calculating the probabilities based on orbital modelling extracted from the atmospheric trajectories of the Tunguska object. They concluded with a probability of 83% that the object moved on an asteroidal path originating from the asteroid belt, rather than on a cometary one (probability of 17%). Proponents of the comet hypothesis have suggested that the object was an extinct comet with a stony mantle that allowed it to penetrate the atmosphere.\nThe chief difficulty in the asteroid hypothesis is that a stony object should have produced a large crater where it struck the ground, but no such crater has been found. It has been hypothesised that the asteroid's passage through the atmosphere caused pressures and temperatures to build up to a point where the asteroid abruptly disintegrated in a huge explosion. The destruction would have to have been so complete that no remnants of substantial size survived, and the material scattered into the upper atmosphere during the explosion would have caused the skyglows. Models published in 1993 suggested that the stony body would have been about across, with physical properties somewhere between an ordinary chondrite and a carbonaceous chondrite. Typical carbonaceous chondrite substance tends to be dissolved with water rather quickly unless it is frozen.\nChristopher Chyba and others have proposed a process whereby a stony asteroid could have exhibited the Tunguska impactor's behaviour. Their models show that when the forces opposing a body's descent become greater than the cohesive force holding it together, it blows apart, releasing nearly all its energy at once. The result is no crater, with damage distributed over a fairly wide radius, and all the damage resulting from the thermal energy the blast releases.\nDuring the 1990s, Italian researchers, coordinated by the physicist Giuseppe Longo from the University of Bologna, extracted resin from the core of the trees in the area of impact to examine trapped particles that were present during the 1908 event. They found high levels of material commonly found in rocky asteroids and rarely found in comets.\nKelly \"et al.\" (2009) contend that the impact was caused by a comet because of the sightings of noctilucent clouds following the impact, a phenomenon caused by massive amounts of water vapour in the upper atmosphere. They compared the noctilucent cloud phenomenon to the exhaust plume from NASA's \"Endeavour\" Space Shuttle. A team of Russian researchers led by Edward Drobyshevski in 2009 suggested that the near-Earth asteroid may be a possible candidate for the Tunguska object's parent body as the asteroid made a close approach of from Earth on 27 June 1908, three days before the Tunguska impact. The team suspected that 2005 NB56's orbit likely fits with the Tunguska object's modelled orbit, even with the effects of weak non-gravitational forces. In 2013, analysis of fragments from the Tunguska site by a joint US-European team was consistent with an iron meteorite.\nThe February 2013 Chelyabinsk bolide event provided ample data for scientists to create new models for the Tunguska event. Researchers used data from both Tunguska and Chelyabinsk to perform a statistical study of over 50\u00a0million combinations of bolide and entry properties that could produce Tunguska-scale damage when breaking apart or exploding at similar altitudes. Some models focused on combinations of properties which created scenarios with similar effects to the tree-fall pattern as well as the atmospheric and seismic pressure waves of Tunguska. Four different computer models produced similar results; they concluded that the likeliest candidate for the Tunguska impactor was a stony body between in diameter, entering the atmosphere at roughly , exploding at altitude, and releasing explosive energy equivalent to between 10 and 30 megatons. This is similar to the blast energy equivalent of the 1980 volcanic eruption of Mount St. Helens. The researchers also concluded impactors of this size hit the Earth only at an average interval scale of millennia.\nLake Cheko.\nIn June 2007, scientists from the University of Bologna identified a lake in the Tunguska region as a possible impact crater from the event. They do not dispute that the Tunguska body exploded in midair, but believe that a fragment survived the explosion and struck the ground. Lake Cheko is a small bowl-shaped lake about north-northwest of the hypocentre.\nThe hypothesis has been disputed by other impact crater specialists. A 1961 investigation had dismissed a modern origin of Lake Cheko, saying that the presence of metres-thick silt deposits on the lake bed suggests an age of at least 5,000 years, but more recent research suggests that only a metre or so of the sediment layer on the lake bed is \"normal lacustrine sedimentation\", a depth consistent with an age of about 100 years. Acoustic-echo soundings of the lake floor support the hypothesis that the Tunguska event formed the lake. The soundings revealed a conical shape for the lake bed, which is consistent with an impact crater. Magnetic readings indicate a possible metre-sized chunk of rock below the lake's deepest point that may be a fragment of the colliding body. Finally, the lake's long axis points to the Tunguska explosion's hypocentre, about away. Work is still being done at Lake Cheko to determine its origins.\nThe main points of the study are that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cheko, a small lake located in Siberia close to the epicentre of the 1908 Tunguska explosion, might fill a crater left by the impact of a fragment of a cosmic body. Sediment cores from the lake's bottom were studied to support or reject this hypothesis. A core, collected near the center of the lake, consists of an upper c. sequence of lacustrine deposits overlaying coarser chaotic material. 210Pb and 137Cs indicate that the transition from lower to upper sequence occurred close to the time of the Tunguska event. Pollen analysis reveals that remains of aquatic plants are abundant in the top post-1908 sequence but are absent in the lower pre-1908 portion of the core. These results, including organic C, N and \u03b413C data, suggest that Lake Cheko formed at the time of the Tunguska event.\nPollen assemblages confirm the presence of two different units, above and below the ~100\u2010cm level (Fig. 4). The upper 100\u2010cm long section, in addition to pollen of taiga forest trees such as Abies, Betula, Juniperus, Larix, Pinus, Picea, and Populus, contains abundant remains of hydrophytes, \"i.e.\", aquatic plants probably deposited under lacustrine conditions similar to those prevailing today. These include both free-floating plants and rooted plants, growing usually in water up to 3\u20134 metres in depth (Callitriche, Hottonia, Lemna, Hydrocharis, Myriophyllum, Nuphar, Nymphaea, Potamogeton, Sagittaria). In contrast, the lower unit (below ~100 cm) contains abundant forest tree pollen, but no hydrophytes, suggesting that no lake existed then, but a taiga forest growing on marshy ground (Fig. 5). Pollen and microcharcoal show a progressive reduction in the taiga forest, from the bottom of the core upward. This reduction may have been caused by fires (two local episodes below ~100 cm), then by the TE and the formation of the lake (between 100 and 90\u00a0cm), and again by subsequent fires (one local fire in the upper 40\u00a0cm).\nIn 2017, new research by Russian scientists pointed to a rejection of the theory that the Tunguska event created Lake Cheko. They used soil research to determine that the lake is 280 years old or even much older; in any case clearly older than the Tunguska event. In analysing soils from the bottom of Lake Cheko, they identified a layer of radionuclide contamination from mid-20th century nuclear testing at Novaya Zemlya. The depth of this layer gave an average annual sedimentation rate of between 3.6 and 4.6\u00a0mm a year. These sedimentation values are less than half of the 1\u00a0cm/year calculated by Gasperini \"et al.\" in their 2009 publication on their analysis of the core they took from Lake Cheko in 1999. The Russian scientists in 2017 counted at least 280 such annual varves in the 1260\u00a0mm long core sample pulled from the bottom of the lake, representing an age older than the Tunguska event.\nAdditionally, there are problems with impact physics: It is unlikely that a stony meteorite in the right size range would have the mechanical strength necessary to survive atmospheric passage intact while retaining a velocity high enough to excavate a crater that size on reaching the ground.\nGeophysical hypotheses.\nThough scientific consensus is that the Tunguska explosion was caused by the impact of a small asteroid, there are some dissenters. Astrophysicist Wolfgang Kundt has proposed that the Tunguska event was caused by the release and subsequent explosion of 10\u00a0million tons of natural gas from within the Earth's crust. The basic idea is that natural gas leaked out of the crust and then rose to its equal-density height in the atmosphere; from there, it drifted downwind, in a sort of wick, which eventually found an ignition source such as lightning. Once the gas was ignited, the fire streaked along the wick, and then down to the source of the leak in the ground, whereupon there was an explosion.\nThe similar verneshot hypothesis has also been proposed as a possible cause of the Tunguska event. Other research has proposed a geophysical mechanism for the event.\nSimilar event.\nA smaller air burst occurred over a populated area on 15 February 2013, at Chelyabinsk in the Ural district of Russia. The exploding meteoroid was determined to have been an asteroid that measured about across. It had an estimated initial mass of 11,000 tonnes and exploded with an energy release of approximately 500 kilotons. The air burst inflicted over 1,200 injuries, mainly from broken glass falling from windows shattered by its shock wave.\nIn fiction.\nIn fiction, many alternative explanations for the event appear. The notion that it was caused by an alien spaceship is a popular one that gained prominence following the publication of Russian science fiction writer Alexander Kazantsev's 1946 short story \"Explosion\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30670", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30670", "title": "Terrorist", "text": ""}
{"id": "30674", "revid": "42734413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30674", "title": "The Terrorist (1998 film)", "text": "The Terrorist is a 1999 Indian Tamil-language film directed by Santosh Sivan. The film portrays a period in the life of a 19-year-old woman, Malli, sent to assassinate a leader in South Asia through a suicide bombing. It stars Ayesha Dharker. Released in 1999, the film was shot in 15 days, with natural lighting, on a shoestring budget of \u20b925 lakh (worth \u20b92.2 crore in 2021 prices).\nThe film won a number of awards at international film festivals. Actor John Malkovich first saw the film at the 1998 Cairo International Film Festival and subsequently adopted the film as a kind of post-facto executive producer. Critic Roger Ebert has included the film in his series of \"Great Movies\" reviews.\nPlot.\nThe movie focuses on a 19-year-old woman named Malli (based on Kalaivani Rajaratnam), who joined a terrorist organisation at a very young age after her brother was killed in the cause. She volunteers herself to become a suicide bomber in an assassination mission. As the plot moves forward, she discovers the importance of human life, after realising she is pregnant. This causes Malli to question her determination to complete the mission.\nInspiration.\nWhile campaigning in the 1991 Indian general election, former prime minister of India Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a female suicide bomber, Kalaivani Rajaratnam. Rajaratnam was affiliated with the Black Tigers, a cadre of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.\nFilm critic Roger Ebert noted that Santosh Sivan \"was inspired by the assassination of the Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991. But in the movie, no country is identified, no name is attached to her target, and no ideology or religion is attached to her movement.\"\nReception.\nEbert concludes his review with the following line: \"Every time I see the film, I feel a great sadness, that a human imagination could be so limited that it sees its own extinction as a victory.\" According to Ebert, it was a film \u2018scripted by the camera\u2019.\nSays Sivan: \"One day I got a call from Samuel Lee Jackson who was interested to cast the heroine of \"The Terrorist\", Ayesha, in a Hollywood film.\"\nThe reissued film's titles read \"John Malkovich Presents\" after Malkovich took a liking for the film. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30677", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30677", "title": "Tool", "text": "Object used to achieve a goal\nA tool is an object that can extend an individual's ability to modify features of the surrounding environment or help them accomplish a particular task, and proto-typically refers to solid hand-operated non-biological objects with a single broad purpose that lack multiple functions, unlike machines or computers. Although human beings are proportionally most active in using and making tools in the animal kingdom, as use of stone tools dates back hundreds of millennia, and also in using tools to make other tools, many animals have demonstrated tool use in both instances.\nEarly human tools, made of such materials as stone, bone, and wood, were used for the preparation of food, hunting, the manufacture of weapons, and the working of materials to produce clothing and useful artifacts and crafts such as pottery, along with the construction of housing, businesses, infrastructure, and transportation. The development of metalworking made additional types of tools possible. Harnessing energy sources, such as animal power, wind, or steam, allowed increasingly complex tools to produce an even larger range of items, with the Industrial Revolution marking an inflection point in the use of tools. The introduction of widespread automation in the 19th and 20th centuries allowed tools to operate with minimal human supervision, further increasing the productivity of human labor.\nBy extension, concepts that support systematic or investigative thought are often referred to as \"tools\" or \"toolkits\".\nEarly humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals.\nDefinition.\nWhile a common-sense understanding of the meaning of tool is widespread, several formal definitions have been proposed.\nIn 1981, Benjamin Beck published a widely used definition of tool use. This has been modified to:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Other, briefer definitions have been proposed:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An object carried or maintained for future use.\u2014\u200a&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The use of physical objects other than the animal's own body or appendages as a means to extend the physical influence realized by the animal.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An object that has been modified to fit a purpose ... [or] An inanimate object that one uses or modifies in some way to cause a change in the environment, thereby facilitating one's achievement of a target goal.\u2014\u200a\nHistory.\nAnthropologists believe that the use of tools was an important step in the evolution of humankind. Because tools are used extensively by both humans (Homo sapiens) and wild chimpanzees, it is widely assumed that the first routine use of tools took place prior to the divergence between the two ape species. These early tools, however, were likely made of perishable materials such as sticks, or consisted of unmodified stones that cannot be distinguished from other stones as tools.\nStone artifacts date back to about 2.5 million years ago. However, a 2010 study suggests the hominin species \"Australopithecus afarensis\" ate meat by carving animal carcasses with stone implements. This finding pushes back the earliest known use of stone tools among hominins to about 3.4 million years ago. Finds of actual tools date back at least 2.6 million years in Ethiopia. One of the earliest distinguishable stone tool forms is the hand axe.\nUp until recently, weapons found in digs were the only tools of early humans that were studied and given importance. Now, more tools are recognized as culturally and historically relevant. As well as hunting, other activities required tools such as preparing food, \"...nutting, leatherworking, grain harvesting and woodworking...\" Included in this group are \"flake stone tools\".\nTools are the most important items that the ancient humans used to climb to the top of the food chain; by inventing tools, they were able to accomplish tasks that human bodies could not, such as using a spear or bow to kill prey, since their teeth were not sharp enough to pierce many animals' skins. \"Man the hunter\" as the catalyst for Hominin change has been questioned. Based on marks on the bones at archaeological sites, it is now more evident that pre-humans were scavenging off of other predators' carcasses rather than killing their own food.\nTimeline of ancient tool development.\nMany tools were made in prehistory or in the early centuries of recorded history, but archaeological evidence can provide dates of development and use.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeveral of the six classic simple machines (wheel and axle, lever, pulley, inclined plane, wedge, and screw) were invented in Mesopotamia. The wheel and axle mechanism first appeared with the potter's wheel, invented in what is now Iraq during the 5th millennium BC. This led to the invention of the wheeled vehicle in Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium BC. The lever was used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia c.\u20093000 BC, and then in ancient Egyptian technology c.\u20092000 BC. The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC.\nThe screw, the last of the simple machines to be invented, first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911\u2013609 BC). The Assyrian King Sennacherib (704\u2013681\u00a0BC) claims to have invented automatic sluices and to have been the first to use water screw pumps, of up to 30 tons weight, which were cast using two-part clay molds rather than by the 'lost wax' process. The Jerwan Aqueduct (c.\u2009688\u00a0BC) is made with stone arches and lined with waterproof concrete. The earliest evidence of water wheels and watermills date back to the ancient Near East in the 4th century BC, specifically in the Persian Empire before 350\u00a0BC, in the regions of Mesopotamia (Iraq) and Persia (Iran). This pioneering use of water power constituted perhaps the first use of mechanical energy. The screwdriver for driving fastening screws was, however, not invented until the late 15th century.\nMechanical devices experienced a major expansion in their use in Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome with the systematic employment of new energy sources, especially waterwheels. Their use expanded through the Dark Ages with the addition of windmills.\nMachine tools.\nMachine tools occasioned a surge in producing new tools in the Industrial Revolution. Pre-industrial machinery was built by various crafters\u2014millwrights built water and windmills, carpenters made wooden framing, and smiths and turners made metal parts. Wooden components had the disadvantage of changing dimensions with temperature and humidity, and the various joints tended to rack (work loose) over time. As the Industrial Revolution progressed, machines with metal parts and frames became more common.\nOther important uses of metal parts were in firearms and threaded fasteners, such as machine screws, bolts, and nuts. There was also the need for precision in making parts. Precision would allow better working machinery, interchangeability of parts, and standardization of threaded fasteners. The demand for metal parts led to the development of several machine tools. They have their origins in the tools developed in the 18th century by makers of clocks and watches and scientific instrument makers to enable them to batch-produce small mechanisms. Before the advent of machine tools, metal was worked manually using the basic hand tools of hammers, files, scrapers, saws, and chisels. Consequently, the use of metal machine parts was kept to a minimum. Hand methods of production were very laborious and costly and precision was difficult to achieve. With their inherent precision, machine tools enabled the economical production of interchangeable parts.\nExamples of machine tools include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdvocates of nanotechnology expect a similar surge as tools become microscopic in size.\nTypes.\nOne can classify tools according to their basic functions:\nSome tools may be combinations of other tools. An alarm-clock is for example a combination of a measuring tool (the clock) and a perception tool (the alarm). This enables the alarm-clock to be a tool that falls outside of all the categories mentioned above.\nThere is some debate on whether to consider protective gear items as tools, because they do not directly help perform work, just protect the worker like ordinary clothing. They do meet the general definition of tools and in many cases are necessary for the completion of the work. Personal protective equipment includes such items as gloves, safety glasses, ear defenders and biohazard suits.\nFunction.\nTool substitution.\nOften, by design or coincidence, a tool may share key functional attributes with one or more other tools. In this case, some tools can substitute for other tools, either as a makeshift solution or as a matter of practical efficiency. \"One tool does it all\" is a motto of some importance for workers who cannot practically carry every specialized tool to the location of every work task, such as a carpenter who does not necessarily work in a shop all day and needs to do jobs in a customer's house. Tool substitution may be divided broadly into two classes: substitution \"by-design\", or \"multi-purpose\", and substitution as makeshift. Substitution \"by-design\" would be tools that are designed specifically to accomplish multiple tasks using only that one tool.\nSubstitution is \"makeshift\" when human ingenuity comes into play and a tool is used for an unintended purpose, such as using a long screwdriver to separate a cars control arm from a ball joint, instead of using a tuning fork. In many cases, the designed secondary functions of tools are not widely known. For example, many wood-cutting hand saws integrate a square by incorporating a specially-shaped handle, that allows 90\u00b0 and 45\u00b0 angles to be marked by aligning the appropriate part of the handle with an edge, and scribing along the back edge of the saw. The latter is illustrated by the saying \"All tools can be used as hammers\". Nearly all tools can be used to function as a hammer, even though few tools are intentionally designed for it and even fewer work as well as the original.\nTools are often used to substitute for many mechanical apparatuses, especially in older mechanical devices. In many cases a cheap tool could be used to occupy the place of a missing mechanical part. A window roller in a car could be replaced with pliers. A transmission shifter or ignition switch would be able to be replaced with a screwdriver. Again, these would be considered tools that are being used for their unintended purposes, substitution as makeshift. Tools such as a rotary tool would be considered the substitution \"by-design\", or \"multi-purpose\". This class of tools allows the use of one tool that has at least two different capabilities. \"Multi-purpose\" tools are basically multiple tools in one device/tool. Tools such as this are often power tools that come with many different attachments like a rotary tool does, so one could say that a power drill is a \"multi-purpose\" tool.\nMulti-use tools.\nA multi-tool is a hand tool that incorporates several tools into a single, portable device; the Swiss Army knife represents one of the earliest examples. Other tools have a primary purpose but also incorporate other functionality \u2013 for example, lineman's pliers incorporate a gripper and cutter and are often used as a hammer; and some hand saws incorporate a square in the right-angle between the blade's dull edge and the saw's handle. This would also be the category of \"multi-purpose\" tools, since they are also multiple tools in one (multi-use and multi-purpose can be used interchangeably \u2013 compare hand axe). These types of tools were specifically made to catch the eye of many different crafters who traveled to do their work. To these workers these types of tools were revolutionary because they were one tool or one device that could do several different things. With this new revolution of tools, the traveling crafter would not have to carry so many tools with them to job sites, in that their space would be limited to the vehicle or to the beast of burden they were driving. Multi-use tools solve the problem of having to deal with many different tools.\nUse by other animals.\nTool use by animals is a phenomenon in which an animal uses any kind of tool in order to achieve a goal such as acquiring food and water, grooming, defense, communication, recreation or construction. Originally thought to be a skill possessed only by humans, some tool use requires a sophisticated level of cognition. There is considerable discussion about the definition of what constitutes a tool and therefore which behaviours can be considered true examples of tool use. Observation has confirmed that a number of species can use tools including monkeys, apes, elephants, several birds, and sea otters. Now the unique relationship of humans with tools is considered to be that we are the only species that uses tools to make \"other\" tools.\n Primates are well known for using tools for hunting or gathering food and water, cover for rain, and self-defense. Chimpanzees have often been the object of study in regard to their usage of tools, most famously by Jane Goodall; these animals are closely related to humans. Wild tool-use in other primates, especially among apes and monkeys, is considered relatively common, though its full extent remains poorly documented, as many primates in the wild are mainly only observed distantly or briefly when in their natural environments and living without human influence. Some novel tool-use by primates may arise in a localized or isolated manner within certain unique primate cultures, being transmitted and practiced among socially connected primates through cultural learning. Many famous researchers, such as Charles Darwin in his book \"The Descent of Man\", mentioned tool-use in monkeys (such as baboons).\nAmong other mammals, both wild and captive elephants are known to create tools using their trunks and feet, mainly for swatting flies, scratching, plugging up waterholes that they have dug (to close them up again so the water does not evaporate), and reaching food that is out of reach. Many other social mammals particularly have been observed engaging in tool-use. A group of dolphins in Shark Bay uses sea sponges to protect their beaks while foraging. Sea otters will use rocks or other hard objects to dislodge food (such as abalone) and break open shellfish. Many or most mammals of the order Carnivora have been observed using tools, often to trap or break open the shells of prey, as well as for scratching.\nCorvids (such as crows, ravens and rooks) are well known for their large brains (among birds) and tool use. New Caledonian crows are among the only animals that create their own tools. They mainly manufacture probes out of twigs and wood (and sometimes metal wire) to catch or impale larvae. Tool use in some birds may be best exemplified in nest intricacy. Tailorbirds manufacture 'pouches' to make their nests in. Some birds, such as weaver birds, build complex nests utilizing a diverse array of objects and materials, many of which are specifically chosen by certain birds for their unique qualities. Woodpecker finches insert twigs into trees in order to catch or impale larvae. Parrots may use tools to wedge nuts so that they can crack open the outer shell of nuts without launching away the inner contents. Some birds take advantage of human activity, such as carrion crows in Japan, which drop nuts in front of cars to crack them open.\nSeveral species of fish use tools to hunt and crack open shellfish, extract food that is out of reach, or clear an area for nesting. Among cephalopods (and perhaps uniquely or to an extent unobserved among invertebrates), octopuses are known to use tools relatively frequently, such as gathering coconut shells to create a shelter or using rocks to create barriers.\nNon-material usage.\nBy extension, concepts which support systematic or investigative thought are often referred to as \"tools\", for example Vanessa Dye refers to \"tools of reflection\" and \"tools to help sharpen your professional practice\" for trainee teachers, illustrating the connection between physical and conceptual tools by quoting the French scientist Claude Bernaud:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Similarly, a decision-making process \"developed to help women and their partners make confident and informed decisions when planning where to give birth\" is described as a \"Birth Choice tool\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The tool encourages women to consider out-of-hospital settings where appropriate, and the idea of a \"toolkit\" is used by the International Labour Organization to describe a set of processes applicable to improving global labour relations.\nA telephone is a communication tool that interfaces between two people engaged in conversation at one level. It also interfaces between each user and the communication network at another level. It is in the domain of media and communications technology that a counter-intuitive aspect of our relationships with our tools first began to gain popular recognition. John M. Culkin famously said, \"We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape us\". One set of scholars expanded on this to say: \"Humans create inspiring and empowering technologies but also are influenced, augmented, manipulated, and even imprisoned by technology\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30680", "revid": "49063202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30680", "title": "The New York Times", "text": "American newspaper\nThe New York Times (NYT) is a newspaper based in Manhattan, New York City. \"The New York Times\" covers domestic, national, and international news, and publishes opinion pieces and reviews. As one of the longest-running newspapers in the United States, the \"Times\" serves as one of the country's newspapers of record. As of August\u00a02025[ [update]], \"The New York Times\" had 11.88 million total and 11.3 million online subscribers, both by significant margins the highest numbers for any newspaper in the United States; the total also included 580,000 print subscribers. \"The New York Times\" is published by the New York Times Company; since 1896, the company has been chaired by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, whose current chairman and the paper's publisher is A. G. Sulzberger. The \"Times\" is headquartered at The New York Times Building in Midtown Manhattan.\nThe \"Times\" was founded as the conservative \"New-York Daily Times\" in 1851, and came to national recognition in the 1870s with its aggressive coverage of corrupt politician Boss Tweed. Following the Panic of 1893, \"Chattanooga Times\" publisher Adolph Ochs gained a controlling interest in the company. In 1935, Ochs was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who began a push into European news. Sulzberger's son Arthur Ochs Sulzberger became publisher in 1963, adapting to a changing newspaper industry and introducing radical changes. \"The New York Times\" was involved in the landmark 1964 U.S. Supreme Court case \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\", which restricted the ability of public officials to sue the media for defamation.\nIn 1971, \"The New York Times\" published the \"Pentagon Papers\", an internal Department of Defense document detailing the United States's historical involvement in the Vietnam War, despite pushback from then-president Richard Nixon. In the landmark decision \"New York Times Co. v. United States\" (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment guaranteed the right to publish the \"Pentagon Papers\". In the 1980s, the \"Times\" began a two-decade progression to digital technology and launched nytimes.com in 1996. In the 21st century, it shifted its publication online amid the global decline of newspapers.\nCurrently, the \"Times\" maintains several regional bureaus staffed with journalists across six continents. It has expanded to several other publications, including \"The New York Times Magazine\", \"The New York Times International Edition\", and \"The New York Times Book Review\". In addition, the paper has produced several television series, podcasts\u2014including \"The Daily\"\u2014and games through \"The New York Times Games\". \"The New York Times\" has been involved in a number of controversies in its history. Among other accolades, it has been awarded the Pulitzer Prize 135 times since 1918, the most of any publication. According to a 2025 Pew Research Center study on educational differences among audiences of 30 major U.S. news outlets, \"The New York Times\" had the highest proportion of college-educated readers among the daily newspapers surveyed, with 56% of its audience holding at least a bachelor's degree.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1851\u20131896.\n\"The New York Times\" was established in 1851 as the \"New-York Daily Times\" by \"New-York Tribune\" journalists Henry Jarvis Raymond and George Jones. The \"Times\" experienced significant circulation, particularly among conservatives; \"New-York Tribune\" publisher Horace Greeley praised the \"Times\". During the American Civil War, \"Times\" correspondents gathered information directly from Confederate states. In 1869, Jones inherited the paper from Raymond, who had changed its name to \"The New-York Times\". Under Jones, the \"Times\" began to publish a series of articles criticizing Tammany Hall political boss William M. Tweed, despite vehement opposition from other New York newspapers. In 1871, \"The New-York Times\" published Tammany Hall's accounting books; Tweed was tried in 1873 and sentenced to twelve years in prison. The \"Times\" earned national recognition for its coverage of Tweed. In 1891, Jones died, creating a management imbroglio in which his children had insufficient business acumen to inherit the company and his will prevented an acquisition of the \"Times\". Editor-in-chief Charles Ransom Miller, editorial editor Edward Cary, and correspondent George F. Spinney established a company to manage \"The New-York Times\", but faced financial difficulties during the Panic of 1893.\n1896\u20131945.\nIn August 1896, \"Chattanooga Times\" publisher Adolph Ochs acquired \"The New-York Times\", implementing significant alterations to the newspaper's structure. Ochs established the \"Times\" as a merchant's newspaper and removed the hyphen from the newspaper's name. In 1905, \"The New York Times\" opened Times Tower, marking expansion. The \"Times\" experienced a political realignment in the 1910s amid several disagreements within the Republican Party. \"The New York Times\" reported on the sinking of the \"Titanic\", as other newspapers were cautious about bulletins circulated by the Associated Press. Through managing editor Carr Van Anda, the \"Times\" paid considereable attention to advances in science, reporting on Albert Einstein's then-obscure theory of general relativity and becoming involved in the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun. In April 1935, Ochs died, leaving his son-in-law Arthur Hays Sulzberger as publisher. The Great Depression forced Sulzberger to reduce \"The New York Times\"'s operations, and developments in the New York newspaper landscape resulted in the formation of larger newspapers, such as the \"New York Herald Tribune\" and the \"New York World-Telegram\". In contrast to Ochs, Sulzberger encouraged wirephotography.\n\"The New York Times\" extensively covered World War II through large headlines, reporting on exclusive stories such as the Yugoslav coup d'\u00e9tat. Amid the war, Sulzberger began expanding the \"Times\"'s operations further, acquiring WQXR-FM in 1944\u2014the first non-\"Times\" investment since the Jones era\u2014and established a fashion show in Times Hall. Despite reductions as a result of conscription, \"The New York Times\" retained the largest journalism staff of any newspaper. The \"Times\"'s print edition became available internationally during the war through the Army &amp; Air Force Exchange Service; \"The New York Times Overseas Weekly\" later became available in Japan through \"The Asahi Shimbun\" and in Germany through the \"Frankfurter Zeitung\". The international edition would develop into a separate newspaper. Journalist William L. Laurence publicized the atomic bomb race between the United States and Germany, resulting in the Federal Bureau of Investigation seizing copies of the \"Times\". The United States government recruited Laurence to document the Manhattan Project in April 1945. Laurence became the only witness of the Manhattan Project, a detail realized by employees of \"The New York Times\" following the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.\n1945\u20131998.\nFollowing World War II, \"The New York Times\" continued to expand. The \"Times\" was subject to investigations from the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, a McCarthyist subcommittee that investigated purported communism from within press institutions. Arthur Hays Sulzberger's decision to dismiss a copyreader who had pleaded the Fifth Amendment drew ire from within the \"Times\" and from external organizations. In April 1961, Sulzberger resigned, appointing his son-in-law, The New York Times Company president Orvil Dryfoos. Under Dryfoos, \"The New York Times\" established a newspaper based in Los Angeles. In 1962, the implementation of automated printing presses in response to increasing costs mounted fears over technological unemployment. The New York Typographical Union staged a strike in December, altering the media consumption of New Yorkers. The strike left New York with three remaining newspapers\u2014the \"Times\", the \"Daily News\", and the \"New York Post\"\u2014by its conclusion in March 1963. In May, Dryfoos died of a heart ailment. Following weeks of ambiguity, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger became \"The New York Times\"'s publisher.\nTechnological advancements leveraged by newspapers such as the \"Los Angeles Times\" and improvements in coverage from \"The Washington Post\" and \"The Wall Street Journal\" necessitated adaptations to nascent computing. \"The New York Times\" published \"Heed Their Rising Voices\" in 1960, a full-page advertisement purchased by supporters of Martin Luther King Jr. criticizing law enforcement in Montgomery, Alabama for their response to the civil rights movement. Montgomery Public Safety commissioner L. B. Sullivan sued the \"Times\" for defamation. In \"New York Times Co. v. Sullivan\" (1964), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the verdict in Alabama county court and the Supreme Court of Alabama violated the First Amendment. The decision is considered to be landmark. After financial losses, \"The New York Times\" ended its international edition, acquiring a stake in the \"Paris Herald Tribune\", forming the \"International Herald Tribune\". The \"Times\" initially published the \"Pentagon Papers\", facing opposition from then-president Richard Nixon. The Supreme Court ruled in \"The New York Times\"'s favor in \"New York Times Co. v. United States\" (1971), allowing the \"Times\" and \"The Washington Post\" to publish the papers.\n\"The New York Times\" remained cautious in its initial coverage of the Watergate scandal. As Congress began investigating the scandal, the \"Times\" furthered its coverage, publishing details on the Huston Plan, alleged wiretapping of reporters and officials, and testimony from James W. McCord Jr. that the Committee for the Re-Election of the President paid the conspirators off. The exodus of readers to suburban New York newspapers, such as \"Newsday\" and Gannett papers, adversely affected \"The New York Times\"'s circulation. Contemporary newspapers balked at additional sections; \"Time\" devoted a cover for its criticism and \"New York\" wrote that the \"Times\" was engaging in \"middle-class self-absorption\". \"The New York Times\", the \"Daily News\", and the \"New York Post\" were the subject of a strike in 1978, allowing emerging newspapers to leverage halted coverage. The \"Times\" deliberately avoided coverage of the AIDS epidemic, running its first front-page article in May 1983. Max Frankel's editorial coverage of the epidemic, with mentions of anal intercourse, contrasted with then-executive editor A. M. Rosenthal's puritan approach, intentionally avoiding descriptions of the luridity of gay venues.\nFollowing years of waning interest in \"The New York Times\", Sulzberger resigned in January 1992, appointing his son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., as publisher. The Internet represented a generational shift within the \"Times\"; Sulzberger, who negotiated The New York Times Company's acquisition of \"The Boston Globe\" in 1993, derided the Internet, while his son expressed antithetical views. @times appeared on America Online's website in May 1994 as an extension of \"The New York Times\", featuring news articles, film reviews, sports news, and business articles. Despite opposition, several employees of the \"Times\" had begun to access the Internet. The online success of publications that traditionally co-existed with the \"Times\"\u2014such as America Online, Yahoo, and CNN\u2014and the expansion of websites such as Monster.com and Craigslist that threatened \"The New York Times\"'s classified advertisement model increased efforts to develop a website. nytimes.com debuted on January 19 and was formally announced three days later. The \"Times\" published domestic terrorist Ted Kaczynski's essay \"Industrial Society and Its Future\" in 1995, contributing to his arrest after his brother David recognized the essay's penmanship.\n1998\u2013present.\nFollowing the establishment of nytimes.com, \"The New York Times\" retained its journalistic hesitancy under executive editor Joseph Lelyveld, refusing to publish an article reporting on the Clinton\u2013Lewinsky scandal from Drudge Report. nytimes.com editors conflicted with print editors on several occasions, including wrongfully naming security guard Richard Jewell as the suspect in the Centennial Olympic Park bombing and covering the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in greater detail than the print edition. The New York Times Electronic Media Company was adversely affected by the dot-com crash. The \"Times\" extensively covered the September 11 attacks. The following day's print issue contained sixty-six articles, the work of over three hundred dispatched reporters. Journalist Judith Miller was the recipient of a package containing a white powder during the 2001 anthrax attacks, furthering anxiety within \"The New York Times\". In September 2002, Miller and military correspondent Michael R. Gordon wrote an article for the \"Times\" claiming that Iraq had purchased aluminum tubes. The article was cited by then-president George W. Bush to claim that Iraq was constructing weapons of mass destruction; the theoretical use of aluminum tubes to produce nuclear material was speculation. In March 2003, the United States invaded Iraq, beginning the Iraq War.\n\"The New York Times\" attracted controversy after thirty-six articles from journalist Jayson Blair were discovered to be plagiarized. Criticism over then-executive editor Howell Raines and then-managing editor Gerald M. Boyd mounted following the scandal, culminating in a town hall in which a deputy editor criticized Raines for failing to question Blair's sources in article he wrote on the D.C. sniper attacks. In June 2003, Raines and Boyd resigned. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. appointed Bill Keller as executive editor. Miller continued to report on the Iraq War as a journalistic embed covering the country's weapons of mass destruction program. Keller and then-Washington bureau chief Jill Abramson unsuccessfully attempted to subside criticism. Conservative media criticized the \"Times\" over its coverage of missing explosives from the Al Qa'qaa weapons facility. An article in December 2005 disclosing warrantless surveillance by the National Security Agency contributed to further criticism from the George W. Bush administration and the Senate's refusal to renew the Patriot Act. In the Plame affair, a Central Intelligence Agency inquiry found that Miller had become aware of Valerie Plame's identity through then-vice president Dick Cheney's chief of staff Scooter Libby, resulting in Miller's resignation.\nDuring the Great Recession, \"The New York Times\" suffered significant fiscal difficulties as a consequence of the subprime mortgage crisis and a decline in classified advertising. Exacerbated by Rupert Murdoch's revitalization of \"The Wall Street Journal\" through his acquisition of Dow Jones &amp; Company, The New York Times Company began enacting measures to reduce the newsroom budget. The company was forced to borrow $250\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) from Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim and fired over one hundred employees by 2010. nytimes.com's coverage of the Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal, resulting in the resignation of then-New York governor Eliot Spitzer, furthered the legitimacy of the website as a journalistic medium. The \"Times\"'s economic downturn renewed discussions of an online paywall; \"The New York Times\" implemented a paywall in March 2011. Abramson succeeded Keller, continuing her characteristic investigations into corporate and government malfeasance into the \"Times\"'s coverage. Following conflicts with newly appointed chief executive Mark Thompson's ambitions, Abramson was dismissed by Sulzberger Jr., who named Dean Baquet as her replacement.\nLeading up to the 2016 presidential election, \"The New York Times\" elevated the Hillary Clinton email controversy into a national issue. Donald Trump's upset victory contributed to an increase in subscriptions to the \"Times\". \"The New York Times\" experienced unprecedented indignation from Trump, who referred to publications such as the \"Times\" as \"enemies of the people\" at the Conservative Political Action Conference and tweeted his disdain for the newspaper and CNN. In October 2017, \"The New York Times\" published an article by journalists Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey alleging that dozens of women had accused film producer and The Weinstein Company co-chairman Harvey Weinstein of sexual misconduct. The investigation resulted in Weinstein's resignation and conviction, precipitated the Weinstein effect, and served as a catalyst for the #MeToo movement. The New York Times Company vacated the public editor position and eliminated the copy desk in November. Sulzberger Jr. announced his resignation in December 2017, appointing his son, A. G. Sulzberger, as publisher.\nTrump's relationship\u2014equally diplomatic and negative\u2014marked Sulzberger's tenure. In September 2018, \"The New York Times\" published \"I Am Part of the Resistance Inside the Trump Administration\", an anonymous essay by a self-described Trump administration official later revealed to be Department of Homeland Security chief of staff Miles Taylor. The animosity\u2014which extended to nearly three hundred instances of Trump disparaging the \"Times\" by May 2019\u2014culminated in Trump ordering federal agencies to cancel their subscriptions to \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\" in October 2019. Trump's tax returns have been the subject of three separate investigations. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the \"Times\" began implementing data services and graphs. On May 23, 2020, \"The New York Times\"'s front page solely featured \"U.S. Deaths Near 100,000, An Incalculable Loss\", a subset of the 100,000 people in the United States who died of COVID-19, the first time that the \"Times\"'s front page lacked images since they were introduced. Since 2020, \"The New York Times\" has focused on broader diversification, developing online games and producing television series. The New York Times Company acquired \"The Athletic\" in January 2022.\nOrganization.\nManagement.\nSince 1896, \"The New York Times\" has been published by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, having previously been published by Henry Jarvis Raymond until 1869 and by George Jones until 1896. Adolph Ochs published the \"Times\" until his death in 1935, when he was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger. Sulzberger was publisher until 1961 and was succeeded by Orvil Dryfoos, his son-in-law, who served in the position until his death in 1963. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger succeeded Dryfoos until his resignation in 1992. His son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., served as publisher until 2018. \"The New York Times\"'s current publisher is A. G. Sulzberger, Sulzberger Jr.'s son. As of 2023, the \"Times\"'s executive editor is Joseph Kahn and the paper's managing editors are Marc Lacey and Carolyn Ryan, having been appointed in June 2022. \"The New York Times\"'s deputy managing editors are Sam Dolnick, Monica Drake, and Steve Duenes, and the paper's assistant managing editors are Matthew Ericson, Jonathan Galinsky, Hannah Poferl, Sam Sifton, Karron Skog, and Michael Slackman.\n\"The New York Times\" is owned by The New York Times Company, a publicly traded company. The New York Times Company, in addition to the \"Times\", owns \"Wirecutter\", \"The Athletic\", The New York Times Cooking, and The New York Times Games, and acquired Serial Productions and Audm. The New York Times Company holds undisclosed minority investments in multiple other businesses, and formerly owned \"The Boston Globe\" and several radio and television stations. The New York Times Company is majority-owned by the Ochs-Sulzberger family through elevated shares in the company's dual-class stock structure held largely in a trust, in effect since the 1950s; as of 2022, the family holds ninety-five percent of The New York Times Company's Class B shares, allowing it to elect seventy percent of the company's board of directors. Class A shareholders have restrictive voting rights. As of 2023, The New York Times Company's chief executive is Meredith Kopit Levien, the company's former chief operating officer who was appointed in September 2020.\nJournalists.\nAs of March 2023, The New York Times Company employs 5,800 individuals, including 1,700 journalists according to deputy managing editor Sam Dolnick. Journalists for \"The New York Times\" may not run for public office, provide financial support to political candidates or causes, endorse candidates, or demonstrate public support for causes or movements. Journalists are subject to the guidelines established in \"Ethical Journalism\" and \"Guidelines on Integrity\". According to the former, \"Times\" journalists must abstain from using sources with a personal relationship to them and must not accept reimbursements or inducements from individuals who may be written about in \"The New York Times\", with exceptions for gifts of nominal value. The latter requires attribution and exact quotations, though exceptions are made for linguistic anomalies. Staff writers are expected to ensure the veracity of all written claims, but may delegate researching obscure facts to the research desk. In March 2021, the \"Times\" established a committee to avoid journalistic conflicts of interest with work written for \"The New York Times\", following columnist David Brooks's resignation from the Aspen Institute for his undisclosed work on the initiative Weave.\nEditorial board.\n\"The New York Times\" editorial board was established in 1896 by Adolph Ochs. With the opinion department, the editorial board is independent of the newsroom. Then-editor-in-chief Charles Ransom Miller served as opinion editor from 1883 until his death in 1922. Rollo Ogden succeeded Miller until his death in 1937. From 1937 to 1938, John Huston Finley served as opinion editor; in a prearranged plan, Charles Merz succeeded Finley. Merz served in the position until his retirement in 1961. John Bertram Oakes served as opinion editor from 1961 to 1976, when then-publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger appointed Max Frankel. Frankel served in the position until 1986, when he was appointed as executive editor. Jack Rosenthal was the opinion editor from 1986 to 1993. Howell Raines succeeded Rosenthal until 2001, when he was made executive editor. Gail Collins succeeded Raines until her resignation in 2006. From 2007 to 2016, Andrew Rosenthal was the opinion editor. James Bennet succeeded Rosenthal until his resignation in 2020. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], the editorial board comprises thirteen opinion writers. \"The New York Times\"'s opinion editor is Kathleen Kingsbury and the deputy opinion editor is Patrick Healy.\n\"The New York Times\"'s editorial board was initially opposed to liberal beliefs, opposing women's suffrage in 1900 and 1914. The editorial board began to espouse progressive beliefs during Oakes' tenure, conflicting with the Ochs-Sulzberger family, of which Oakes was a member as Adolph Ochs's nephew; in 1976, Oakes publicly disagreed with Sulzberger's endorsement of Daniel Patrick Moynihan over Bella Abzug in the 1976 Senate Democratic primaries in a letter sent from Martha's Vineyard. Under Rosenthal, the editorial board took positions supporting assault weapons legislation and the legalization of marijuana, but publicly criticized the Obama administration over its portrayal of terrorism. In presidential elections, \"The New York Times\" has endorsed a total of twelve Republican candidates and thirty-two Democratic candidates, and has endorsed the Democrat in every election since 1960. With the exception of Wendell Willkie, Republicans endorsed by the \"Times\" have won the presidency. In 2016, the editorial board issued an anti-endorsement against Donald Trump for the first time in its history. In February 2020, the editorial board reduced its presence from several editorials each day to occasional editorials for events deemed particularly significant. Since August 2024, the board no longer endorses candidates in local or congressional races in New York.\nUnionization.\nSince 1940, editorial, media, and technology workers of \"The New York Times\" have been represented by the New York Times Guild. The Times Guild, along with the Times Tech Guild, are represented by the NewsGuild-CWA. In 1940, Arthur Hays Sulzberger was called upon by the National Labor Relations Board amid accusations that he had discouraged Guild membership in the \"Times\". Over the next few years, the Guild would ratify several contracts, expanding to editorial and news staff in 1942 and maintenance workers in 1943.\nThe New York Times Guild has walked out several times in its history, including for six and a half hours in 1981 and in 2017, when copy editors and reporters walked out at lunchtime in response to the elimination of the copy desk. On December 7, 2022, the union held a one-day strike, the first interruption to \"The New York Times\" since 1978. The New York Times Guild reached an agreement in May 2023 to increase minimum salaries for employees and a retroactive bonus. The Times Tech Guild is the largest technology union with collective bargaining rights in the United States. The guild held a second strike beginning on November 4, 2024, threatening the \"Times\"'s coverage of the 2024 United States presidential election.\nContent.\nCirculation.\nAs of August 2025, \"The New York Times\" has 11.8 million subscribers, with 11.3 million online-only subscribers and 580,000 print subscribers. The New York Times Company intends to have 15 million subscribers by 2027. The \"Times\"'s shift towards subscription-based revenue with the debut of an online paywall in 2011 contributed to subscription revenue exceeding advertising revenue the following year, furthered by the 2016 presidential election and Donald Trump. In 2022, \"Vox\" wrote that \"The New York Times\"'s subscribers skew \"older, richer, whiter, and more liberal\"; to reflect the general population of the United States, the \"Times\" has attempted to alter its audience by acquiring \"The Athletic\", investing in verticals such as \"The New York Times Games\", and beginning a marketing campaign showing diverse subscribers to the \"Times\". The New York Times Company chief executive Meredith Kopit Levien stated that the average age of subscribers has remained constant.\nNewsletters.\nIn October 2001, \"The New York Times\" began publishing \"DealBook\", a financial newsletter edited by Andrew Ross Sorkin. The \"Times\" had intended to publish the newsletter in September, but delayed its debut following the September 11 attacks. A website for \"DealBook\" was established in March 2006. \"The New York Times\" began shifting towards \"DealBook\" as part of the newspaper's financial coverage in November 2010 with a renewed website and a presence in the \"Times\"'s print edition. In 2011, the \"Times\" began hosting the DealBook Summit, an annual conference hosted by Sorkin. During the COVID-19 pandemic, \"The New York Times\" hosted the DealBook Online Summit in 2020 and 2021. The 2022 DealBook Summit featured\u2014among other speakers\u2014former vice president Mike Pence and Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, culminating in an interview with former FTX chief executive Sam Bankman-Fried; FTX had filed for bankruptcy several weeks prior. The 2023 DealBook Summit's speakers included vice president Kamala Harris, Israeli president Isaac Herzog, and businessman Elon Musk.\nIn June 2010, \"The New York Times\" licensed the political blog \"FiveThirtyEight\" in a three-year agreement. The blog, written by Nate Silver, had garnered attention during the 2008 presidential election for predicting the elections in forty-nine of fifty states. \"FiveThirtyEight\" appeared on nytimes.com in August. According to Silver, several offers were made for the blog; Silver wrote that a merger of unequals must allow for editorial sovereignty and resources from the acquirer, comparing himself to Groucho Marx. According to \"The New Republic\", \"FiveThirtyEight\" drew as much as a fifth of the traffic to nytimes.com during the 2012 presidential election. In July 2013, \"FiveThirtyEight\" was sold to ESPN. In an article following Silver's exit, public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote that he was disruptive to the \"Times\"'s culture for his perspective on probability-based predictions and scorn for polling\u2014having stated that punditry is \"fundamentally useless\", comparing him to Billy Beane, who implemented sabermetrics in baseball. According to Sullivan, his work was criticized by several notable political journalists.\n\"The New Republic\" obtained a memo in November 2013 revealing then-Washington bureau chief David Leonhardt's ambitions to establish a data-driven newsletter with presidential historian Michael Beschloss, graphic designer Amanda Cox, economist Justin Wolfers, and \"The New Republic\" journalist Nate Cohn. By March, Leonhardt had amassed fifteen employees from within \"The New York Times\"; the newsletter's staff included individuals who had created the \"Times\"'s dialect quiz, fourth down analyzer, and a calculator for determining buying or renting a home. \"The Upshot\" debuted in April 2014. \"Fast Company\" reviewed an article about Illinois Secure Choice\u2014a state-funded retirement saving system\u2014as \"neither a terse news item, nor a formal financial advice column, nor a politically charged response to economic policy\", citing its informal and neutral tone. \"The Upshot\" developed \"the needle\" for the 2016 presidential election and 2020 presidential elections, a thermometer dial displaying the probability of a candidate winning. In January 2016, Cox was named editor of \"The Upshot\". Kevin Quealy was named editor in June 2022.\nPolitical positions.\n\"The New York Times\" has said it is perceived as a liberal newspaper. An analysis by Pew Research Center in October 2014 placed the \"Times\" readership as ideologically liberal based on a scale of 10 political values questions. According to an internal readership poll conducted by \"The New York Times\" in 2019, eighty-four percent of readers identified as liberal. \"The New York Times\" has struggled internally with how to balance its coverage, dismissing criticism from the left for \"sanewashing\" conservative viewpoints.\nIn covering Israel's war on the Gaza Strip, \"The New York Times\" instructed its reporters not to use the words Palestine and Genocide, or refer to refugee camps, with data analysis showing a pattern of articles emphasizing Israeli civilians killed by Palestinians over a much larger number of Palestinian civilians killed by Israelis. The group Writers Against the War on Gaza wrote in the blog Mondoweiss that this has contrasted with \"The New York Times\" coverage of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in which Russia is considered a threat to U.S. foreign policy interests where Israel is considered an ally.\nCrossword.\nIn February 1942, \"The New York Times\" crossword debuted in \"The New York Times Magazine\"; according to Richard Shepard, the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 convinced then-publisher Arthur Hays Sulzberger of the necessity of a crossword.\nCooking.\n\"The New York Times\" has published recipes since the 1850s and has had a separate food section since the 1940s. In 1961, restaurant critic Craig Claiborne published \"The New York Times Cookbook\", an unauthorized cookbook that drew from the \"Times\"'s recipes. Since 2010, former food editor Amanda Hesser has published \"The Essential New York Times Cookbook\", a compendium of recipes from \"The New York Times\". The \"Innovation Report\" in 2014 revealed that the \"Times\" had attempted to establish a cooking website since 1998, but faced difficulties with the absence of a defined data structure. In September 2014, \"The New York Times\" introduced NYT Cooking, an application and website. Edited by food editor Sam Sifton, the \"Times\"'s cooking website features 21,000 recipes as of 2022. NYT Cooking features videos as part of an effort by Sifton to hire two former \"Tasty\" employees from BuzzFeed. In August 2023, NYT Cooking added personalized recommendations through the cosine similarity of text embeddings of recipe titles. The website also features no-recipe recipes, a concept proposed by Sifton.\nIn May 2016, The New York Times Company announced a partnership with startup Chef'd to form a meal delivery service that would deliver ingredients from The New York Times Cooking recipes to subscribers; Chef'd shut down in July 2018 after failing to accrue capital and secure financing. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported in September 2022 that the \"Times\" would expand its delivery options to US$ cooking kits curated by chefs such as Nina Compton, Chintan Pandya, and Naoko Takei Moore. That month, the staff of NYT Cooking went on tour with Compton, Pandya, and Moore in Los Angeles, New Orleans, and New York City, culminating in a food festival. In addition, \"The New York Times\" offered its own wine club originally operated by the Global Wine Company. The New York Times Wine Club was established in August 2009, during a dramatic decrease in advertising revenue. By 2021, the wine club was managed by Lot18, a company that provides proprietary labels. Lot18 managed the Williams Sonoma Wine Club and its own wine club Tasting Room.\nArchives.\n\"The New York Times\" archives its articles in a basement annex beneath its building known as \"the morgue\", a venture started by managing editor Carr Van Anda in 1907. The morgue comprises news clippings, a pictures library, and the \"Times\"'s book and periodicals library. As of 2014, it is the largest library of any media company, dating back to 1851. In November 2018, \"The New York Times\" partnered with Google to digitize the Archival Library. Additionally, \"The New York Times\" has maintained a virtual microfilm reader known as TimesMachine since 2014. The service launched with archives from 1851 to 1980; in 2016, TimesMachine expanded to include archives from 1981 to 2002. The \"Times\" built a pipeline to take in TIFF images, article metadata in XML and an INI file of Cartesian geometry describing the boundaries of the page, and convert it into a PNG of image tiles and JSON containing the information in the XML and INI files. The image tiles are generated using GDAL and displayed using Leaflet, using data from a content delivery network. The \"Times\" ran optical character recognition on the articles using Tesseract and shingled and fuzzy string matched the result.\nContent management system.\n\"The New York Times\" uses a proprietary content management system known as Scoop for its online content and the Microsoft Word-based content management system CCI for its print content. Scoop was developed in 2008 to serve as a secondary content management system for editors working in CCI to publish their content on the \"Times\"'s website; as part of \"The New York Times\"'s online endeavors, editors now write their content in Scoop and send their work to CCI for print publication. Since its introduction, Scoop has superseded several processes within the \"Times\", including print edition planning and collaboration, and features tools such as multimedia integration, notifications, content tagging, and drafts. \"The New York Times\" uses private articles for high-profile opinion pieces, such as those written by Russian president Vladimir Putin and actress Angelina Jolie, and for high-level investigations. In January 2012, the \"Times\" released Integrated Content Editor (ICE), a revision tracking tool for WordPress and TinyMCE. ICE is integrated within the \"Times\"'s workflow by providing a unified text editor for print and online editors, reducing the divide between print and online operations.\nBy 2017, \"The New York Times\" began developing a new authoring tool to its content management system known as Oak, in an attempt to further the \"Times\"'s visual efforts in articles and reduce the discrepancy between the mediums in print and online articles. The system reduces the input of editors and supports additional visual mediums in an editor that resembles the appearance of the article. Oak is based on ProseMirror, a JavaScript rich-text editor toolkit, and retains the revision tracking and commenting functionalities of \"The New York Times\"'s previous systems. Additionally, Oak supports predefined article headers. In 2019, Oak was updated to support collaborative editing using Firebase to update editors's cursor status. Several Google Cloud Functions and Google Cloud Tasks allow articles to be previewed as they will be printed, and the \"Times\"'s primary MySQL database is regularly updated to update editors on the article status.\nStyle and design.\nStyle guide.\nSince 1895, \"The New York Times\" has maintained a manual of style in several forms. \"The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage\" was published on the \"Times\"'s intranet in 1999.\n\"The New York Times\" uses honorifics when referring to individuals. With the \"AP Stylebook\"'s removal of honorifics in 2000 and \"The Wall Street Journal\"'s omission of courtesy titles in May 2023, the \"Times\" is the only national newspaper that continues to use honorifics. According to former copy editor Merrill Perlman, \"The New York Times\" continues to use honorifics as a \"sign of civility\". The \"Times\"'s use of courtesy titles led to an apocryphal rumor that the paper had referred to singer Meat Loaf as \"Mr. Loaf\". Several exceptions have been made; the former sports section and \"The New York Times Book Review\" do not use honorifics. A leaked memo following the killing of Osama bin Laden in May 2011 revealed that editors were given a last-minute instruction to omit the honorific from Osama bin Laden's name, consistent with deceased figures of historic significance, such as Adolf Hitler, Napoleon, and Vladimir Lenin. \"The New York Times\" uses academic and military titles for individuals prominently serving in that position. In 1986, the \"Times\" began to use Ms., and introduced the gender-neutral title Mx. in 2015. \"The New York Times\" uses initials when a subject has expressed a preference, such as Donald Trump.\n\"The New York Times\" maintains a strict but not absolute obscenity policy, including phrases. In a review of the Canadian hardcore punk band Fucked Up, music critic Kelefa Sanneh wrote that the band's name\u2014entirely rendered in asterisks\u2014would not be printed in the \"Times\" \"unless an American president, or someone similar, says it by mistake\"; \"The New York Times\" did not repeat then-vice president Dick Cheney's use of \"fuck\" against then-senator Patrick Leahy in 2004 or then-vice president Joe Biden's remarks that the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 was a \"big fucking deal\". The \"Times\"'s profanity policy has been tested by former president Donald Trump. \"The New York Times\" published Trump's \"Access Hollywood\" tape in October 2016, containing the words \"fuck\", \"pussy\", \"bitch\", and \"tits\", the first time the publication had published an expletive on its front page, and repeated an explicit phrase for fellatio stated by then-White House communications director Anthony Scaramucci in July 2017. \"The New York Times\" omitted Trump's use of the phrase \"shithole countries\" from its headline in favor of \"vulgar language\" in January 2018. The \"Times\" banned certain words, such as \"bitch\", \"whore\", and \"sluts\", from \"Wordle\" in 2022.\nHeadlines.\nJournalists for \"The New York Times\" do not write their own headlines, but rather copy editors who specifically write headlines. The \"Times\"'s guidelines insist headline editors get to the main point of an article but avoid giving away endings, if present. Other guidelines include using slang \"sparingly\", avoiding tabloid headlines, not ending a line on a preposition, article, or adjective, and chiefly, not to pun. \"The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage\" states that wordplay, such as \"Rubber Industry Bounces Back\", is to be tested on a colleague as a canary is to be tested in a coal mine; \"when no song bursts forth, start rewriting\". \"The New York Times\" has amended headlines due to controversy. In 2019, following two back-to-back mass shootings in El Paso and Dayton, the \"Times\" used the headline, \"Trump Urges Unity vs. Racism\", to describe then-president Donald Trump's words after the shootings. After criticism from \"FiveThirtyEight\" founder Nate Silver, the headline was changed to, \"Assailing Hate But Not Guns\".\nOnline, \"The New York Times\"'s headlines do not face the same length restrictions as headlines that appear in print; print headlines must fit within a column, often six words. Additionally, headlines must \"break\" properly, containing a complete thought on each line without splitting up prepositions and adverbs. Writers may edit a headline to fit an article more aptly if further developments occur. The \"Times\" uses A/B testing for articles on the front page, placing two headlines against each other. At the end of the test, the headlines that receives more traffic is chosen. The alteration of a headline regarding intercepted Russian data used in the Mueller special counsel investigation was noted by Trump in a March 2017 interview with \"Time\", in which he claimed that the headline used the word \"wiretapped\" in the print version of the paper on January 20, while the digital article on January 19 omitted the word. The headline was intentionally changed in the print version to use \"wiretapped\" in order to fit within the print guidelines.\nNameplate.\nThe nameplate of \"The New York Times\" has been unaltered since 1967. In creating the initial nameplate, Henry Jarvis Raymond took as his model the British newspaper \"The Times\", which used a Blackletter style called Textura, popularized following the fall of the Western Roman Empire and regional variations of Alcuin's script, as well as a period. With the change to \"The New-York Times\" on September 14, 1857, the nameplate followed. Under George Jones, the terminals of the \"N\", \"r\", and \"s\" were intentionally exaggerated into swashes. The nameplate in the January 15, 1894, issue trimmed the terminals once more, smoothed the edges, and turned the stem supporting the \"T\" into an ornament. The hyphen was dropped on December 1, 1896, after Adolph Ochs purchased the paper. The descender of the \"h\" was shortened on December 30, 1914. The largest change to the nameplate was introduced on February 21, 1967, when type designer Ed Benguiat redesigned the logo, most prominently turning the arrow ornament into a diamond. Notoriously, the new logo dropped the period that had followed the word \"Times\" up until that point; one reader compared the omission of the period to \"performing plastic surgery on Helen of Troy.\" Picture editor John Radosta worked with a New York University professor to determine that dropping the period saved the paper US$ ().\nPrint edition.\nDesign and layout.\nAs of December 2023, \"The New York Times\" has printed sixty thousand issues, a statistic represented in the paper's masthead to the right of the volume number, the \"Times\"'s years in publication written in Roman numerals. The volume and issues are separated by four dots representing the edition number of that issue; on the day of the 2000 presidential election, the \"Times\" was revised four separate times, necessitating the use of an em dash in place of an ellipsis. The em dash issue was printed hundreds times over before being replaced by the one-dot issue. Despite efforts by newsroom employees to recycle copies sent to \"The New York Times\"'s office, several copies were kept, including one put on display at the Museum at The Times. From February 7, 1898, to December 31, 1999, the \"Times\"'s issue number was incorrect by five hundred issues, an error suspected by \"The Atlantic\" to be the result of a careless front page type editor. The misreporting was noticed by news editor Aaron Donovan, who was calculating the number of issues in a spreadsheet and noticed the discrepancy. \"The New York Times\" celebrated fifty thousand issues on March 14, 1995, an observance that should have occurred on July 26, 1996.\n\"The New York Times\" has reduced the physical size of its print edition while retaining its broadsheet format. \"The New-York Daily Times\" debuted at across. By the 1950s, the \"Times\" was being printed at across. In 1953, an increase in paper costs to US$ () a ton increased newsprint costs to US$ million () On December 28, 1953, the pages were reduced to . On February 14, 1955, a further reduction to occurred, followed by . On August 6, 2007, the largest cut occurred when the pages were reduced to , a decision that other broadsheets had previously considered. Then-executive editor Bill Keller stated that a narrower paper would be more beneficial to the reader but acknowledged a net loss in article space of five percent. In 1985, The New York Times Company established a minority stake in a US$ million () newsprint plant in Clermont, Quebec through Donahue Malbaie. The company sold its equity interest in Donahue Malbaie in 2017.\n\"The New York Times\" often uses large, bolded headlines for major events. For the print version of the \"Times\", these headlines are written by one copy editor, reviewed by two other copy editors, approved by the masthead editors, and polished by other print editors. The process is completed before 8 p.m., but it may be repeated if further development occur, as did take place during the 2020 presidential election. On the day Joe Biden was declared the winner, \"The New York Times\" utilized a \"hammer headline\" reading, \"Biden Beats Trump\", in all caps and bolded. A dozen journalists discussed several potential headlines, such as \"It's Biden\" or \"Biden's Moment\", and prepared for a Donald Trump victory, in which they would use \"Trump Prevails\". During Trump's first impeachment, the \"Times\" drafted the hammer headline, \"Trump Impeached\". \"The New York Times\" altered the ligatures between the E and the A, as not doing so would leave a noticeable gap due to the stem of the A sloping away from the E. The \"Times\" reused the tight kerning for \"Biden Beats Trump\" and Trump's second impeachment, which simply read, \"Impeached\".\nIn cases where two major events occur on the same day or immediately after each other, \"The New York Times\" has used a \"paddle wheel\" headline, where both headlines are used but split by a line. The term dates back to August 8, 1959, when it was revealed that the United States was monitoring Soviet missile firings and when Explorer 6\u2014shaped like a paddle wheel\u2014launched. Since then, the paddle wheel has been used several times, including on January 21, 1981, when Ronald Reagan was sworn in minutes before Iran released fifty-two American hostages, ending the Iran hostage crisis. At the time, most newspapers favored the end of the hostage crisis, but the \"Times\" placed the inauguration above the crisis. Other occasions in which the paddle wheel has been used include on July 26, 2000, when the 2000 Camp David Summit ended without an agreement and when Bush announced that Dick Cheney would be his running mate, and on June 24, 2016, when the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum passed, beginning Brexit, and when the Supreme Court deadlocked in \"United States v. Texas\".\n\"The New York Times\" has run editorials from its editorial board on the front page twice. On June 13, 1920, the \"Times\" ran an editorial opposing Warren G. Harding, who was nominated during that year's Republican Party presidential primaries. Amid growing acceptance to run editorials on the front pages from publications such as the \"Detroit Free Press\", \"The Patriot-News\", \"The Arizona Republic\", and \"The Indianapolis Star\", \"The New York Times\" ran an editorial on its front page on December 5, 2015, following a terrorist attack in San Bernardino, California, in which fourteen people were killed. The editorial advocates for the prohibition of \"slightly modified combat rifles\" used in the San Bernardino shooting and \"certain kinds of ammunition\". Conservative figures, including Texas senator Ted Cruz, \"The Weekly Standard\" editor Bill Kristol, \"Fox &amp; Friends\" co-anchor Steve Doocy, and then-New Jersey governor Chris Christie criticized the \"Times\". Talk radio host Erick Erickson acquired an issue of \"The New York Times\" to fire several rounds into the paper, posting a picture online.\nPrinting process.\nSince 1997, \"The New York Times\"'s primary distribution center is located in College Point, Queens. The facility is and employs 170 people as of 2017. The College Point distribution center prints 300,000 to 800,000 newspapers daily. On most occasions, presses start before 11 p.m. and finish before 3 a.m. A robotic crane grabs a roll of newsprint and several rollers ensure ink can be printed on paper. The final newspapers are wrapped in plastic and shipped out. As of 2018, the College Point facility accounted for 41 percent of production. Other copies are printed at 26 other publications, such as \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", \"The Dallas Morning News\", \"The Santa Fe New Mexican\", and the \"Courier Journal\". With the decline of newspapers, particularly regional publications, the \"Times\" must travel further; for example, newspapers for Hawaii are flown from San Francisco on United Airlines, and Sunday papers are flown from Los Angeles on Hawaiian Airlines. Computer glitches, mechanical issues, and weather phenomena affect circulation but do not stop the paper from reaching customers. The College Point facility prints over two dozen other papers, including \"The Wall Street Journal\" and \"USA Today\".\n\"The New York Times\" has halted its printing process several times to account for major developments. The first printing stoppage occurred on March 31, 1968, when then-president Lyndon B. Johnson announced that he would not seek a second term. Other press stoppages include May 19, 1994, for the death of former first lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and July 17, 1996, for Trans World Airlines Flight 800. The 2000 presidential election necessitated two press stoppages. Al Gore appeared to concede on November 8, forcing then-executive editor Joseph Lelyveld to stop the \"Times\"'s presses to print a new headline, \"Bush Appears to Defeat Gore\", with a story that stated George W. Bush was elected president. However, Gore held off his concession speech over doubts over Florida. Lelyveld reran the headline, \"Bush and Gore Vie for an Edge\". Since 2000, three printing stoppages have been issued for the death of William Rehnquist on September 3, 2005, for the killing of Osama bin Laden on May 1, 2011, and for the passage of the Marriage Equality Act in the New York State Assembly and subsequent signage by then-governor Andrew Cuomo on June 24, 2011.\nOnline platforms.\nWebsite.\nThe New York Times website is hosted at nytimes.com. It has undergone several major redesigns and infrastructure developments since its debut. In April 2006, \"The New York Times\" redesigned its website with an emphasis on multimedia. In preparation for Super Tuesday in February 2008, the \"Times\" developed a live election system using the Associated Press's File Transfer Protocol (FTP) service and a Ruby on Rails application; nytimes.com experienced its largest traffic on Super Tuesday and the day after.\nApplications.\nThe NYTimes application debuted with the introduction of the App Store on July 10, 2008. \"Engadget\"'s Scott McNulty wrote critically of the app, negatively comparing it to \"The New York Times\"'s mobile website. An iPad version with select articles was released on April 3, 2010, with the release of the first-generation iPad. In October, \"The New York Times\" expanded NYT Editors' Choice to include the paper's full articles. NYT for iPad was free until 2011. The \"Times\" applications on iPhone and iPad began offering in-app subscriptions in July 2011. The \"Times\" released a web application for iPad\u2014featuring a format summarizing trending headlines on Twitter\u2014and a Windows 8 application in October 2012.\nEfforts to ensure profitability through an online magazine and a \"Need to Know\" subscription emerged in \"Adweek\" in July 2013. In March 2014, \"The New York Times\" announced three applications\u2014NYT Now, an application that offers pertinent news in a blog format, and two unnamed applications, later known as NYT Opinion and NYT Cooking\u2014to diversify its product laterals.\nPodcasts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"The Daily\" is the modern front page of \"The New York Times\".\n \u2014Sam Dolnick, speaking to \"Intelligencer\" in January 2020\n\"The New York Times\" manages several podcasts, including multiple podcasts with Serial Productions. The \"Times\"'s longest-running podcast is \"The Book Review Podcast\", debuting as \"Inside The New York Times Book Review\" in April 2006.\n\"The New York Times\"'s defining podcast is \"The Daily\", a daily news podcast hosted by Michael Barbaro which debuted on February 1, 2017. Between March 2022 and March 2025, the approximately 30 minute programme was co-hosted with Sabrina Tavernise. Beginning in April 2025 Barbaro was joined by two new regular co-hosts, Natalie Kitroeff and Rachel Abrams.\n\"The Interview\" was launched in 2024 and is hosted weekly by David Marchese and Lulu Garcia-Navarro. Episodes typically last 40 to 50 minutes. Condensed versions of the interviews are published simultaneously in \"The New York Times Magazine\". Guests have included politicians, actors, influential experts, media figures and high-profile writers.\nIn October 2021, \"The New York Times\" began testing \"New York Times Audio\", an application featuring podcasts from the \"Times\", audio versions of articles\u2014including from other publications through Audm, and archives from \"This American Life\". The application debuted in May 2023 exclusively on iOS for \"Times\" subscribers. New York Times Audio includes exclusive podcasts such as \"The Headlines\", a daily news recap, and \"Shorts\", short audio stories under ten minutes. In addition, a \"Reporter Reads\" section features \"Times\" journalists reading their articles and providing commentary.\nGames.\n\"The New York Times\" has used video games as part of its journalistic efforts, among the first publications to do so, contributing to an increase in Internet traffic; the publication has also developed its own video games. In 2014, \"The New York Times Magazine\" introduced \"Spelling Bee\", a word game in which players guess words from a set of letters in a honeycomb and are awarded points for the length of the word and receive extra points if the word is a pangram. The game was proposed by Will Shortz, created by Frank Longo, and has been maintained by Sam Ezersky. In May 2018, \"Spelling Bee\" was published on nytimes.com, furthering its popularity. In February 2019, the \"Times\" introduced \"Letter Boxed\", in which players form words from letters placed on the edges of a square box, followed in June 2019 by \"Tiles\", a matching game in which players form sequences of tile pairings, and \"Vertex\", in which players connect vertices to assemble an image. In July 2023, \"The New York Times\" introduced \"Connections\", in which players identify groups of words that are connected by a common property. In April, the \"Times\" introduced \"Digits\", a game that required using operations on different values to reach a set number; \"Digits\" was shut down in August. In March 2024, \"The New York Times\" released \"Strands\", a themed word search.\nIn January 2022, The New York Times Company acquired \"Wordle\", a word game developed by Josh Wardle in 2021, at a valuation in the \"low-seven figures\". The acquisition was proposed by David Perpich, a member of the Sulzberger family who proposed the purchase to Knight over Slack after reading about the game. \"The Washington Post\" purportedly considered acquiring \"Wordle\", according to \"Vanity Fair\". At the 2022 Game Developers Conference, Wardle stated that he was overwhelmed by the volume of \"Wordle\" facsimiles and overzealous monetization practices in other games. Concerns over \"The New York Times\" monetizing \"Wordle\" by implementing a paywall mounted; \"Wordle\" is a client-side browser game and can be played offline by downloading its webpage. \"Wordle\" moved to the \"Times\"'s servers and website in February. The game was added to the NYT Games application in August, necessitating it be rewritten in the JavaScript library React. In November, \"The New York Times\" announced that Tracy Bennett would be the \"Wordle\"'s editor.\nOther publications.\n\"The New York Times Magazine\".\n\"The New York Times Magazine\" and \"The Boston Globe Magazine\" are the only weekly Sunday magazines following \"The Washington Post Magazine\"'s cancellation in December 2022.\n\"The New York Times in Spanish\".\nIn February 2016, \"The New York Times\" introduced a Spanish website, \"The New York Times en Espa\u00f1ol\". The website, intended to be read on mobile devices, would contain translated articles from the \"Times\" and reporting from journalists based in Mexico City. The \"Times en Espa\u00f1ol\"'s style editor is Paulina Chavira, who has advocated for pluralistic Spanish to accommodate the variety of nationalities in the newsroom's journalists and wrote a stylebook for \"The New York Times en Espa\u00f1ol\".\nArticles the \"Times\" intends to publish in Spanish are sent to a translation agency and adapted for Spanish writing conventions; the present progressive tense may be used for forthcoming events in English, but other tenses are preferable in Spanish. The \"Times en Espa\u00f1ol\" consults the Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola and Fund\u00e9u and frequently modifies the use of diacritics\u2014such as using an acute accent for the C\u00e1rtel de Sinaloa but not the Cartel de Medell\u00edn\u2014and using the gender-neutral pronoun \"elle\". Headlines in \"The New York Times en Espa\u00f1ol\" are not capitalized. The \"Times en Espa\u00f1ol\" publishes \"El Times\", a newsletter led by Elda Cant\u00fa intended for all Spanish speakers. In September 2019, \"The New York Times\" ended \"The New York Times en Espa\u00f1ol\"'s separate operations. A study published in \"The Translator\" in 2023 found that the \"Times en Espa\u00f1ol\" engaged in tabloidization.\n\"The New York Times in Chinese\".\nIn June 2012, \"The New York Times\" introduced a Chinese website, , in response to Chinese editions created by \"The Wall Street Journal\" and the \"Financial Times\". Conscious to censorship, the \"Times\" established servers outside of China and affirmed that the website would uphold the paper's journalistic standards; the government of China had previously blocked articles from nytimes.com through the Great Firewall, and the website was blocked in China until August 2001 after then-general secretary Jiang Zemin met with journalists from \"The New York Times\". Then-foreign editor Joseph Kahn assisted in the establishment of cn.nytimes.com, an effort that contributed to his appointment as executive editor in April 2022.\nIn October 2012, published an article detailing the wealth of then-premier Wen Jiabao's family. In response, the government of China blocked access to nytimes.com and cn.nytimes.com and references to the \"Times\" and Wen were censored on microblogging service Sina Weibo. In March 2015, a mirror of and the website for GreatFire were the targets for a government-sanctioned distributed denial of service attack on GitHub in March 2015, disabling access to the service for several days. Chinese authorities requested the removal of \"The New York Times\"'s news applications from the App Store in December 2016.\nAwards and recognition.\nAwards.\nAs of 2023, \"The New York Times\" has received 137 Pulitzer Prizes, the most of any publication.\nRecognition.\n\"The New York Times\" is considered a newspaper of record in the United States. The \"Times\" is the largest metropolitan newspaper in the United States; as of 2022, \"The New York Times\" is the second-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States behind \"The Wall Street Journal\".\nA study published in \"Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values\" in 2013 found that \"The New York Times\" received more citations in academic journals than the \"American Sociological Review\", \"Research Policy\", or the \"Harvard Law Review\". With sixteen million unique records, the \"Times\" is the third-most referenced source in Common Crawl, a collection of online material used in datasets such as GPT-3, behind Wikipedia and a United States patent database.\n\"The New Yorker\"'s Max Norman wrote in March 2023 that the \"Times\" has shaped mainstream English usage. In a January 2018 article for \"The Washington Post\", Margaret Sullivan stated that \"The New York Times\" affects the \"whole media and political ecosystem\".\n\"The New York Times\"'s nascent success has led to concerns over media consolidation, particularly amid the decline of newspapers. In 2006, economists Lisa George and Joel Waldfogel examined the consequences of the \"Times\"'s national distribution strategy and audience with circulation of local newspapers, finding that local circulation decreased among college-educated readers. The effect of \"The New York Times\" in this manner was observed in \"The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead\", the newspaper of record for Fargo, North Dakota. \"Axios\" founder Jim VandeHei opined that the \"Times\" is \"going to basically be a monopoly\" in an opinion piece written by then-media columnist and former \"BuzzFeed News\" editor-in-chief Ben Smith; in the article, Smith cites the strength of \"The New York Times\"'s journalistic workforce, broadening content, and the expropriation of \"Gawker\" editor-in-chief Choire Sicha, \"Recode\" editor-in-chief Kara Swisher, and \"Quartz\" editor-in-chief Kevin Delaney. Smith compared the \"Times\" to the New York Yankees during their 1927 season containing Murderers' Row.\nControversies.\nIsraeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nSince 2003, studies analyzing coverage of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict in the \"New York Times\" have demonstrated a bias against Palestinians and in favor of Israel.\nGaza war.\n\"The New York Times\" has received criticism for its coverage of the Gaza war. In April 2024, \"The Intercept\" reported that a November 2023 internal memorandum by Susan Wessling and Philip Pan instructed journalists to reduce using the terms \"genocide\" and \"ethnic cleansing\" and to avoid using the phrase \"occupied territory\" in the context of Palestinian land, \"Palestine\" except in rare circumstances, and the term \"refugee camps\" to describe areas of Gaza despite recognition from the United Nations. A spokesperson from the \"Times\" stated that issuing guidance was standard practice. An analysis by \"The Intercept\" noted that \"The New York Times\" described Israeli deaths as a massacre nearly sixty times, but had only described Palestinian deaths as a massacre once. Writers and editors have left the newspaper due to its coverage of events in Gaza, including Jazmine Hughes and Jamie Lauren Keiles.\nIn December 2023, \"The New York Times\" published an investigation titled \"'Screams Without Words': How Hamas Weaponized Sexual Violence on Oct. 7\", alleging that Hamas weaponized sexual and gender-based violence during its armed incursion on Israel. The investigation was the subject of an article from \"The Intercept\" questioning the journalistic acumen of Anat Schwartz, a filmmaker involved in the inquiry who had no prior reporting experience and agreed with a post stating Israel should \"violate any norm, on the way to victory\", doubting the veracity of the opening claim that Gal Abdush was raped in a timespan disputed by her family, and alleging that the \"Times\" was pressured by the Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America. \"The New York Times\" initiated an inquiry into the leaking of confidential information about the report to other outlets, which received criticism from NewsGuild of New York president Susan DeCarava for purported racial targeting; the \"Times\"'s investigation was inconclusive, but found gaps in the way proprietary journalistic material is handled.\nThe New York Times Building has been a site of protest action during the Gaza war and genocide, including a November 2023 sit-in demanding that The Times\u2019 editorial board publicly call for a ceasefire and accusing the media company of \"complicity in laundering genocide,\" a February 29, 2024 protest and press conference following the release of \"The Intercept\"'s critical investigation into the NYT \"Screams Without Words\" expos\u00e9, and an action on July 30, 2025 in which protesters spray-painted \"NYT Lies, Gaza dies\" on the building's glass facade. In addition, protesters blocked \"The New York Times\"' distribution center March 14, 2024 and executive editor Joseph Kahn's residence was splattered with red paint on August 25, 2025. The collective Writers Against the War on Gaza, which publishes the mock publication \"The New York War Crimes\", has been associated with protests against \"The New York Times\". On October 27, 2025, 300 writers\u2014including scholars, journalists, and public intellectuals\u2014pledged to boycott \"The New York Times\" and withhold contributions to the paper in protest of what they describe as its complicity in the Gaza genocide, demanding 1) a review of anti-Palestinian bias in the newsroom, 2) a retraction of \"Screams Without Words\", and 3) a call from the Editorial Board for a US arms embargo on Israel. Among the initial signatories, about 150 had previously contributed to the \"Times\".\nTransgender people.\n\"The New York Times\" has received criticism regarding its coverage of transgender people. When it published an opinion piece by Weill Cornell Medicine professor Richard A. Friedman called \"How Changeable Is Gender?\" in August 2015, \"Vox\"'s German Lopez criticized Friedman as suggesting that parents and doctors might be right in letting children suffer from severe dysphoria in case something changes down the line, and as implying that conversion therapy may work for transgender children. In February 2023, nearly one thousand current and former \"Times\" writers and contributors wrote an open letter addressed to standards editor Philip B. Corbett, criticizing the paper's coverage of transgender, non\u2060-\u2060binary, and gender-nonconforming people; some of the \"Times\"' articles have been cited in state legislatures attempting to justify criminalizing gender-affirming care. Contributors wrote in the open letter that \"the \"Times\" has in recent years treated gender diversity with an eerily familiar mix of pseudoscience and euphemistic, charged language, while publishing reporting on trans children that omits relevant information about its sources.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n\"The New York Times\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe New York Times Company.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReports.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMagazines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPodcasts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30682", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30682", "title": "Ten Key Values", "text": ""}
{"id": "30683", "revid": "45278071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30683", "title": "Toho", "text": "Japanese entertainment corporation\n is a Japanese entertainment company that primarily engages in producing and distributing films and exhibiting stage plays. It is headquartered in Chiyoda, Tokyo, and is one of the core companies of the Osaka-based Hankyu Hanshin Toho Group. Toho is best known for producing and distributing many of Ishir\u014d Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya's \"kaiju\" and \"tokusatsu\" films as well as the films of Akira Kurosawa and the animated films produced by Studio Ghibli, Shin-Ei Animation, TMS Entertainment, CoMix Wave Films, and OLM, Inc. The company has released the majority of the highest-grossing Japanese films, and through its subsidiaries, is the largest film importer in Japan. The Doraemon film series, distributed by Toho since 1980, is the highest-grossing film series and animated film series in Japan. It is also one of the highest-grossing non-English language film series.\nToho's most famous creation is Godzilla, featured in 33 of the company's films. Godzilla, Rodan, Mothra, King Ghidorah, and Mechagodzilla are described as Toho's Big Five due to their numerous appearances throughout the \"Godzilla\" franchise, as well as spin-offs. Toho has also been involved in the production of numerous anime titles. Its subdivisions are Toho-Towa Company, Limited (Japanese exclusive theatrical distributor of Universal Pictures via NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan), Towa Pictures Company Limited (Japanese exclusive theatrical distributor of Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros.), Toho Pictures Incorporated, Toho International Inc., Toho E. B. Company Limited, and Toho Music Corporation &amp; Toho Costume Company Limited. The company is the largest shareholder (7.96%) of Fuji Media Holdings Inc.\nToho is one of the four members of the Motion Picture Producers Association of Japan (MPPAJ), is the largest of Japan's Big Four film studios, and is the only film studio that is a component of the Nikkei 225 index.\nThe company buys cartoons for Make 2D animated movies.\nHistory.\nToho was created by the founder of the Hankyu Railway, Ichiz\u014d Kobayashi, in 1932 as the . It managed much of the kabuki in Tokyo and, among other properties, the eponymous Tokyo Takarazuka Theatre and the Imperial Garden Theater in Tokyo; Toho and Shochiku enjoyed a duopoly over theaters in Tokyo for many years.\nLabor disputes (1946\u20131948).\nAfter the end of World War II, the new Occupation government allowed and encouraged the formation of labor unions, which had been banned under the Imperial government. During a general strike of film studio employees beginning in October 1946, a group of Toho's ten top stars led by Denjiro Okochi split from the main Toho union along with 445 employees. During the resolution of the strike, a closed-shop provision with the main union led to the establishment of the Shintoho Company, which comprised the members of the dissenting union and former Toho facilities. \nThe loss of major stars led to the hiring and training of new stars, including Toshiro Mifune. The contract made after the strike stipulated that Toho would only produce films approved by a committee that included union members, which led to filmmakers gaining unprecedented creative and productive control over their films. While Toho produced only thirteen films in 1947, six Toho films, including \"One Wonderful Sunday\", directed by Akira Kurosawa, were ranked among the best ten films of the year in Kinema Junpo. However, each film had double or triple the budget of films produced by other studios, and the company suffered severe losses.\nIn 1948, the new Toho president Tetsuzo Watanabe ordered a return of the wartime quota of 24 films per year and the end of control over production by the union. In April, Toho management announced the dismissal of 1200 employees, with the aim of both cutting expenses and eliminating Communist leaders from the union. Negotiations failed and the union occupied the studio on April 15, joined by activists from the Japan Communist Party and other organizations, erecting barricades and closing the main gates. \nOn August 13, the Tokyo District Court decided in Toho's favor, and on the morning of August 19, a district police chief arrived at the front gate to read out the court decision. Two thousand policemen surrounded the studio, reinforced by soldiers, three airplanes, and several armored cars and tanks sent by the U.S. Eighth Army. The union leaders agreed to end their occupation on the condition the union was not disbanded.\nToho was severely weakened after the strikes and produced only four films in 1948 and five films in 1949, and continued to distribute Shintoho films until the end of 1949.\nInternational expansion (1953\u2013present).\nIn May 1953, Toho established Toho International, a Los Angeles-based subsidiary intended to target North American and Latin American markets. \"Seven Samurai\" was among the first films offered for foreign sales.\nToho and Shochiku competed with the influx of Hollywood films and boosted the film industry by focusing on new directors such as Akira Kurosawa, Kon Ichikawa, Keisuke Kinoshita, Ishir\u014d Honda, and Kaneto Shindo.\nAfter several successful film exports to the United States during the 1950s through Henry G. Saperstein, Toho took over the La Brea Theatre in Los Angeles to show its films without the need to sell them to a distributor. It was known as the Toho Theatre from the late 1960s until the 1970s. Toho also had a theater in San Francisco and opened a theater in New York City in 1963. The Shintoho Company, which existed until 1961, was named New Toho because it broke off from the original company. Toho has contributed to the production of some American films, including Sam Raimi's 1998 film, \"A Simple Plan\" and Paul W. S. Anderson's 2020 military science fiction/kaiju film, \"Monster Hunter\".\nIn 2019, Toho invested \u00a515.4 billion ($14 million) into their Los Angeles-based subsidiary Toho International Inc. as part of their \"Toho Vision 2021 Medium-term Management Strategy\", a strategy to increase content, platform, real-estate, beat JPY50 billion profits, and increase character businesses on Toho intellectual properties such as Godzilla. Hiroyasu Matsuoka was named the representative director of the US subsidiary.\nIn 2020, Toho acquired a 34.8% stake in the animation studio TIA, with ILCA and Anima each retaining a 32.6% stake. In 2022, Toho acquired Anima's 32.6% stake to take a controlling 67.4% stake in TIA, making the studio a subsidiary, and ultimately renaming the studio into Toho Animation Studios.\nIn December 2023, Toho announced their intent to acquire a 25% stake in Fifth Season for $225 million via Toho International. Following the completion of the deal, Fifth Season will be valued at $900 million; CJ ENM will remain the majority shareholder in the company, with former owner Endeavor also continuing to serve as a strategic shareholder. CEOs Graham Taylor and Chris Rice stated that this investment would empower the company to continue the expansion of its premium slate and create opportunities for collaboration between Fifth Season, Toho and CJ ENM to produce global content as well as content produced in Japan.\nFollowing the success of \"Godzilla Minus One\" (2023) as their first self-distributed film in the U.S., Toho declared in March 2024 that Godzilla is their \"Intellectual property (IP) treasure\" and they had regained retailing rights overseas (which were once abandoned), and now are able to sell, advertise, and distribute their own products to consumers outside Japan directly. The company also said that the film winning Best Visual Effects at the 96th Academy Awards is helping them gain more recognition and advancing more business extension overseas.In April 2025, Toho announced plans to invest \u00a515 billion ($105 million) into Godzilla, including a \"Godzilla Minus One\" sequel, video games, merchandise, and amusement park attractions, as part of a larger \u00a5120 billion ($830 million) investment into expanding its film and anime projects.\nProductions and distributions.\nTelevision.\nToho Animation.\nToho Animation (stylized as TOHO animation) is a Japanese animation production label founded in 2012, and owned by Toho Co., Ltd., one of the top three film distributors in Japan. The process of the label is done in a similar fashion to Sony Pictures Animation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTheater.\nToho has produced revivals and original works. Years shown refer to when they staged each piece.\nVideo games.\nIn more recent years and for a period, they have produced video games. One of their first video games was the 1990 NES game titled \"Circus Caper\". Later, they followed with a series of games based on Godzilla and a 1992 game called \"Serizawa Nobuo no Birdy Try\". It also published games such as \"Super Aleste\" (\"Space Megaforce\" in North America). They even worked with Bandai on \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", released in Japan in 1988 and in the United States in 1989.\nSignificant employees.\n\"dates as company employee\"\nToho Cinderella Audition.\nThe Toho Cinderella Audition is an audition to discover new young actresses, first held in 1984 and irregularly held since then. It is considered one of Japan's \"Big Three Actress Auditions\", along with Oscar Promotion's National Bish\u014djo Contest and Horipro's Talent Scout Caravan.\nHeadquarters.\nToho's headquarters, the , are in Y\u016brakuch\u014d, Chiyoda, Tokyo. The company moved into its current headquarters in April 2005.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30684", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30684", "title": "Tundra", "text": "Biome where plant growth is hindered by frigid temperatures\nIn physical geography, a tundra () is a type of biome where tree growth is hindered by frigid temperatures and short growing seasons. There are three regions and associated types of tundra: Arctic, Alpine, and Antarctic.\nTundra vegetation is composed of dwarf shrubs, sedges, grasses, mosses, and lichens. Scattered trees grow in some tundra regions. The ecotone (or ecological boundary region) between the tundra and the forest is known as the tree line or timberline. The tundra soil is rich in nitrogen and phosphorus. The soil also contains large amounts of biomass and decomposed biomass that has been stored as methane and carbon dioxide in the permafrost, making the tundra soil a carbon sink. As global warming heats the ecosystem and causes soil thawing, the permafrost carbon cycle accelerates and releases much of these soil-contained greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, creating a feedback cycle that contributes to climate change.\nEtymology.\nThe word comes from the Russian \u201c\u0442\u0443\u0301\u043d\u0434\u0440\u0430\u201d (\"tundra\"). The first use of tundra in English was in 1824, spelled \"toundra\", possibly indicating borrowing from French. The origin of the Russian word is uncertain: some sources attribute the origin to \"tunturia\", Finnish for \"treeless plain\". Other sources say it originated from S\u00e1mi languages as \"tundar\", meaning \"elevated wasteland\" or \"marshy plain\", from the 16th century.\nArctic.\nArctic tundra occurs in the far Northern Hemisphere (Arctic), north of the taiga belt. The word \"tundra\" usually refers only to the areas where the subsoil is permafrost, or permanently frozen soil. (It may also refer to the treeless plain in general so that northern S\u00e1pmi would be included.) Permafrost tundra includes vast areas of northern Russia and Canada. The polar tundra is home to several peoples who are mostly nomadic reindeer herders, such as the Nganasan and Nenets in the permafrost area (and the S\u00e1mi in S\u00e1pmi).\nArctic tundra contains areas of stark landscape and is frozen for much of the year. The soil there is frozen from down, making it impossible for trees to grow there. Instead, bare and sometimes rocky land can only support certain kinds of Arctic vegetation, low-growing plants such as moss, heath (Ericaceae varieties such as crowberry and black bearberry), and lichen.\nThere are two main seasons, winter and summer, in the polar tundra areas. During the winter it is very cold, dark, and windy with the average temperature around , sometimes dipping as low as . However, extreme cold temperatures on the tundra generally do not drop as low as those experienced in taiga areas further south (for example, Russia's, Canada's, and Alaska's lowest temperatures were recorded in locations south of the tree line). During the summer, temperatures rise somewhat, and the top layer of seasonally-frozen soil melts, leaving the ground very soggy. The tundra is covered in marshes, lakes, bogs, and streams during the warm months. Generally daytime temperatures during the summer rise to about but can often drop to or even below freezing. Arctic tundras are sometimes the subject of habitat conservation programs. In Canada and Russia, many of these areas are protected through a national biodiversity action plan.\nArctic tundra tends to be windy, with winds often blowing upwards of . It is also a polar desert, with only about of precipitation falling per year (the summer is typically the season of maximum precipitation). Although precipitation is light, evaporation is also relatively minimal. During the summer, the permafrost thaws just enough to let plants grow and reproduce, but because the ground below this is frozen, the water cannot sink any lower, so the water forms the lakes and marshes found during the summer months. There is a natural pattern of accumulation of fuel and wildfire which varies depending on the nature of vegetation and terrain. Research in Alaska has shown fire-event return intervals (FRIs) that typically vary from 150 to 200 years, with dryer lowland areas burning more frequently than wetter highland areas.\nThe biodiversity of tundras is low: 1,700 species of vascular plants and only 48 species of land mammals can be found, although millions of birds migrate there each year for the marshes. There are also a few fish species. There are few species with large populations. Notable plants in the Arctic tundra include blueberry (\"Vaccinium uliginosum\"), crowberry (\"Empetrum nigrum\"), reindeer lichen (\"Cladonia rangiferina\"), lingonberry (\"Vaccinium vitis-idaea\"), and Labrador tea (\"Rhododendron groenlandicum\"). Notable animals include reindeer (caribou), musk ox, Arctic hare, Arctic fox, snowy owl, ptarmigan, northern red-backed voles, lemmings, the mosquito, and even polar bears near the ocean. The tundra is largely devoid of poikilotherms such as frogs or lizards.\nDue to the harsh climate of Arctic tundra, regions of this kind have seen little human activity, even though they are sometimes rich in natural resources such as petroleum, natural gas, and uranium. In recent times this has begun to change in Alaska, Russia, and some other parts of the world: for example, the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug produces 90% of Russia's natural gas. \nRelationship to climate change.\nA severe threat to tundra is climate change, which causes permafrost to thaw. The thawing of the permafrost in a given area on human time scales (decades or centuries) could radically change which species can survive there. It also represents a significant risk to infrastructure built on top of permafrost, such as roads and pipelines. \nIn locations where dead vegetation and peat have accumulated, there is a risk of wildfire, such as the of tundra which burned in 2007 on the north slope of the Brooks Range in Alaska. Such events may both result from and contribute to global warming.\nCarbon emissions from permafrost thaw contribute to the same warming which facilitates the thaw, making it a positive climate change feedback. The warming also intensifies the Arctic water cycle, and the increased amounts of warmer rain are another factor which increases permafrost thaw depths.\nThe IPCC Sixth Assessment Report estimates that carbon dioxide and methane released from permafrost could amount to the equivalent of carbon dioxide per of warming. For comparison, by 2019, \"annual\" anthropogenic emission of carbon dioxide alone stood around . A 2018 perspectives article discussing tipping points in the climate system activated around of global warming suggested that at this threshold, permafrost thaw would add a further to global temperatures by 2100, with a range of \nAntarctic.\nAntarctic tundra occurs on Antarctica and on several Antarctic and subantarctic islands, including South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and the Kerguelen Islands. Most of Antarctica is too cold and dry to support vegetation, and most of the continent is covered by ice fields or cold deserts. However, some portions of the continent, particularly the Antarctic Peninsula, have areas of rocky soil that support plant life. The flora presently consists of around 300\u2013400 species of lichens, 100 mosses, 25 liverworts, and around 700 terrestrial and aquatic algae species, which live on the areas of exposed rock and soil around the shore of the continent. Antarctica's two flowering plant species, the Antarctic hair grass (\"Deschampsia antarctica\") and Antarctic pearlwort (\"Colobanthus quitensis\"), are found on the northern and western parts of the Antarctic Peninsula.\nIn contrast with the Arctic tundra, the Antarctic tundra lacks a large mammal fauna, mostly due to its physical isolation from the other continents. Sea mammals and seabirds, including seals and penguins, inhabit areas near the shore, and some small mammals, like rabbits and cats, have been introduced by humans to some of the subantarctic islands. The Antipodes Subantarctic Islands tundra, an ecoregion that includes the Bounty Islands, Auckland Islands, Antipodes Islands, the Campbell Islands, and Macquarie Island. Species endemic to this ecoregion include the windswept helmet-orchid (\"Corybas dienemus\") and the grooved helmet-orchid (\"Corybas sulcatus\"), the only subantarctic orchids; the royal penguin; and the Antipodean albatross.\nThere is some ambiguity on whether Magellanic moorland, on the west coast of Patagonia, should be considered tundra or not. Edmundo Pisano, a Chilean Phytogeographer, called it tundra () since he considered the low temperatures key to restrict plant growth. More recent approaches have since recognized it as a temperate grassland, restricting southern tundra to coastal Antarctica and its islands.\nThe flora and fauna of Antarctica and the Antarctic Islands (south of 60\u00b0 south latitude) are protected by the Antarctic Treaty System.\nAlpine.\nAlpine tundra does not contain trees because the climate and soils at high altitude block tree growth. The cold climate of the alpine tundra is caused by the low air temperatures, and is similar to polar climate. Alpine tundra is generally better drained than arctic soils. Alpine tundra transitions to subalpine forests below the tree line; stunted forests occurring within the forest-tundra ecotone are known as \"Krummholz\". Alpine tundra can be affected by woody plant encroachment.\nAlpine tundra occurs in mountains worldwide. The flora of the alpine tundra is characterized by plants that grow close to the ground, including perennial grasses, sedges, forbs, cushion plants, mosses, and lichens. The flora is adapted to the harsh conditions of the alpine environment, which include low temperatures, dryness, ultraviolet radiation, and a short growing season.\nClimatic classification.\nTundra climates ordinarily fit the K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"ET\", signifying a local climate in which at least one month has an average temperature high enough to melt snow (), but no month with an average temperature in excess of . The cold limit generally meets the \"EF\" climates of permanent ice and snows; the warm-summer limit generally corresponds with the poleward or altitudinal limit of trees, where they grade into the subarctic climates designated \"Dfd\", \"Dwd\" and \"Dsd\" (extreme winters as in parts of Siberia), \"Dfc\" typical in Alaska, Canada, mountain areas of Scandinavia, European Russia, and Western Siberia (cold winters with months of freezing).\nDespite the potential diversity of climates in the \"ET\" category involving precipitation, extreme temperatures, and relative wet and dry seasons, this category is rarely subdivided. Rainfall and snowfall are generally slight due to the low vapor pressure of water in the chilly atmosphere, but as a rule potential evapotranspiration is extremely low, allowing soggy terrain of swamps and bogs even in places that get precipitation typical of deserts of lower and middle latitudes. The amount of native tundra biomass depends more on the local temperature than the amount of precipitation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30685", "revid": "3382231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30685", "title": "The Chronicles of Narnia", "text": "Series of children's fantasy novels by C. S. Lewis\nThe Chronicles of Narnia is a series of seven portal fantasy novels by British author C.\u00a0S. Lewis. Illustrated by Pauline Baynes and originally published between 1950 and 1956, the series is set in the fictional realm of Narnia, a fantasy world of magic, mythical beasts, and talking animals. It narrates the adventures of various children who play central roles in the unfolding history of the Narnian world. Except in \"The Horse and His Boy\", the protagonists are all children from the real world who are magically transported to Narnia, where they are sometimes called upon by the lion Aslan to protect Narnia from evil. The books span the entire history of Narnia, from its creation in \"The Magician's Nephew\" to its eventual destruction in \"The Last Battle\".\nC.S. Lewis's life and literary influences deeply shaped The Chronicles of Narnia. His childhood experiences\u00a0\u2013\u00a0moving to a large house in Belfast, losing his mother at an early age, and attending English boarding schools\u00a0\u2013\u00a0paralleled events and settings in Narnia, such as Lucy discovering the magical world or the Pevensies attending school. Lewis also drew extensively on mythology, medieval literature, and cosmology. Works like the Old Irish immrama inspired \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\"; Michael Ward's \"Planet Narnia\" suggests that each Narnia book corresponds to a medieval planet with symbolic traits. Lewis's reading of Plato, George MacDonald, Dante, and John Milton influenced themes, character archetypes, and moral lessons in the series, with elements of Christian theology interwoven through characters like Aslan, though Lewis preferred the term \"supposition\" over allegory.\nThe books have had significant influence, shaping literature and popular culture. Writers such as Philip Pullman, Katherine Paterson, and Lev Grossman drew inspiration from Narnia's worlds, characters, and narrative structures. Criticism of the series has focused on perceived inconsistencies, gender stereotyping, and racial representation, but defenders argue that female characters are often portrayed heroically and that themes of morality, courage, and imagination remain central, contributing to the series' lasting appeal.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" is considered a classic of children's literature and is Lewis's best-selling work, having sold 120 million copies in 47 languages. The series has been adapted for radio, television, the stage, film, and video games.\nBackground and conception.\nAlthough Lewis originally conceived what would become \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" in 1939 (the picture of a Faun with parcels in a snowy wood has a history dating to 1914), he did not finish writing the first book \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" until 1949. \"The Magician's Nephew\", the penultimate book to be published, but the last to be written, was completed in 1954. Lewis did not write the books in the order in which they were originally published, nor were they published in their current chronological order of presentation. The original illustrator, Pauline Baynes, created pen and ink drawings for the \"Narnia\" books that are still used in the editions published today.\nLewis was awarded the 1956 Carnegie Medal for \"The Last Battle\", the final book in the saga. The series was first referred to as \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" by fellow children's author Roger Lancelyn Green in March 1951, after he had read and discussed with Lewis his recently completed fourth book \"The Silver Chair\", originally entitled \"Night under Narnia\".\nLewis described the origin of \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" in an essay entitled \"It All Began with a Picture\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Lion\" all began with a picture of a Faun carrying an umbrella and parcels in a snowy wood. This picture had been in my mind since I was about sixteen. Then one day, when I was about forty, I said to myself: \"Let's try to make a story about it.\"\nShortly before the start of World War II, many children were evacuated to the English countryside in anticipation of attacks on London and other major urban areas by Nazi Germany. As a result, on 2 September 1939, three school girls named Margaret, Mary and Katherine came to live at The Kilns in Risinghurst, Lewis's home three miles east of Oxford city centre. Lewis later suggested that the experience gave him a new appreciation of children and in late September he began a children's story on an odd sheet of paper which has survived as part of another manuscript:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis book is about four children whose names were Ann, Martin, Rose and Peter. But it is most about Peter who was the youngest. They all had to go away from London suddenly because of Air Raids, and because Father, who was in the Army, had gone off to the War and Mother was doing some kind of war work. They were sent to stay with a kind of relation of Mother's who was a very old professor who lived all by himself in the country.\nIn \"It All Began with a Picture\", C. S. Lewis continues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At first, I had very little idea how the story would go. But then suddenly Aslan came bounding into it. I think I had been having a good many dreams of lions about that time. Apart from that, I don't know where the Lion came from or why he came. But once he was there, he pulled the whole story together, and soon he pulled the six other Narnian stories in after him.\nAlthough Lewis pleaded ignorance about the source of his inspiration for Aslan, Jared Lobdell, digging into Lewis's history to explore the making of the series, suggests Charles Williams's 1931 novel \"The Place of the Lion\" as a likely influence.\nThe manuscript for \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" was complete by the end of March 1949.\nName.\nThe name \"Narnia\" is based on Narni, Italy, written in Latin as \"Narnia\". Green wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Walter Hooper asked where he found the word 'Narnia', Lewis showed him \"Murray's Small Classical Atlas\", ed. G.B. Grundy (1904), which he acquired when he was reading the classics with Mr [William T.] Kirkpatrick at Great Bookham [1914\u20131917]. On plate 8 of the Atlas is a map of ancient Italy. Lewis had underscored the name of a little town called Narnia, simply because he liked the sound of it. Narnia\u00a0\u2013\u00a0or 'Narni' in Italian\u00a0\u2013\u00a0is in Umbria, halfway between Rome and Assisi.\nPublication history.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia's\" seven books have been in continuous publication since 1956, selling over 100 million copies in 47 languages and with editions in braille.\nThe first five books were originally published in the United Kingdom by Geoffrey Bles. The first edition of \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" was released in London on 16 October 1950. Although three more books, \"Prince Caspian\", \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" and \"The Horse and His Boy\", were already complete, they were not released immediately at that time, but instead appeared (along with \"The Silver Chair\") one at a time in each of the subsequent years (1951\u20131954). The last two books (\"The Magician's Nephew\" and \"The Last Battle\") were published in the United Kingdom originally by The Bodley Head in 1955 and 1956.\nIn the United States, the publication rights were first owned by Macmillan Publishers, and later by HarperCollins. The two issued both hardcover and paperback editions of the series during their tenure as publishers, while at the same time Scholastic, Inc. produced paperback versions for sale primarily through direct mail order, book clubs, and book fairs. HarperCollins also published several one-volume collected editions containing the full text of the series. As noted below (see Reading order), the first American publisher, Macmillan, numbered the books in publication sequence, whereas HarperCollins, at the suggestion of Lewis's stepson, opted to use the series' internal chronological order when they won the rights to it in 1994. Scholastic switched the numbering of its paperback editions in 1994 to mirror that of HarperCollins.\nBooks.\nThe seven books that make up \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" are presented here in order of original publication date.\n\"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (1950).\n\"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", completed by the end of March 1949 and published by Geoffrey Bles in the United Kingdom on 16 October 1950, tells the story of four ordinary children: Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy Pevensie, Londoners who were evacuated to the English countryside following the outbreak of World War II. They discover a wardrobe in Professor Digory Kirke's house that leads to the magical land of Narnia. The Pevensie children help Aslan, a talking lion, save Narnia from the evil White Witch, who has reigned for a century of perpetual winter with no Christmas. The children become kings and queens of this new-found land and establish the Golden Age of Narnia, leaving a legacy to be rediscovered in later books.\n\"Prince Caspian: The Return to Narnia\" (1951).\nCompleted after Christmas 1949 and published on 15 October 1951, \"Prince Caspian: The Return to Narnia\" tells the story of the Pevensie children's second trip to Narnia, a year (on Earth) after their first. They are drawn back by the power of Susan's horn, blown by Prince Caspian to summon help in his hour of need. Narnia as they knew it is no more, as 1,300 years have passed, their castle is in ruins, and all Narnians have retreated so far within themselves that only Aslan's magic can wake them. Caspian has fled into the woods to escape his uncle, Miraz, who has usurped the throne. The children set out once again to save Narnia.\n\"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" (1952).\nWritten between January and February 1950 and published on 15 September 1952, \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" sees Edmund and Lucy Pevensie, along with their priggish cousin, Eustace Scrubb, return to Narnia, three Narnian years (and one Earth year) after their last departure. Once there, they join Caspian's voyage on the ship \"Dawn Treader\" to find the seven lords who were banished when Miraz took over the throne. This perilous journey brings them face to face with many wonders and dangers as they sail toward Aslan's country at the edge of the world.\n\"The Silver Chair\" (1953).\nCompleted at the beginning of March 1951 and published 7 September 1953, \"The Silver Chair\" is the first Narnia book not involving the Pevensie children, focusing instead on Eustace. Several months after \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", Aslan calls Eustace back to Narnia along with his classmate Jill Pole. They are given four signs to aid them in the search for Prince Caspian's son Rilian, who disappeared ten years earlier on a quest to avenge his mother's death. Fifty years have passed in Narnia since the events from \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\"; Eustace is still a child, but Caspian, barely an adult in the previous book, is now an old man. Eustace and Jill, with the help of Puddleglum the Marsh-wiggle, face danger and betrayal on their quest to find Rilian.\n\"The Horse and His Boy\" (1954).\nBegun in March and completed at the end of July 1950, \"The Horse and His Boy\" was published on 6 September 1954. The story takes place during the reign of the Pevensies in Narnia, an era which begins and ends in the last chapter of \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". The protagonists, a young boy named Shasta and a talking horse named Bree, both begin in bondage in the country of Calormen. By \"chance\", they meet and plan their return to Narnia and freedom. Along the way they meet Aravis and her talking horse Hwin, who are also fleeing to Narnia.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" (1955).\nCompleted in February 1954\nand published by Bodley Head in London on 2 May 1955, \"The Magician's Nephew\" serves as a prequel and presents Narnia's origin story: how Aslan created the world and how evil first entered it. Digory Kirke and his friend Polly Plummer stumble into different worlds by experimenting with magic rings given to them by Digory's uncle. In the dying world of Charn they awaken Queen Jadis, and another world turns out to be the beginnings of the Narnian world (where Jadis later becomes the White Witch). The story is set in 1900, when Digory was a 12-year-old boy. He is a middle-aged professor by the time he hosts the Pevensie children in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" 40 years later.\n\"The Last Battle\" (1956).\nCompleted in March 1953 and published 4 September 1956, \"The Last Battle\" chronicles the end of the world of Narnia. Approximately two hundred Narnian years (and seven Earth years) after the events of \"The Silver Chair\", Jill and Eustace return to save Narnia from the ape Shift, who tricks Puzzle the donkey into impersonating the lion Aslan, thereby precipitating a showdown between the Calormenes and King Tirian. This leads to the end of Narnia as it is known throughout the series, but allows Aslan to lead the characters to the \"true\" Narnia.\nReading order.\nFans of the series often have strong opinions about the order in which the books should be read. The issue revolves around the placement of \"The Magician's Nephew\" and \"The Horse and His Boy\" in the series. Both are set significantly earlier in the story of Narnia than their publication order and fall somewhat outside the main story arc connecting the others. The reading order of the other five books is not disputed.\nWhen first published, the books were not numbered. The first American publisher, Macmillan, enumerated them according to their original publication order, while some early British editions specified the internal chronological order. When HarperCollins took over the series rights in 1994, they adopted the internal chronological order. To make the case for the internal chronological order, Lewis's stepson, Douglas Gresham, quoted Lewis's 1957 reply to a letter from an American fan who was having an argument with his mother about the order:\nI think I agree with your [chronological] order for reading the books more than with your mother's. The series was not planned beforehand as she thinks. When I wrote \"The Lion\" I did not know I was going to write any more. Then I wrote \"P. Caspian\" as a sequel and still didn't think there would be any more, and when I had done \"The Voyage\" I felt quite sure it would be the last, but I found I was wrong. So perhaps it does not matter very much in which order anyone read them. I'm not even sure that all the others were written in the same order in which they were published.\nIn the 2005 HarperCollins adult editions of the books, the publisher cites this letter to assert Lewis's preference for the numbering they adopted by including this notice on the copyright page:\nAlthough \"The Magician's Nephew\" was written several years after C. S. Lewis first began \"The Chronicles of Narnia\", he wanted it to be read as the first book in the series. HarperCollins is happy to present these books in the order in which Professor Lewis preferred.\nPaul Ford cites several scholars who have weighed in against this view and continues, saying, \"Most scholars disagree with this decision and find it the least faithful to Lewis's deepest intentions.\" Scholars and readers who appreciate the original order believe that Lewis was simply being gracious to his youthful correspondent and that he could have changed the books' order in his lifetime had he so desired. They maintain that much of the magic of Narnia comes from the way the world is gradually presented in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\"\u2014that the mysterious wardrobe, as a narrative device, is a much better introduction to Narnia than \"The Magician's Nephew\", where the word \"Narnia\" appears in the first paragraph as something already familiar to the reader. Moreover, they say, it is clear from the texts themselves that \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" was intended to be read first. When Aslan is first mentioned in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", for example, the narrator says that \"None of the children knew who Aslan was, any more than you do\"\u2014which is nonsensical if one has already read \"The Magician's Nephew\". Other similar textual examples are also cited.\nDoris Meyer, author of \"C. S. Lewis in Context\" and \"Bareface: A Guide to C.S. Lewis's Last Novel\", writes that rearranging the stories chronologically \"lessens the impact of the individual stories\" and \"obscures the literary structures as a whole\". Peter Schakel devotes an entire chapter to this topic in his book \"Imagination and the Arts in C. S. Lewis: Journeying to Narnia and Other Worlds\", and in \"Reading with the Heart: The Way into Narnia\" he writes:\nThe only reason to read \"The Magician's Nephew\" first [...] is for the chronological order of events, and that, as every story teller knows, is quite unimportant as a reason. Often the early events in a sequence have a greater impact or effect as a flashback, told after later events which provide background and establish perspective. So it is [...] with the \"Chronicles\". The artistry, the archetypes, and the pattern of Christian thought all make it preferable to read the books in the order of their publication.\nMain characters.\nAslan.\nAslan, the Great Lion, is the titular lion of \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", and his role in Narnia is developed throughout the remaining books. He is also the only character to appear in all seven books. Aslan is a talking lion, the King of Beasts, son of the Emperor-Over-the-Sea. He is a wise, compassionate, magical authority (both temporal and spiritual) who serves as mysterious and benevolent guide to the human children who visit, as well as being the guardian and saviour of Narnia. C. S. Lewis described Aslan as an alternative version of Jesus as the form in which he may have appeared in an alternative reality. In his book \"Miracles\", C.S. Lewis argues that the possible existence of other worlds with other sentient life-forms should not deter or detract from being Christian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The universe] may be full of lives that have been redeemed in modes suitable to their condition, of which we can form no conception. It may be full of lives that have been redeemed in the very same mode as our own. It may be full of things quite other than life in which God is interested though we are not.\nPevensie family.\nThe four Pevensie siblings are the main human protagonists of \"The Chronicles of Narnia\". Varying combinations of some or all of them appear in five of the seven novels. They are introduced in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (although their surname is not revealed until \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\"), and eventually become Kings and Queens of Narnia reigning as a tetrarchy. Although introduced in the series as children, the siblings grow up into adults while reigning in Narnia. They go back to being children once they get back to their own world, but feature as adults in \"The Horse and His Boy\" during their Narnian reign.\nAll four appear in \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\" and \"Prince Caspian\"; in the latter, however, Aslan tells Peter and Susan that they will not return, as they are getting too old. Susan, Lucy, and Edmund appear in \"The Horse and His Boy\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Peter is said to be away fighting giants on the other side of Narnia. Lucy and Edmund appear in \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", where Aslan tells them, too, that they are getting too old. Peter, Edmund, and Lucy appear as Kings and Queens in Aslan's Country in \"The Last Battle\"; Susan does not. Asked by a child in 1958 if he would please write another book entitled \"Susan of Narnia\" so that the entire Pevensie family would be reunited, C. S. Lewis replied: \"I am so glad you like the Narnian books and it was nice of you to write and tell me. There's no use just asking me to write more. When stories come into my mind I have to write them, and when they don't I can't!\"\nLucy Pevensie.\nLucy is the youngest of the four Pevensie siblings. Of all the Pevensie children, Lucy is the closest to Aslan, and of all the human characters who visit Narnia, Lucy is perhaps the one who believes in Narnia the most. In \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", she initiates the story by entering Narnia through the wardrobe, and (with Susan) witnesses Aslan's execution and resurrection. She is named Queen Lucy the Valiant. In \"Prince Caspian\", she is the first to see Aslan when he comes to guide them. In \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", it is Lucy who breaks the spell of invisibility on the Dufflepuds. As an adult in \"The Horse and His Boy\", she helps fight the Calormenes at Anvard. Although a minor character in \"The Last Battle\", much of the closing chapter is seen from her point of view.\nEdmund Pevensie.\nEdmund is the second child to enter Narnia in \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", where he falls under the White Witch's spell from eating the Turkish delight she gives him. Instantiating the book's Christian theme of betrayal, repentance, and subsequent redemption via blood sacrifice, he betrays his siblings to the White Witch, but quickly realizes her true nature and her evil intentions, and is redeemed by the sacrifice of Aslan's life. He is named King Edmund the Just. In \"Prince Caspian\" and \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", he supports Lucy; in \"The Horse and His Boy\", he leads the Narnian delegation to Calormen and, later, the Narnian army breaking the siege at Anvard.\nSusan Pevensie.\nIn \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", Susan accompanies Lucy to see Aslan die and rise again. She is named Queen Susan the Gentle. In \"Prince Caspian\", however, she is the last of the four to believe and follow Lucy when the latter is called by Aslan to guide them. As an adult queen in \"The Horse and His Boy\", she is courted by Prince Rabadash of Calormen, but refuses his marriage proposal, and his angry response leads the story to its climax. In \"The Last Battle\", she has stopped believing in Narnia and remembers it only as a childhood game, though Lewis mentioned in a letter to a fan that he thought she may eventually believe again: \"The books don't tell us what happened to Susan... But there is plenty of time for her to mend, and perhaps she will get to Aslan's country in the end\u00a0\u2013\u00a0in her own way.\"\nPeter Pevensie.\nPeter is the eldest of the Pevensies. In \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", he kills Maugrim, a talking wolf, to save Susan, and leads the Narnian army against the White Witch. Aslan names him High King, and he is known as Peter the Magnificent. In \"Prince Caspian\", he duels the usurper King Miraz to restore Caspian's throne. In \"The Last Battle\", it is Peter whom Aslan entrusts with the duty of closing the door on Narnia for the final time.\nEustace Scrubb.\nEustace Clarence Scrubb is a cousin of the Pevensies, and a classmate of Jill Pole at their school Experiment House. He is portrayed at first as a brat and a bully, but comes to improve his nasty behaviour when his greed turns him into a dragon for a while. His distress at having to live as a dragon causes him to reflect upon how horrible he has been, and his subsequent improved character is rewarded when Aslan changes him back into a boy. In the later books, Eustace comes across as a much nicer person, although he is still rather grumpy and argumentative. Nonetheless, he becomes a hero along with Jill Pole when the pair succeed in freeing the lost Prince Rilian from the clutches of an evil witch. He appears in \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", \"The Silver Chair\", and \"The Last Battle\".\nJill Pole.\nJill Pole is a schoolmate of Eustace Scrubb. She appears in \"The Silver Chair\", where she is the viewpoint character for most of the action, and returns in \"The Last Battle\". In \"The Silver Chair\", Eustace introduces her to the Narnian world, where Aslan gives her the task of memorising a series of signs that will help her and Eustace on their quest to find Caspian's lost son. In \"The Last Battle\", she and Eustace accompany King Tirian in his ill-fated defence of Narnia against the Calormenes.\nProfessor Digory Kirke.\nDigory Kirke is the nephew referred to in the title of \"The Magician's Nephew\". He first appears as a minor character in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", known only as \"The Professor\", who hosts the Pevensie children when they are evacuated from London and defends Lucy's story of having found a country in the back of the wardrobe. In \"The Magician's Nephew\", the young Digory, thanks to his uncle's magical experimentation, inadvertently brings Jadis from her dying homeworld of Charn to the newly created world of Narnia; to rectify his mistake, Aslan sends him to fetch a magical apple which will protect Narnia and heal his dying mother. He returns in \"The Last Battle\".\nPolly Plummer.\nPolly Plummer appears in \"The Magician's Nephew\" and \"The Last Battle\". She is the next-door neighbour of the young Digory Kirke. She is tricked by a wicked magician (who is Digory's uncle) into touching a magic ring which transports her to the Wood between the Worlds and leaves her there stranded. The wicked uncle persuades Digory to follow her with a second magic ring that has the power to bring her back. This sets up the pair's adventures into other worlds, and they witness the creation of Narnia as described in \"The Magician's Nephew\". She appears at the end of \"The Last Battle\".\nTumnus.\nTumnus the Faun, called \"Mr Tumnus\" by Lucy, is featured prominently in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" and also appears in \"The Horse and His Boy\" and \"The Last Battle\". He is the first creature Lucy meets in Narnia, as well as the first Narnian to be introduced in the series; he invites her to his home with the intention of betraying her to Jadis, but quickly repents and befriends her. In \"The Horse and His Boy\", he devises the Narnian delegation's plan of escape from Calormen. He returns for a brief dialogue at the end of \"The Last Battle\". Lewis's initial inspiration for the entire series was a mental image of a faun in a snowy wood; Tumnus is that faun.\nCaspian.\nCaspian is first introduced in the book titled after him, as the young nephew and heir of King Miraz. Fleeing potential assassination by his uncle, he becomes leader of the Old Narnian rebellion against the Telmarine occupation. With the help of the Pevensies, he defeats Miraz's army and becomes King Caspian X of Narnia. In \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", he leads an expedition out into the eastern ocean to find Seven Lords, whom Miraz had exiled, and ultimately to reach Aslan's Country. In \"The Silver Chair\", he makes two brief appearances as an old, dying man, but at the end is resurrected in Aslan's Country.\nTrumpkin.\nTrumpkin the Dwarf is the narrator of several chapters of \"Prince Caspian\"; he is one of Caspian's rescuers and a leading figure in the \"Old Narnian\" rebellion, and accompanies the Pevensie children from the ruins of Cair Paravel to the Old Narnian camp. In \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", we learn that Caspian has made him his Regent in Narnia while he is away at sea, and he appears briefly in this role (now elderly and very deaf) in \"The Silver Chair\".\nReepicheep.\nReepicheep the Mouse is the leader of the Talking Mice of Narnia in \"Prince Caspian\". Utterly fearless, infallibly courteous, and obsessed with honour, he is badly wounded in the final battle but healed by Lucy and Aslan. In \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", his role is greatly expanded; he becomes a visionary as well as a warrior, and ultimately his willing self-exile to Aslan's Country breaks the enchantment on the last three of the Lost Lords, thus achieving the final goal of the quest. Lewis identified Reepicheep as \"specially\" exemplifying the latter book's theme of \"the spiritual life\". Reepicheep makes one final cameo appearance at the end of \"The Last Battle\", in Aslan's Country.\nPuddleglum.\nPuddleglum the Marsh-wiggle guides Eustace and Jill on their quest in \"The Silver Chair\". Though always comically pessimistic, he provides the voice of reason and as such intervenes critically in the climactic enchantment scene.\nShasta / Cor.\nShasta, later known as Cor of Archenland, is the principal character in \"The Horse and His Boy\". Born the eldest son and heir of King Lune of Archenland, and elder twin of Prince Corin, Cor was kidnapped as an infant and raised as a fisherman's son in Calormen. With the help of the talking horse Bree, Shasta escapes from being sold into slavery and makes his way northward to Narnia. On the journey his companion Aravis learns of an imminent Calormene surprise attack on Archenland; Shasta warns the Archenlanders in time and discovers his true identity and original name. At the end of the story he marries Aravis and becomes King of Archenland.\nAravis.\nAravis, daughter of Kidrash Tarkaan, is a character in \"The Horse and His Boy\". Escaping a forced betrothal to the loathsome Ahoshta, she joins Shasta on his journey and inadvertently overhears a plot by Rabadash, crown prince of Calormen, to invade Archenland. She later marries Shasta, now known as Prince Cor, and becomes queen of Archenland at his side.\nBree.\nBree (Breehy-hinny-brinny-hoohy-hah) is Shasta's mount and mentor in \"The Horse and His Boy\". A Talking Horse of Narnia, he wandered into Calormen as a foal and was captured. He first appears as a Calormene nobleman's war-horse; when the nobleman buys Shasta as a slave, Bree organises and carries out their joint escape. Though friendly, he is also vain and a braggart until his encounter with Aslan late in the story.\nTirian.\nThe last King of Narnia is the viewpoint character for much of \"The Last Battle\". Having rashly killed a Calormene for mistreating a Narnian Talking Horse, he is imprisoned by the villainous ape Shift but released by Eustace and Jill. Together they fight faithfully to the last and are welcomed into Aslan's Kingdom.\nAntagonists.\nJadis, the White Witch.\nJadis, commonly known during her rule of Narnia as the White Witch, is the main villain of \"The Lion, The Witch and the Wardrobe\" and \"The Magician's Nephew\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0the only antagonist to appear in more than one Narnia book. In \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", she is the witch responsible for the freezing of Narnia resulting in the Hundred Year Winter; she turns her enemies into statues and kills Aslan on the Stone Table, but is killed by him in battle after his resurrection. In \"The Magician's Nephew\", she is wakened from a magical sleep by Digory in the dead world of Charn and inadvertently brought to Victorian London before being transported to Narnia, where she steals an apple to grant her the gift of immortality.\nMiraz.\nKing Miraz is the lead villain of \"Prince Caspian\". Prior to the book's opening he has killed King Caspian IX, father of the titular Prince Caspian, and usurped his throne as king of the Telmarine colonizers in Narnia. He raises Caspian as his heir, but seeks to kill him after his own son is born. As the story progresses he leads the Telmarine war against the Old Narnian rebellion; he is defeated in single combat by Peter and then murdered by one of his own lords.\nLady of the Green Kirtle.\nThe Lady of the Green Kirtle is the lead villain of \"The Silver Chair\", and is also referred to in that book as \"the Queen of Underland\" or simply as \"the Witch\". She rules an underground kingdom through magical mind-control. Prior to the events of \"The Silver Chair\", she has murdered Caspian's Queen and then seduced and abducted his son Prince Rilian. She encounters the protagonists on their quest and sends them astray. Confronted by them later, she attempts to enslave them magically; when that fails, she attacks them in the form of a serpent and is killed.\nRabadash.\nPrince Rabadash, heir to the throne of Calormen, is the primary antagonist of \"The Horse and His Boy\". Hot-headed, arrogant, and entitled, he brings Queen Susan of Narnia\u00a0\u2013\u00a0along with a small retinue of Narnians, including King Edmund\u00a0\u2013\u00a0to Calormen in the hope that Susan will marry him. When the Narnians realize that Rabadash may force Susan to accept his marriage proposal, they spirit Susan out of Calormen by ship. Incensed, Rabadash launches a surprise attack on Archenland with the ultimate intention of raiding Narnia and taking Susan captive. His plan is foiled when Shasta and Aravis warn the Archenlanders of his impending strike. After being captured by Edmund, Rabadash blasphemes against Aslan. Aslan then temporarily transforms him into a donkey as punishment.\nShift the Ape.\nShift is the most prominent villain of \"The Last Battle\". He is an elderly Talking Ape\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Lewis does not specify what kind of ape, but Pauline Baynes' illustrations depict him as a chimpanzee. He persuades the na\u00efve donkey Puzzle to pretend to be Aslan (wearing a lion-skin) in order to seize control of Narnia, and proceeds to cut down the forests, enslave the other Talking Beasts, and invite the Calormenes to invade. He loses control of the situation due to over-indulging in alcohol, and is eventually swallowed up by the evil Calormene god Tash.\nNarnian geography.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" describes the world in which Narnia exists as one major landmass encircled by an ocean. Narnia's capital sits on the eastern edge of the landmass on the shores of the Great Eastern Ocean. This ocean contains the islands explored in \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\". On the main landmass Lewis places the countries of Narnia, Archenland, Calormen, and Telmar, along with a variety of other areas that are not described as countries. The author also provides glimpses of more fantastic locations that exist in and around the main world of Narnia, including an edge and an underworld.\nInfluences.\nLewis's life.\nLewis's early life has parallels with \"The Chronicles of Narnia\". At the age of seven, he moved with his family to a large house on the edge of Belfast. Its long hallways and empty rooms inspired Lewis and his brother to invent make-believe worlds whilst exploring their home, an activity reflected in Lucy's discovery of Narnia in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". Like Caspian and Rilian, Lewis lost his mother at an early age, spending much of his youth in English boarding schools similar to those attended by the Pevensie children, Eustace Scrubb, and Jill Pole. During World War II many children were evacuated from London and other urban areas because of German air raids. Some of these children, including one named Lucy (Lewis's goddaughter) stayed with him at his home The Kilns near Oxford, just as the Pevensies stayed with The Professor in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\".\nInfluences from mythology and cosmology.\nDrew Trotter, president of the Center for Christian Study, noted that the producers of the film \"\" felt that the books' plots adhere to the archetypal \"monomyth\" pattern as detailed in Joseph Campbell's \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\".\nLewis was widely read in medieval Celtic literature, an influence reflected throughout the books, and most strongly in \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader.\" The entire book imitates one of the immrama, a type of traditional Old Irish tale that combines elements of Christianity and Irish mythology to tell the story of a hero's sea journey to the Otherworld.\n\"Planet Narnia\".\nMichael Ward's 2008 book \"Planet Narnia\" proposes that each of the seven books related to one of the seven moving heavenly bodies or \"planets\" known in the Middle Ages according to the Ptolemaic geocentric model of cosmology (a theme to which Lewis returned habitually throughout his work). At that time, each of these heavenly bodies was believed to have certain attributes, and Ward contends that these attributes were deliberately but subtly used by Lewis to furnish elements of the stories of each book:\nIn \"The Lion\" [the child protagonists] become monarchs under sovereign Jove; in \"Prince Caspian\" they harden under strong Mars; in \"The \"Dawn Treader\"\" they drink light under searching Sol; in \"The Silver Chair\" they learn obedience under subordinate Luna; in \"The Horse and His Boy\" they come to love poetry under eloquent Mercury; in \"The Magician's Nephew\" they gain life-giving fruit under fertile Venus; and in \"The Last Battle\" they suffer and die under chilling Saturn.\nLewis's interest in the literary symbolism of medieval and Renaissance astrology is more overtly referenced in other works such as his study of medieval cosmology \"The Discarded Image\", and in his early poetry as well as in \"Space Trilogy\". Narnia scholar Paul F. Ford finds Ward's assertion that Lewis intended \"The Chronicles\" to be an embodiment of medieval astrology implausible, though Ford addresses an earlier (2003) version of Ward's thesis (also called \"Planet Narnia\", published in the \"Times Literary Supplement\"). Ford argues that Lewis did not start with a coherent plan for the books, but Ward's book answers this by arguing that the astrological associations grew in the writing:\nJupiter was... [Lewis's] favourite planet, part of the \"habitual furniture\" of his mind... \"The Lion\" was thus the first example of that \"idea that he wanted to try out\". \"Prince Caspian\" and \"The \"Dawn Treader\"\" naturally followed because Mars and Sol were both already connected in his mind with the merits of the Alexander technique... at some point after commencing \"The Horse and His Boy\" he resolved to treat all seven planets, for seven such treatments of his idea would mean that he had \"worked it out to the full\".\nA quantitative analysis on the imagery in the different books of \"The Chronicles\" gives mixed support to Ward's thesis: \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\", \"The Silver Chair\", \"The Horse and His Boy\", and \"The Magician's Nephew\" do indeed employ concepts associated with, respectively, Sol, Luna, Mercury, and Venus, far more often than chance would predict, but \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\", \"Prince Caspian\", and \"The Last Battle\" fall short of statistical correlation with their proposed planets.\nInfluences from literature.\nGeorge MacDonald's \"Phantastes\" (1858) influenced the structure and setting of \"The Chronicles\". It was a work that was \"a great balm to the soul\".\nPlato was an undeniable influence on Lewis's writing of \"The Chronicles\". Most clearly, Digory explicitly invokes Plato's name at the end of \"The Last Battle\", to explain how the old version of Narnia is but a shadow of the newly revealed \"true\" Narnia. Plato's influence is also apparent in \"The Silver Chair\" when the Queen of the Underland attempts to convince the protagonists that the surface world is not real. She echoes the logic of Plato's Cave by comparing the sun to a nearby lamp, arguing that reality is only that which is perceived in the immediate physical vicinity.\nThe White Witch in \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\" shares many features, both of appearance and character, with the villainous Duessa of Edmund Spenser's \"Faerie Queene\", a work Lewis studied in detail. Like Duessa, she falsely styles herself Queen; she leads astray the erring Edmund with false temptations; she turns people into stone as Duessa turns them into trees. Both villains wear opulent robes and deck their conveyances out with bells. In \"The Magician's Nephew\" Jadis takes on echoes of Satan from John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\": she climbs over the wall of the paradisal garden in contempt of the command to enter only by the gate, and proceeds to tempt Digory as Satan tempted Eve, with lies and half-truths. Similarly, the Lady of the Green Kirtle in \"The Silver Chair\" recalls both the snake-woman Errour in \"The Faerie Queene\" and Satan's transformation into a snake in \"Paradise Lost\".\nLewis read Edith Nesbit's children's books as a child and was greatly fond of them. He described \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\" around the time of its completion as \"a children's book in the tradition of E. Nesbit\". \"The Magician's Nephew\" in particular bears strong resemblances to Nesbit's \"The Story of the Amulet\" (1906). This novel focuses on four children living in London who discover a magic amulet. Their father is away and their mother is ill, as is the case with Digory. They manage to transport the queen of ancient Babylon to London and she is the cause of a riot; likewise, Polly and Digory transport Queen Jadis to London, sparking a very similar incident.\nMarsha Daigle-Williamson argues that Dante's \"Divine Comedy\" had a significant impact on Lewis's writings. In the Narnia series, she identifies this influence as most apparent in \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" and \"The Silver Chair\". Daigle-Williamson identifies the plot of \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" as a Dantean journey with a parallel structure and similar themes. She likewise draws numerous connections between \"The Silver Chair\" and the events of Dante's \"Inferno\".\nColin Duriez, writing on the shared elements found in both Lewis's and J. R. R. Tolkien's works, highlights the thematic similarities between Tolkien's poem \"Imram\" and Lewis's \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\".\nInfluences on other works.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" is considered a classic of children's literature.\nInfluences on literature.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" has been a significant influence on both adult and children's fantasy literature in the post-World War II era. In 1976, the scholar Susan Cornell Poskanzer praised Lewis for his \"strangely powerful fantasies\". Poskanzer argued that children could relate to \"Narnia\" books because the heroes and heroines were realistic characters, each with their own distinctive voice and personality. Furthermore, the protagonists become powerful kings and queens who decide the fate of kingdoms, while the adults in the \"Narnia\" books tended to be buffoons, which by inverting the normal order of things was pleasing to many youngsters. However, Poskanzer criticized Lewis for what she regarded as scenes of gratuitous violence, which she felt were upsetting to children. Poskanzer also noted Lewis presented his Christian message subtly enough as to avoid boring children with overt sermonizing.\nExamples include:\nPhilip Pullman's fantasy series, \"His Dark Materials\", is seen as a response to \"The Chronicles\". Pullman is a self-described atheist who wholly rejects the spiritual themes that permeate \"The Chronicles\", yet his series nonetheless addresses many of the same issues and introduces some similar character types, including talking animals. In another parallel, the first books in each series\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Pullman's \"Northern Lights\" and \"The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0both open with a young girl hiding in a wardrobe.\nBill Willingham's comic book series \"Fables\" makes reference at least twice to a king called \"The Great Lion\", a thinly veiled reference to Aslan. The series avoids explicitly referring to any characters or works that are not in the public domain.\nThe novel \"Bridge to Terabithia\" by Katherine Paterson has Leslie, one of the main characters, reveal to Jesse her love of Lewis's books, subsequently lending him \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" so that he can learn how to behave like a king. Her book also features the island name \"Terabithia\", which sounds similar to Terebinthia, a Narnian island that appears in \"Prince Caspian\" and \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\". Katherine Paterson herself acknowledges that Terabithia is likely to be derived from Terebinthia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I thought I had made it up. Then, rereading \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" by C. S. Lewis, I realized that I had probably gotten it from the island of Terebinthia in that book. However, Lewis probably got that name from the terebinth tree in the Bible, so both of us pinched from somewhere else, probably unconsciously.\"\nScience-fiction author Greg Egan's short story \"Oracle\" depicts a parallel universe in which an author nicknamed Jack (Lewis's nickname) has written novels about the fictional \"Kingdom of Nesica\", and whose wife is dying of cancer, paralleling the death of Lewis's wife Joy Davidman. Several Narnian allegories are also used to explore issues of religion and faith versus science and knowledge.\nLev Grossman's \"New York Times\" best-seller \"The Magicians\" is a contemporary dark fantasy about an unusually gifted young man obsessed with Fillory, the magical land of his favourite childhood books. Fillory is a thinly veiled substitute for Narnia, and clearly the author expects it to be experienced as such. Not only is the land home to many similar talking animals and mythical creatures, it is also accessed through a grandfather clock in the home of an uncle to whom five English children are sent during World War II. Moreover, the land is ruled by two Aslan-like rams named Ember and Umber, and terrorised by The Watcherwoman. She, like the White Witch, freezes the land in time. The book's plot revolves heavily around a place very like the \"wood between the worlds\" from \"The Magician's Nephew\", an interworld waystation in which pools of water lead to other lands. This reference to \"The Magician's Nephew\" is echoed in the title of the book.\nJ. K. Rowling, author of the Harry Potter series, has said that she was a fan of the works of Lewis as a child, and cites the influence of \"The Chronicles\" on her work: \"I found myself thinking about the wardrobe route to Narnia when Harry is told he has to hurl himself at a barrier in King's Cross Station\u00a0\u2013\u00a0it dissolves and he's on platform Nine and Three-Quarters, and there's the train for Hogwarts.\" Nevertheless, she is at pains to stress the differences between Narnia and her world: \"Narnia is literally a different world\", she says, \"whereas in the Harry books you go into a world within a world that you can see if you happen to belong. A lot of the humour comes from collisions between the magic and the everyday worlds. Generally there isn't much humour in the Narnia books, although I adored them when I was a child. I got so caught up I didn't think CS Lewis was especially preachy. Reading them now I find that his subliminal message isn't very subliminal.\" \"New York Times\" writer Charles McGrath notes the similarity between Dudley Dursley, the obnoxious son of Harry's neglectful guardians, and Eustace Scrubb, the spoiled brat who torments the main characters until he is redeemed by Aslan.\nThe comic book series \"Pakkins' Land\" by Gary and Rhoda Shipman in which a young child finds himself in a magical world filled with talking animals, including a lion character named King Aryah, has been compared favorably to the \"Narnia\" series. The Shipmans have cited the influence of C.S. Lewis and the \"Narnia\" series in response to reader letters.\nInfluences on popular culture.\nAs with any popular long-lived work, contemporary culture abounds with references to the lion Aslan, travelling via wardrobe and direct mentions of \"The Chronicles\". Examples include:\nCharlotte Staples Lewis, a character first seen early in the fourth season of the TV series \"Lost\", is named in reference to C. S. Lewis. \"Lost\" producer Damon Lindelof said that this was a clue to the direction the show would take during the season. The book \"Ultimate Lost and Philosophy\", edited by William Irwin and Sharon Kaye, contains a comprehensive essay on \"Lost\" plot motifs based on \"The Chronicles\".\nThe second SNL Digital Short by Andy Samberg and Chris Parnell features a humorous nerdcore hip hop song titled \"Chronicles of Narnia (Lazy Sunday)\", which focuses on the performers' plan to see \"The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" at a cinema. It was described by \"Slate\" magazine as one of the most culturally significant \"Saturday Night Live\" skits in many years, and an important commentary on the state of rap. Swedish Christian power metal band Narnia, whose songs are mainly about the \"Chronicles of Narnia\" or the Bible, feature Aslan on all their album covers. The song \"Further Up, Further In\" from the album \"Room to Roam\" by Scottish-Irish folk-rock band The Waterboys is heavily influenced by \"The Chronicles of Narnia\". The title is taken from a passage in \"The Last Battle\", and one verse of the song describes sailing to the end of the world to meet a king, similar to the ending of \"Voyage of the Dawn Treader\". C. S. Lewis is explicitly acknowledged as an influence in the liner notes of the 1990 compact disc.\nDuring interviews, the primary creator of the Japanese anime and gaming series \"Digimon\" has said that he was inspired and influenced by \"The Chronicles of Narnia\".\nIts influence extends to fan fiction: under the pen name Edonohana, Rachel Manija Brown wrote \"No Reservations: Narnia\", which imagined Anthony Bourdain exploring Narnia and its cuisine in the style of his \"No Reservations\" TV show and book. Bourdain himself praised the fic's writing and \"frankly a bit frightening\" attention to detail.\nThe IDF's plan to kill the top Iranian military commanders and nuclear scientists at the start of the 2025 Iran-Israel war was considered so fantastical that it was named Operation Narnia.\nChristian themes.\nLewis had authored a number of works on Christian apologetics and other literature with Christian-based themes before writing the \"Narnia\" books. The character Aslan is widely accepted by literary academia as being based on Jesus Christ. Lewis did not initially plan to incorporate Christian theological concepts into his \"Narnia\" stories. Lewis maintained that the \"Narnia\" books were not allegorical, preferring to term their Christian aspects a \"supposition\".\n\"The Chronicles\" have, consequently, a large Christian following, and are widely used to promote Christian ideas. However, some Christians object that \"The Chronicles\" promote \"soft-sell paganism and occultism\" due to recurring pagan imagery and themes.\nCriticism.\nConsistency.\nGertrude Ward noted that \"When Lewis wrote \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", he clearly meant to create a world where there were no human beings at all. As the titles of Mr. Tumnus' books testify, in this world human beings are creatures of myth, while its common daily reality includes fauns and other creatures which are myth in our world. This worked well for the first volume of the series, but for later volumes Lewis thought up plots which required having more human beings in this world. In \"Prince Caspian\" he still kept the original structure and explained that more humans had arrived from our world at a later time, overrunning Narnia. However, later on he gave in and changed the entire concept of this world\u00a0\u2013\u00a0there have always been very many humans in this world, and Narnia is just one very special country with a lot of talking animals and fauns and dwarves etc. In this revised world, with a great human empire to the south of Narnia and human principality just next door, the White Witch would not have suspected Edmund of being a dwarf who shaved his beard\u00a0\u2013\u00a0there would be far more simple and obvious explanations for his origin. And in fact, in this revised world it is not entirely clear why were the four Pevensie children singled out for the Thrones of Narnia, over so many other humans in the world. [...] Still, we just have to live with these discrepancies, and enjoy each Narnia book on its own merits.\"\nAccusations of gender stereotyping.\nIn later years, both Lewis and the \"Chronicles\" have been criticised (often by other authors of fantasy fiction) for gender role stereotyping, though other authors have defended Lewis in this area. Most allegations of sexism centre on the description of Susan Pevensie in \"The Last Battle\" when Lewis writes that Susan is \"no longer a friend of Narnia\" and interested \"in nothing nowadays except nylons and lipstick and invitations\".\nPhilip Pullman, inimical to Lewis on many fronts, calls the \"Narnia\" stories \"monumentally disparaging of women\". His interpretation of the Susan passages reflects this view:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Susan, like Cinderella, is undergoing a transition from one phase of her life to another. Lewis didn't approve of that. He didn't like women in general, or sexuality at all, at least at the stage in his life when he wrote the Narnia books. He was frightened and appalled at the notion of wanting to grow up.\nIn fantasy author Neil Gaiman's short story \"The Problem of Susan\" (2004), an elderly woman, Professor Hastings, deals with the grief and trauma of her entire family's death in a train crash. Although the woman's maiden name is not revealed, details throughout the story strongly imply that this character is the elderly Susan Pevensie. The story is written for an adult audience and deals with issues of sexuality and violence and through it Gaiman presents a critique of Lewis's treatment of Susan, as well as the problem of evil as it relates to punishment and salvation.\nLewis supporters cite the positive roles of women in the series, including Jill Pole in \"The Silver Chair\", Aravis Tarkheena in \"The Horse and His Boy\", Polly Plummer in \"The Magician's Nephew\", and particularly Lucy Pevensie in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". Alan Jacobs, an English professor at Wheaton College, asserts that Lucy is the most admirable of the human characters and that generally the girls come off better than the boys throughout the series (Jacobs, 2008: 259). In her contribution to \"The Chronicles of Narnia and Philosophy\", Karin Fry, an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Wisconsin, Stevens Point, notes that \"the most sympathetic female characters in \"The Chronicles\" are consistently the ones who question the traditional roles of women and prove their worth to Aslan through actively engaging in the adventures just like the boys.\" Fry goes on to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNathan Ross notes that \"Much of the plot of 'Wardrobe' is told exclusively from the point of view of Susan and Lucy. It is the girls who witness Aslan being killed and coming back to life\u00a0\u2013\u00a0a unique experience from which the boys are excluded. Throughout, going through many highly frightening and shocking moments, Susan and Lucy behave with grown up courage and responsibility. Their experiences are told in full, over several chapters, while what the boys do at the same time\u00a0\u2013\u00a0preparing an army and going into battle\u00a0\u2013\u00a0is relegated to the background. This arrangement of material clearly implies that what girls saw and did was the more important. Given the commonly held interpretation\u00a0\u2013\u00a0that Aslan is Jesus Christ and that what the girls saw was a no less than a reenacting of the Crucifixion\u00a0\u2013\u00a0this order of priorities makes perfect sense\".\nTaking a different stance altogether, Monika B. Hilder provides a thorough examination of the feminine ethos apparent in each book of the series, and proposes that critics tend to misread Lewis's representation of gender. As she puts it \"...we assume that Lewis is sexist when he is in fact applauding the 'feminine' heroic. To the extent that we have not examined our own chauvinism, we demean the 'feminine' qualities and extol the 'masculine'\u00a0\u2013\u00a0not noticing that Lewis does the opposite.\"\nThere have been other instances where C.S. Lewis's writings have been accused of gender stereotyping of women beyond The Chronicles of Narnia. Ursula K. Le Guin reviewing The Dark Tower in her 1989 book Dancing at the Edge of the World says \"The spitefulness shown towards women in these tales is remarkable [...] There'a a good deal of hatred in Lewis, and it is frightening hatred, because this gentle, brilliant, loving, devout man never saw the need even to rationalize it, let alone apologize for it. He was self-righteous in his faith. That may be permissible to a militant Christian; but it is not permissible to a highly intelligent, highly educated man to be self-righteous in his opinions and prejudices.\"\nAccusations of racism.\nIn addition to sexism, Pullman and others have also accused the Narnia series of fostering racism. Over the alleged racism in \"The Horse and His Boy\", newspaper editor Kyrie O'Connor wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While the book's storytelling virtues are enormous, you don't have to be a bluestocking of political correctness to find some of this fantasy anti-Arab, or anti-Eastern, or anti-Ottoman. With all its stereotypes, mostly played for belly laughs, there are moments you'd like to stuff this story back into its closet.\nGregg Easterbrook, writing in \"The Atlantic\", stated that \"the Calormenes, are unmistakable Muslim stand-ins\", while novelist Philip Hensher raises specific concerns that a reader might gain the impression that Islam is a \"Satanic cult\". In rebuttal to this charge, at an address to a C. S. Lewis conference, Devin Brown argued that there are too many dissimilarities between the Calormene religion and Islam, particularly in the areas of polytheism and human sacrifice, for Lewis's writing to be regarded as critical of Islam.\nNicholas Wanberg has argued, echoing claims by Mervyn Nicholson, that accusations of racism in the books are \"an oversimplification\", but he asserts that the stories employ beliefs about human aesthetics, including equating dark skin with ugliness, that have been traditionally associated with racist thought.\nCritics also argue whether Lewis's work presents a positive or negative view of colonialism. Nicole DuPlessis favors the anticolonial view, claiming \"the negative effects of colonial exploitations and the themes of animals' rights and responsibility to the environment are emphasized in Lewis's construction of a community of living things. Through the negative examples of illegitimate rulers, Lewis constructs the 'correct' relationship between humans and nature, providing examples of rulers like Caspian who fulfil their responsibilities to the environment.\" Clare Etcherling counters with her claim that \"those 'illegitimate' rulers are often very dark-skinned\" and that the only \"legitimate rulers are those sons and daughters of Adam and Eve who adhere to Christian conceptions of morality and stewardship\u00a0\u2013\u00a0either white English children (such as Peter) or Narnians who possess characteristics valued and cultivated by the British (such as Caspian).\"\nAdaptations.\nTelevision.\n\"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" was first adapted in 1967. Comprising ten episodes of thirty minutes each, the screenplay was written by Trevor Preston and it directed by Helen Standage.\n\"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" was adapted again in 1979, this time as an animated cartoon co-produced by Bill Melendez and the Children's Television Workshop, with a screenplay by David D. Connell.\nBetween 1988 and 1990, \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", \"Prince Caspian\", \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" and \"The Silver Chair\" were adapted as three TV serials.\nFilm.\nWalden Media.\nSceptical that any cinematic adaptation could render the more fantastical elements and characters of the story realistically, Lewis never sold the film rights to the \"Narnia\" series. In answering a letter with a question posed by a child in 1957, asking if the \"Narnia\" series could be adapted to television, C. S. Lewis wrote back: \"They'd be no good on TV. Humanised beasts can't be presented to the \"eye\" without at once becoming either hideous or ridiculous. I wish the idiots who run the film world [would] realize that there are stories which are for the \"ear\" alone.\"\nThe first novel adapted was \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". Released in December 2005, ' was produced by Walden Media, distributed by Walt Disney Pictures, and directed by Andrew Adamson, with a screenplay by Ann Peacock, Stephen McFeely and Christopher Markus. The second novel adapted was '. Released in 2008, it was co-produced by Walden Media and Walt Disney Pictures, co-written and directed by Andrew Adamson, with Screenwriters including Christopher Markus &amp; Stephen McFeely. In December 2008, Disney pulled out of financing the remainder of the \"Chronicles of Narnia\" film series. However, Walden Media and 20th Century Fox eventually co-produced \"\", which was released in December 2010.\nIn May 2012, producer Douglas Gresham confirmed that Walden Media's contract with the C.S. Lewis Estate had expired, and that there was a moratorium on producing any \"Narnia\" films outside of Walden Media. On 1 October 2013, it was announced that the C.S. Lewis Company had entered into an agreement with the Mark Gordon Company to jointly develop and produce \"\". On 26 April 2017, Joe Johnston was hired to direct the film. In October, Johnston said filming was expected to begin in late 2018.\nNetflix.\nOn 3 October 2018, the C.S. Lewis Company announced that Netflix had acquired the rights to new film and television series adaptations of the \"Narnia\" books. According to \"Fortune\", this was the first time that rights to the entire \"Narnia\" catalogue had been held by a single company. Entertainment One, which had acquired production rights to a fourth \"Narnia\" film, also joined the series. Mark Gordon, Douglas Gresham and Vincent Sieber were announced as executive producers. In July 2023, it was announced that Greta Gerwig had been hired to write and direct at least two Narnia films for Netflix. Gerwig's adaptation will release exclusively in IMAX theaters on Thanksgiving Day in 2026, before premiering on Netflix in December 2026. In March and April 2025, listings from \"Production Weekly\" and \"Production List\" referred to the production as \"Narnia: The Magician's Nephew\". The filming for the first film began on August 11, 2025 in London.\nRadio.\nThe BBC produced dramatisations of all seven novels starting in the late 1980s and running into the 1990s. They were originally broadcast on BBC Radio 4 In the UK. BBC Audiobooks released both audio cassette and compact disc versions of the series.\nBetween 1998 and 2002, Focus on the Family produced radio dramatisations by Paul McCusker of the entire series through its Radio Theatre programme. Over one hundred performers took part including Paul Scofield as the storyteller and David Suchet as Aslan. Accompanied by an original orchestral score and cinema-quality digital sound design, the series was hosted by Lewis's stepson Douglas Gresham and ran for just over 22 hours. Recordings of the entire adaptation were released on compact disc between 1999 and 2003.\nStage.\nIn 1984, Vanessa Ford Productions presented \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" at London's Westminster Theatre. Adapted by Glyn Robbins, the play was directed by Richard Williams and designed by Marty Flood. The production was later revived at Westminster and The Royalty Theatre and went on tour until 1997. Productions of other tales from \"The Chronicles\" were also staged, including \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\" (1986), \"The Magician's Nephew\" (1988) and \"The Horse and His Boy\" (1990).\nIn 1997, Trumpets Inc., a Filipino Christian theatre and musical production company, produced a musical rendition of \"The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe\" that Douglas Gresham, Lewis's stepson, has openly declared that he feels is the closest to Lewis's intent. The book and lyrics were written by Jaime del Mundo and Luna Inocian, while the music was composed by Lito Villareal.\nThe Royal Shakespeare Company premiered \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1998. The novel was adapted by Adrian Mitchell. The show was originally directed by Adrian Noble and designed by Anthony Ward, with the revival directed by Lucy Pitman-Wallace. Well received by audiences, the production was periodically re-staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company for several years afterwards.\nIn 2022, The Logos Theater, of Taylors, South Carolina, created a stage adaptation of \"The Horse and His Boy\", with later performances at the Museum of the Bible and Ark Encounter.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30686", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30686", "title": "The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe", "text": ""}
{"id": "30689", "revid": "49117961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30689", "title": "Take Me Out to the Ball Game", "text": "Song by Albert von Tilzer\n\"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" is a 1908 waltz song by Jack Norworth and Albert Von Tilzer which has become the unofficial anthem of North American baseball, although neither of its authors had attended a game before writing the song. The song's chorus is traditionally sung as part of the seventh-inning stretch of a baseball game. Fans are generally encouraged to sing along, and at many ballparks, the words \"home team\" are replaced with the team name.\n\"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" is one of the three-most recognizable songs in the US, along with \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" and \"Happy Birthday.\" However, most people are only familiar with the chorus. The verses of the song likely failed to gain popularity due to being in third person.\nHistory.\nJack Norworth, while riding a subway train, was inspired by a sign that said \"Baseball Today \u2013 Polo Grounds\". In the song, Katie's (and later Nelly's) beau calls to ask her out to see a show. She accepts the date, but only if her date will take her out to the baseball game. The words were set to music by Albert Von Tilzer. (Norworth and Von Tilzer finally saw their first Major League Baseball games 32 and 20 years later, respectively.) The song was first sung by Norworth's then-wife Nora Bayes and popularized by many other vaudeville acts. It was played at a ballpark for the first known time in 1934, at a high-school game in Los Angeles; it was played later that year during the fourth game of the 1934 World Series.\nNorworth wrote an alternative version of the song in 1927. (Norworth and Bayes were famous for writing and performing such smash hits as \"Shine On, Harvest Moon\".) With the sale of so many records, sheet music, and piano rolls, the song became one of the most popular hits of 1908. The Haydn Quartet singing group, led by popular tenor Harry MacDonough, recorded a successful version on Victor Records.\nIts use became popularized by Harry Caray, the announcer of the Chicago White Sox, when he began singing it during the seventh-inning stretch in 1976. He continued the tradition when he became the announcer for the Chicago Cubs in 1982 and games were nationally broadcast.\nThe most famous recording of the song was credited to \"Billy Murray and the Haydn Quartet\", even though Murray did not sing on it. The confusion, nonetheless, is so pervasive that, when \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" was selected by the National Endowment for the Arts and the Recording Industry Association of America as one of the 365 top \"Songs of the Century\", the song was credited to Billy Murray, implying his recording of it as having received the most votes among songs from the first decade. The first recorded version was by Edward Meeker. Meeker's recording was selected by the Library of Congress as a 2010 addition to the National Recording Registry, which selects recordings annually that are \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nLyrics.\nBelow are the lyrics of the 1908 version, which is out of copyright.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nRecordings.\nThe song (or at least its chorus) has been recorded or cited countless times since it was written. The original music and 1908 lyrics of the song are now in the public domain in the United States (worldwide copyright remains until 70 years after the composers' deaths). The copyright to the revised 1927 lyrics entered the public domain in the United States on January 1, 2023. It has been used as an instrumental underscore or introduction to many films or skits having to do with baseball.\nThe first verse of the 1927 version is sung by Dan Hornsby for Columbia Records 1544-D (148277). The Hoosier Hot Shots recorded the song in 1936. Gene Kelly and Frank Sinatra at the start of the MGM musical film, \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" (1949), a movie that also features a song about the famous and fictitious double play combination, \"O'Brien to Ryan to Goldberg\".\nIn the mid-1980s, the Kidsongs Kids recorded an adaptation of this song for \"A Day at Old MacDonald's Farm.\"\nIn the mid-1990s, a Major League Baseball ad campaign featured versions of the song performed by musicians of several different genres. An alternative rock version by the Goo Goo Dolls was also recorded. Multiple genre Louisiana singer-songwriter Dr. John and pop singer Carly Simon both recorded different versions of the song for the PBS documentary series \"Baseball\", by Ken Burns.\nIn 2001, Nike aired a commercial featuring a diverse group of Major League Baseball players singing lines of the song in their native languages. The players and languages featured were Ken Griffey Jr. (American English), Alex Rodriguez (Caribbean Spanish), Chan Ho Park (Korean), Kazuhiro Sasaki (Japanese), Graeme Lloyd (Australian English), \u00c9ric Gagn\u00e9 (Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois French), Andruw Jones (Dutch), John Franco (Italian), Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez (Caribbean Spanish), and Mark McGwire (American English).\nIn popular culture.\nThe iconic song has been used and alluded to in many different ways since its inception.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30690", "revid": "20908215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30690", "title": "Tai chi", "text": "Chinese martial art\n is a Chinese martial art. Initially developed for combat and self-defense, for most practitioners it has evolved into a sport and form of exercise. As an exercise, tai chi is performed as gentle, low-impact movement in which practitioners perform a series of deliberate, flowing motions while focusing on deep, slow breaths. Often described as \"meditation in motion,\" tai chi aims to cultivate and balance the body\u2019s (vital energy), thereby promoting both mental and physical well-being.\nMany forms of tai chi are practiced, both traditional and modern. While the precise origins are not known, the earliest documented practice is from Chen Village and Zhabao Village in Henan on the North China Plain, a region where centuries of rebellions, invasions, and adverse economic and social conditions nurtured the development of a wide range of martial arts, including those of the Shaolin Monastery on Mount Song at the western edge of the plain. \nMost modern styles trace their development to five traditional schools: Chen, Yang, Wu (Hao), Wu, and Sun. In the early 20th century Yang Chengfu, Wu Jianquan, Sun Lutang, and others promoted and standardized the art for its health benefits in programs supported by the Nationalist government, an approach that was further expanded and institutionalized by the PRC government after 1949. In 2020, tai chi was included in the UNESCO List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"tai chi\", the most common English spelling, is not a standard romanization of the Chinese name for the art (). The Chinese name was first commonly written in English using the Wade\u2013Giles system as \". But English speakers abbreviated it to \" and dropped the mark of aspiration. Since the late twentieth century, pinyin has been officially adopted in China and replaced Wade\u2013Giles as the most popular system for romanizing Chinese. In pinyin, tai chi is spelled . In English, tai chi is sometimes referred to as \"shadowboxing\".\nThe etymology of tai chi's Chinese name is somewhat uncertain because of the lack of a record of spoken usage. Before the mid-nineteenth century, it appears that outsiders generically described the art as , \"Long Boxing\"(), or . In the mid-nineteenth century, the art began to be associated with the philosophy of (see Conceptual background). This association may have originated in the writings of the founders of Wu (Hao)-style tai chi, perhaps inspired by a tai chi classic attributed to the semi-mythical Wang Zongyue that begins with the words \" is born from ; it is the mother of Yin and Yang\". However, as the Wu (Hao) founders had no financial need to promote their art, their contributions to the \"tai chi classics\" were not distributed widely for many years. The first public association between and the art was a poem by Imperial Court scholar Weng Tonghe describing a tai chi performance by Yang Luchan. It is not clear whether Weng was making a new connection or whether the new name was already in use. Written evidence for the Yang family's adoption of the name first appeared in a later text, possibly completed in 1875 by Yang Luchan's son, Yang Banhou, or no later than the first decade of the twentieth century by one or more of Yang Banhou's disciples. By the second decade of the twentieth century, Yang Chengfu's disciples and Sun Lutang were using the term in their publications, including in the titles of some of the tai chi classics. It then appeared in a book by a Chen family member, Chen Xin, published after he died in 1929.\nPhilosophical background.\nChinese philosophy, particularly Taoist and Confucian thought, forms the conceptual background to tai chi. Early tai chi texts include embedded quotations from early Chinese classics like the , \"Great Learning\", \"Book of Documents\", \"Records of the Grand Historian\", and , as well as from famous Chinese thinkers like Zhu Xi, Zhou Dunyi, and Mencius.\nEarly tai chi sources are grounded in cosmology. cosmology appears in both Taoist and Confucian philosophy, where it represents the single source or mother of yin and yang (represented by the symbol ). Tai chi also draws on Chinese theories of the body, particularly Taoist (internal alchemy) teachings on (vital energy) and on the three . Cheng Man-ch'ing emphasizes the Taoist background of tai chi and states that it \"enables us to reach the stage of undifferentiated pure yang, which is exactly the same as Laozi's 'concentrating the qi and developing softness'\".\nAs such, tai chi considers itself an \"internal\" () martial art focused on developing . In China, tai chi is categorized under the group of Chinese martial arts\u2014that is, arts applied with internal power. Although the term suggests these arts originated in the Wudang Mountains, it is used only to distinguish the skills, theories, and applications of from those of the Shaolin grouping, or (hard/external styles).\nTai chi also adopts the Taoist ideals of softness overcoming hardness, of (effortless action), and of yielding into its martial art technique while also retaining Taoist ideas of spiritual self-cultivation.\nTai chi's path is one of developing naturalness by relaxing, attending inward, and slowing mind, body, and breath. This allows the practitioner to become less tense, to drop conditioned habits, to let go of thoughts, to allow to flow smoothly, and thus to flow with the . It is thus a kind of moving meditation that allows us to let go of the self and experience no-mind () and spontaneity ().\nA key aspect of tai chi philosophy is to work with the flow of \"yin\" (softness) and \"yang\" (hardness) elements. When two forces push each other with equal force, neither side moves. Motion cannot occur until one side yields. Therefore, a key principle in tai chi is to avoid using force directly against force (hardness against hardness). Laozi provided the archetype for this in the when he wrote, \"The soft and the pliable will defeat the hard and strong.\" Conversely, when in possession of leverage, one may want to use hardness to force the opponent to become soft. Traditionally, tai chi uses both soft and hard. Yin is said to be the mother of Yang, using soft power to create hard power.\nTraditional schools also emphasize that one is expected to show (\"martial virtue/heroism\"), to protect the defenseless, and to show mercy to one's opponents.\nIn December 2020, the 15th regular session of the UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage included tai chi in the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.\nPractice.\nTraditionally, the foundational tai chi practice consists of learning and practicing a specific solo forms or routines (). This entails learning a routine sequence of movements that emphasize a straight spine, abdominal breathing and a natural range of motion. Tai chi relies on knowing the appropriate change in response to outside forces, as well as on yielding to and redirecting an attack, rather than meeting it with opposing force. Physical fitness is also seen as an important step towards effective self-defense.\nTai chi movements were inspired by animals, especially birds and leopards.\nThere are also numerous other supporting solo practices such as:\nThere is no scientific evidence for the existence of qi,\nnor any demonstrating the effectiveness of acupressure\nor traditional Chinese medicine\nbeyond that of placebo treatment.\nFurther training entails learning (push hands drills), (striking techniques), free sparring, grappling training, and weapons training.\nThe fundamental training concepts of the art are detailed in a few dozen classical texts originally written in classical Chinese by tai chi masters, the \"tai chi classics\". In these texts, it is noted that the physiological and kinesiological aspects of the body's movements are characterized by the circular motion and rotation of the pelvis, based on the metaphors of the pelvis as the hub and the arms and feet as the spokes of a wheel. Furthermore, the respiration of breath is coordinated with the physical movements in a state of deep relaxation, rather than muscular tension.\nTai chi is a complete martial art system with a full range of bare-hand movement sets and weapon forms, such as the (straight sword), (curved sword), and (spear), which are based on the dynamic relationship between and . While tai chi is typified by its slow movements, many styles (including the three most popular: Yang, Wu, and Chen) have secondary, faster-paced forms. Some traditional schools teach martial applications of the postures of different forms (taolu).\nSolo practices.\n (solo \"forms\") are choreographed sets of movements practiced alone or in unison as a group. Tai chi is often characterized by slow movements in Taolu practice, and one of the reasons is to develop body awareness. Accurate, repeated practice of the solo routine is said to retrain posture, encourage circulation throughout students' bodies, maintain flexibility, and familiarize students with the martial sequences implied by the forms. Usually performed standing, solo forms have also been adapted for seated practice.\nWeapon practice.\nTai chi practices involving weapons also exist. Weapons training and fencing applications often employ:\nMore exotic weapons include:\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nTai chi's formative influences came from practices undertaken in Taoist and Buddhist monasteries, such as Wudang, Shaolin, and The Thousand Year Temple in Henan. The early development of tai chi proper is connected with Henan's Thousand Year Temple and a nexus of nearby villages: Chen Village, Tang Village, Wangbao Village, and Zhaobao Town. These villages were closely connected, shared an interest in the martial arts and many went to study at Thousand Year Temple (which was a syncretic temple with elements from the three teachings). documents from these villages, mostly dating to the 17th century, are some of the earliest sources for the practice of tai chi.\nSome traditionalists claim that tai chi is a purely Chinese art that comes from ancient Taoism and Confucianism. These schools believe that tai chi theory and practice were formulated by Taoist monk Zhang Sanfeng in the 12th century. A research project conducted by the China Sports Commission determined as much, and Wu Tunan also examined Zhang Sanfeng's contribution to Tai Chi in his book \"A Study of Tai Chi\". These stories are often filled with legendary and hagiographical content and lack historical support.\nIn March 2007, the China Federation of Literary and Art Circles recognized Chenjiagou in Wen County, Jiaozuo City, Henan Province as the birthplace of Chinese Tai Chi. In August 2007, after further detailed investigation and verification of various opinions in society, the national martial arts department recognized Chenjiagou in Wen County as the \"birthplace of Chinese martial arts Tai Chi.\"\nModern historians point out that the earliest reference indicating a connection between Zhang Sanfeng and martial arts is actually a 17th-century piece called \"Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan\" (1669), composed by Huang Zongxi (1610\u20131695). Aside from this single source, the other claims of connections between tai chi and Zhang Sanfeng appeared no earlier than the 19th century. According to Douglas Wile, \"there is no record of a Zhang Sanfeng in the Song Dynasty (960\u20131279), and there is no mention in the Ming (1368\u20131644) histories or hagiographies of Zhang Sanfeng of any connection between the immortal and the martial arts.\"\nAnother common theory for the origin of tai chi is that it was created by Chen Wangting (1580\u20131660) while living in Chen Village (), Henan. The other four contemporary traditional tai chi styles (Yang, Sun, Wu and Wu/Hao) trace their teachings back to Chen village in the early 1800s.\nYang Luchan (1799\u20131872), the founder of the popular Yang style, trained with the Chen family for 18 years before he started to teach in Beijing, which strongly suggests that his work was heavily influenced by the Chen family art. Martial arts historian Xu Zhen claimed that the tai chi of Chen Village was influenced by the style practiced at nearby Shaolin Monastery, while Tang Hao thought it was derived from a treatise by Ming dynasty general Qi Jiguang, (\"New Treatise on Military Efficiency\"), which discussed several martial arts styles including .\nStandardization.\nUnder the Nationalist government, the Central Guo Shu Institute () in Chongqing under the direction of Chen Panling () in 1936 created a unified form combining elements of Chen, Yang, Sun and Wu forms. This was called Guo Shu Taiji (). After the retreat of the Nationalists to Taiwan in 1949, Chen Pan-ling continued to propagate the form where it is now called 99 Taiji. This frame formed the structure of Wang Shu-jin's taiji form.\nIn 1956, the government-sponsored Chinese Sports Committee (CSC) brought together a group of tai chi masters to create a shortened tai chi form that could help improve the health of the general public, because the long traditional forms were considered too difficult for most people to learn. The result was the 24-posture simplified form, developed from the traditional Yang-style long form.\nAnother 1950s form is the \"97 movements combined tai chi form\", which blends Yang, Wu, Sun, Chen, and Fu styles.\nIn 1976, they developed a slightly longer demonstration form that would not require the traditional forms' memory, balance, and coordination. This became the \"Combined 48 Forms\" that were created by three ' coaches, headed by Men Hui Feng. The combined forms simplified and combined classical forms from the original Chen, Yang, Wu, and Sun styles. Other competitive forms were designed to be completed within a six-minute time limit.\nIn the late 1980s, CSC standardized more competition forms for the four major styles as well as combined forms. These five sets of forms were created by different teams, and later approved by a committee of coaches in China. These forms were named after their style: the \"Chen-style national competition form\" is the \"56 Form\". Also standardized was the \"42 Form\", also known as the \"Competition Form\", which combined movements from multiple styles.\nIn the 11th Asian Games of 1990, was included as an item for competition for the first time with the 42 Form representing tai chi. The International Wushu Federation (IWUF) applied for to be part of the Olympic Games.\nTai chi was added to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists in December of 2020, nominated by China.\nStyles.\nChinese origin.\nThe five major styles of tai chi are named for the Chinese families who originated them:\nThe most popular is Yang, followed by Wu, Chen, Sun, and Wu/Hao. The styles share underlying theory, but their training differs.\nDozens of new styles, hybrid styles, and offshoots followed, although the family schools are accepted as standard by the international community. Other important styles are Zhaobao tai chi, a close cousin of Chen style, which is recognized by Western practitioners; Fu style, created by Fu Zhensong, which evolved from Chen, Sun and Yang styles, and incorporates movements from ; and Cheng Man-ch'ing style, which simplifies Yang style.\nAround the world in the 20th and 21st centuries, some Chinese emigrants who had learned tai chi in China continued to practice it together in their new communities.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nChoy Hok Pang, a disciple of Yang Chengfu, was the first known proponent of tai chi to openly teach in the United States, beginning in 1939. His son and student Choy Kam Man emigrated to San Francisco from Hong Kong in 1949 to teach tai chi in Chinatown. Choy Kam Man taught until he died in 1994.\nSophia Delza, a professional dancer and student of Ma Yueliang, performed the first known public demonstration of tai chi in the United States at the New York City Museum of Modern Art in 1954. She wrote the first English language book on tai chi, \"T'ai-chi Ch'\u00fcan: Body and Mind in Harmony\", in 1961. She taught regular classes at Carnegie Hall, the Actors Studio, and the United Nations.\nHuang Wenshan, a Chinese-American scholar and pioneer of cultural studies, has been called \"the father of Tai Chi in the America.\" A student of Dong Yingjie and a lifelong advocate of tai chi, in 1962 with the help of Marshall Ho'o, a former student of Choy Hok Pang, he founded the National Tai Chi Chuan Institute in Los Angeles, and the first nationwide organization of tai chi schools in the USA, the National Tai Chi Chuan Association. In 1973 Huang wrote one of the earliest comprehensive and popular books on the topic in English, \"Fundamentals of Tai Chi Chuan\". From 1973 to 1974 Marshall Ho'o hosted a television show on tai chi broadcasting from Los Angeles, which began weekly, grew to four times per week, and was picked up by other stations across the country as its popularity grew. Ho'o also promoted the art in Black Belt magazine, authored a book on tai chi, and co-founded the Aspen Academy of Martial Arts.\nTung Hu Ling, son of Dong Yingjie and a pioneer in the spread of tai chi outside of China, was invited for a teaching tour of Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York, Toronto, and Hawaii organized by Huang and Ho'o from 1966 to 1967 During that tour Tung taught for a term at Huang's Los Angeles school assisted by Ho'o, who said that was \"the first time a tai chi master came to us.\" Within a year Tung returned to found a school in Hawaii later led by his son Dong Zengchen and now by his grandson Alex Dong who is based in New York, while in 1971 his son Tung Kai Ying founded a school in Los Angeles now run by Kai Ying's son Tung Chen-wei, and from those centers the family has grown a global network of schools and workshops. \nCheng Man-ch'ing opened his Shr Jung Tai Chi School after he moved to New York from Taiwan in 1964. Unlike the older generation of practitioners, Cheng was cultured and educated in American ways, and thus was able to transcribe Yang's dictation into a written manuscript that became the de facto manual for Yang style. Cheng felt Yang's traditional 108-movement form was unnecessarily long and repetitive, which makes it difficult to learn. He thus created a shortened 37-movement version that he taught in his schools. Cheng's form became the dominant form in the eastern United States until other teachers immigrated in larger numbers in the 1990s. He taught until his death in 1975.\nCanada.\nMoy Lin-shin arrived in Toronto, Canada, from China in 1970, where he started teaching tai chi and related internal arts.\nEurope.\nItaly.\nM\u00b0Chang Dsu Yao (1918\u20131992) was the first Chinese Master to introduce Traditional Chinese martial arts to Italy. After a military career and teaching martial arts in Taiwan, he moved to Italy in 1975. There, he began teaching Tai Chi Chuan, that he had learned from Yang Chengfu, and Shaolin Kung Fu. His teachings attracted numerous students, among them Roberto Fassi, with whom he co-authored several martial arts publications.\nUnited Kingdom.\nNorwegian Pytt Geddes was the first European to teach tai chi in Britain, holding classes at The Place in London in the early 1960s. She had first encountered tai chi in Shanghai in 1948, and studied with Choy Hok Pang and his son Choy Kam Man (who both also taught in the United States) while living in Hong Kong in the late 1950s.\nYin and yang.\nMore traditional practitioners hold that the two aspects of health and martial arts make up the art's and . The \"family\" schools present their teachings in a martial art context, whatever the intention of their students.\nHealth.\nTai chi's health training concentrates on relieving stress on the body and mind. In the 21st century, tai chi classes that purely emphasize health are popular in hospitals, clinics, community centers and senior centers. Tai chi's low-stress training method for seniors has become better known.\nClinical studies exploring tai chi's effect on specific diseases and health conditions exist, though there are insufficient studies with consistent approaches to generate a comprehensive conclusion.\nTai chi has been promoted for treating various ailments, and is supported by the Parkinson's Foundation and Diabetes Australia, among others. However, medical evidence of effectiveness is lacking. A 2017 systematic review found that it decreased falls in older people.\nA 2011 comprehensive overview of systematic reviews of tai chi recommended tai chi to older people for its physical and psychological benefits. It found positive results for fall prevention and overall mental health. No conclusive evidence showed benefit for most of the conditions researched, including Parkinson's disease, diabetes, cancer and arthritis.\nA 2015 systematic review found that tai chi could be performed by those with chronic medical conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure, and osteoarthritis without negative effects, and found favorable effects on functional exercise capacity.\nIn 2015 the Australian Government's Department of Health published the results of a review of alternative therapies that sought to identify any that were suitable for coverage by health insurance. Tai chi was one of 17 therapies evaluated. The study concluded that low-quality evidence suggests that tai chi may have some beneficial health effects when compared to control in a limited number of populations for a limited number of outcomes.\nA 2020 review of 13 studies found that tai chi had positive effect on the quality of life and depressive symptoms of older adults with chronic conditions who lived in community settings.\nIn 2022, the U.S.A agency the National Institutes of Health published an analysis of various health claims, studies and findings. They concluded the evidence was of low quality, but that it appears to have a small positive effect on quality of life.\nSport and competition.\nIn addition to its health and meditative aspects, Tai Chi is practiced as a competitive sport in several formats. The most common is (\u63a8\u624b; pushing hands), in which two participants attempt to unbalance, move, or throw one another while maintaining sensitivity and control. Competitions may use fixed-step or moving-step rulesets, depending on whether foot movement is restricted. Scoring typically rewards the ability to displace the opponent through weight shifting, yielding, and redirection.\nTai Chi form routines (t\u00e0ij\u00edqu\u00e1n t\u00e0ol\u00f9, \u592a\u6975\u62f3\u5957\u8def) are also performed competitively. These performances are evaluated using criteria such as balance, smoothness, and technical difficulty, sometimes incorporating movements from multiple family styles.\nSome organizations promote (\u6563\u624b; free-hand) or light- to full-contact sparring events intended to show Tai Chi's combative efficacy, though these are less common and often overlap with broader wushu competition formats. \nTournaments are held annually in Europe, Asia and the Americas, with some drawing over 1000 competitors.\nSelf-defense and martial application.\nIn its martial aspect, tai chi emphasizes defense over attack, and replies to hard forces with soft forces and vice versa.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30691", "revid": "14841472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30691", "title": "Lisa Beamer", "text": "American writer\nLisa Beamer (n\u00e9e\u00a0Brosious; born April 10, 1969) is an American writer. The widow of Todd Beamer, a victim of the United Airlines Flight 93 crash as part of the September 11 attacks against the United States in 2001, she has become best known for her actions following the disaster.\nShe is a 1991 graduate of Wheaton College; she gave the 2011 commencement address at Wheaton and was a cheerleader.\nPost-9/11 career.\nAt the time of the attacks, Lisa Beamer was five months pregnant with her daughter, Morgan Kay, who was born on January 9, 2002. In the immediate aftermath of the attacks, the pregnant Beamer had a high profile, with more than 200 media appearances in six months. She was introduced by President George W. Bush at a commemoration ceremony. Shortly after the attacks, she set up the Todd M. Beamer Memorial Foundation, which was initially run by a family friend. The organization sought to trademark the phrase \"Let's Roll,\" which was the subject of some criticism after some accused her of seeking to profit from her husband's death.\nIn 2003, Beamer and co-author Ken Abraham wrote a book about Todd and her attempts to deal with her grief over his death, \"Let's Roll!: Ordinary People, Extraordinary Courage\", about Todd and Beamer's life before the crash and her life since. Royalties from the book were donated to the Todd M. Beamer Foundation, which was founded in 2001 by Beamer and others to help children who have suffered trauma. The organization was later renamed Heroic Choices. As of 2007, Heroic Choices was struggling to maintain financial viability. According to the Board Chair, \"[as with any charity created after 9/11], the farther you get away from the event, the more difficult it is to raise funds.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30696", "revid": "50914484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30696", "title": "Green Party of the United States", "text": "American political party\nThe Green Party of the United States (GPUSA) is a federation of Green state political parties in the United States. The party promotes green politics, specifically environmentalism, nonviolence, social justice, participatory democracy, anti-war, and anti-racism. As of 2023,[ [update]] it is the fourth-largest political party in the United States by voter registration, behind the Libertarian Party. The Party first gained traction in 2000, when Ralph Nader ran for president.\nThe direct predecessor of the GPUSA was the Association of State Green Parties (ASGP). In the late 1990s, the ASGP, which formed in 1996, had increasingly distanced itself from the Greens/Green Party USA (G/GPUSA), America's then-primary green organization which had formed in 1991 out of the Green Committees of Correspondence, a collection of local green groups active since 1984. In 2001, the GPUS was officially founded as the ASGP split from the G/GPUSA. After its founding, the GPUS soon became the primary national green organization in the country, surpassing the G/GPUSA. John Rensenbrink and Howie Hawkins were co-founders of the Green Party.\nThe Greens (as ASGP) first gained widespread public attention during the 2000 presidential election, when the ticket composed of Ralph Nader and Winona LaDuke won 2.7% of the popular vote, raising questions as to whether they spoiled the election in favor of George W. Bush. Nader has dismissed the notion that he and other Green candidates are spoilers.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe political movement that began in 1985 as the decentralized Committees of Correspondence evolved into a more centralized structure by 1990, opening a national clearinghouse and forming governing bodies, bylaws and a platform as the Green Committees of Correspondence; by 1990, it was known simply as The Greens. The organization conducted grassroots organizing efforts, educational activities and electoral campaigns.\nInternal divisions arose between members who saw electoral politics as ultimately corrupting and supported the notion of an \"anti-party party\" formed by Petra Kelly and other leaders of the Greens in Germany vs. those who saw electoral strategies as a crucial engine of social change. A struggle for the direction of the organization culminated in a \"compromise agreement\", ratified in 1990 at the Greens National Congress in Elkins, West Virginia, in which both strategies would be accommodated within the same 527 political organization renamed the Greens/Green Party USA (G/GPUSA). It was recognized by the FEC as a national political party in 1991.\nThe compromise agreement subsequently collapsed and two Green Party organizations co-existed in the United States until 2019 when the Greens/Green Party USA was dissolved. The Green Politics Network was organized in 1990 and the National Association of Statewide Green Parties formed by 1994. Divisions between those pressing to break onto the national political stage and those aiming to grow roots at the local level continued to widen during the 1990s. The Association of State Green Parties (ASGP) encouraged and backed Nader's presidential runs in 1996 and 2000. By 2001, the push to separate electoral activity from the G/GPUSA issue-based organizing led to the Boston Proposal and the subsequent rise of the Green Party of the United States. The G/GPUSA lost most of its affiliates in the next few months and dropped its FEC national party status in the year 2005.\n2020s.\nHowie Hawkins announced his candidacy for President in the 2020 United States presidential election on April 3, 2019, seeking the Green nomination, and later became the nominee.\nOn August 17, 2024, Jill Stein and Butch Ware officially became the 2024 Green Party's nominees for President and Vice President, winning 267 out of the 287 Green delegate votes at their national convention. Their campaign primarily focused on social justice reforms, labor rights, healthcare, economic restructuring, and demilitarizing. The party also campaigned heavily on ending American aid to Israel during the Gaza war and particularly attacked Democratic candidates Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. \nThe Stein/Ware ticket came in third place, securing 862,049 votes. \nOn February 3, Butch Ware announced that he would be campaigning to become the Governor of California in the 2026 California gubernatorial election. \nOn August 29, former presidential candidate Jill Stein spoke at and attended the second annual People's Conference for Palestine. She spoke in favor of the UN imposing an arms embargo, trade boycott, divestment, and utilizing the United Nations Protection Force.\nStructure and composition.\nCommittees.\nThe Green Party has two national committees recognized by the Federal Election Commission (FEC):\nGreen National Committee.\nThe GNC is composed of delegates elected by affiliated state parties. The state parties also appoint delegates to serve on the various standing committees of the GNC. The National Committee elects a steering committee of seven co-chairs, a secretary and a treasurer to oversee daily operations. The National Committee performs most of its business online, but it also holds an annual national meeting to conduct business in person.\nCaucuses.\nFive Identity Caucuses have achieved representation on the GNC:\nOther caucuses have worked toward formal recognition by the GNC:\nIdeology.\nValues.\nThe Green Party of the United States follows the ideals of green politics, which are based on the Four Pillars, namely:\nThe Ten Key Values, which expand upon the Four Pillars, are as follows:\nThe Green Party doesn't accept donations from corporations, political action committees (PACs), 527(c) organizations or soft money. The party's platforms and rhetoric harshly criticize corporate influence and control over government, media, and society at large.\nEco-socialism.\nIn 2016, the Green Party passed a motion in favor of rejecting both capitalism and state socialism, supporting instead an \"alternative economic system based on ecology and decentralization of power\". The motion states the change that the party says could be described as promoting \"ecological socialism\", \"communalism\", or perhaps the \"cooperative commonwealth\". The Green Party rejection of both state socialism and capitalism and their promotion of communalism which was created by libertarian socialist Murray Bookchin places the Green Party into the ideology of libertarian socialism. The eco-socialist economy the Green Party of the United States wants to create is similar to the market socialist mutualist economics of Proudhon which consists of a large sector of democratically controlled public enterprises, a large sector of cooperative enterprises, and a smaller sector of small businesses and self-employed. Consumer goods and services would be sold to consumers in the market by cooperatives, public enterprises, and small businesses. Services that would be for free include health care, education, child care, and urban mass transit. Goods and services that would be available at low cost would include public housing, power, broadband, and water. Howie Hawkins who was nominated by the Green Party to run for president of the United States in 2020 identifies as a libertarian socialist.\nPolitical positions.\nEconomic and social issues.\nHealthcare.\nThe Green Party supports the implementation of a single-payer healthcare system and the abolition of private health insurance in the United States. They have also called for contraception and abortion procedures to be available on demand. The Green Party has called for the repeal of the Hyde Amendment, an act that prohibits the use of federal taxpayer funds for abortions, unless in the cases of rape, incest, or to save the life of the mother.\nEducation.\nThe Green Party calls for providing tuition-free college at public universities and vocational schools, increasing funding for after-school and daycare programs, cancelling all student loan debt, and repealing the No Child Left Behind Act. They are strongly against the dissolution of public schools and the privatization of education.\nGreen New Deal.\nIn 2006, the Green Party developed a Green New Deal that would ultimately serve as a transitional plan to a 100% clean, renewable energy including solar and wind energy by 2030 utilizing a carbon tax, jobs guarantee, tuition-free college, single-payer healthcare and a focus on using public programs.\nHowie Hawkins focused his gubernatorial campaign on the Green New Deal, which was the first time the policy was introduced. Jill Stein also developed her presidential campaign based on the Green New Deal.\nCriminal justice.\nThe Green Party favors the abolition of the death penalty, repeal of three-strikes laws, banning of private prisons, legalization of marijuana, and decriminalization of other drugs.\nRacial justice.\nThe Green Party advocates for \"complete and full\" reparations to the African American community, as well the removal of the Confederate flag from all government buildings.\nLGBT+ rights.\nThe party supports same-sex marriage, the right of access to medical and surgical treatment for transgender and gender-nonconforming people, and withdrawing foreign aid to countries with poor LGBT+ rights records. The party opposes gender-critical feminism.\nYouth rights.\nThe party supports youth rights. They reject the idea that young people are property of their parents or guardians. They support providing mothers with prenatal care. They oppose child abuse and neglect and support young people's rights to food, shelter, healthcare, and education. They support greater student input into their education and sex education and oppose advertisements in schools. They support lowering the voting age to 16.\nFundraising and position on Super PACs.\nIn the early decades of Green organizing in the United States, the prevailing American system of money-dominated elections was universally rejected by Greens, so that some Greens were reluctant to have Greens participate in the election system at all because they deemed the campaign finance system inherently corrupt. Other Greens felt strongly that the Green Party should develop in the electoral arena and many of these Greens felt that adopting an alternative model of campaign finance, emphasizing self-imposed contribution limits, would present a wholesome and attractive contrast to the odious campaign finance practices of the money-dominated major parties.\nOver the years, some state Green parties have come to place less emphasis on the principle of self-imposed limits than they did in the past. Nevertheless, it is safe to say that Green Party fundraising (for candidates' campaigns and for the party itself) still tends to rely on relatively small contributions and that Greens generally decry not only the rise of the Super PACs, but also the big-money system, which some Greens criticize as plutocracy.\nSome Greens feel that the Green Party's position should be simply to follow the laws and regulations of campaign finance. Other Greens argue that it would injure the Green Party not to practice a principled stand against the anti-democratic influence of money in the political process. Candidates for office, like Jill Stein, the 2012 and 2016 Green Party nominee for the President of the United States, typically rely on smaller donations to fund their campaigns.\nForeign policy.\nThe Green Party calls on the United States to join the International Criminal Court, and sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and Non-Proliferation Treaty. Additionally, it supports cutting the defense budget in half, as well as prohibiting all arms sales to foreign countries.\nThe Green Party supports the 2015 Iran nuclear deal to decrease sanctions while limiting Iran's capacity to make nuclear weapons.\nThe Green Party advocates for the Palestinian right of return and cutting all U.S. aid to Israel. It has also expressed support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement. The Green Party supports \"...the creation of one secular, democratic state for Palestinians and Israelis on the land between the Mediterranean Sea and the River Jordan as the national home of both peoples, with Jerusalem as its capital.\"\nThe Green Party called for a ceasefire in the Gaza war and condemned Israeli war crimes in the Gaza Strip.\nMembership.\nThe Green Party's membership encompasses the fourth-highest percentage of registered voters in the United States, with a total membership of 261,091 in July 2025.\nThe Green Party has its strongest popular support on the Pacific Coast, Upper Great Lakes, and Northeast, as reflected in the geographical distribution of Green candidates elected. As of June 2007[ [update]], Californians have elected 55 of the 226 office-holding Greens nationwide. Other states with high numbers of Green elected officials include Pennsylvania (31), Wisconsin (23), Massachusetts (18) and Maine (17). Maine has the highest per capita number of Green elected officials in the country and the largest Green registration percentage with more than 29,273 Greens comprising 2.95% of the electorate as of November 2006[ [update]]. Madison, Wisconsin is the city with the most Green elected officials (8), followed by Portland, Maine (7).\nThe 2016 presidential campaign of Jill Stein got substantive support from counties and precincts with a high percentage of Native American population. For instance, in Sioux County (North Dakota, 84.1% Native American), Stein gained her best county-wide result: 10.4% of the votes. In Rolette County (also North Dakota, 77% Native American), she got 4.7% of the votes. Other majority Native American counties where Stein did above state average are Menominee (WI), Roosevelt (MT) and several precincts in Alaska.\nAt its peak in 2004, the Green Party had 318,931 registered members in states allowing party registration and tens of thousands of members and contributors in the rest of the country.\nState and territorial parties.\nThe following is a list of accredited state parties which comprise the Green Party of the United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of national conventions and annual meetings.\nThe Green National Convention is scheduled in presidential election years and the Annual National Meeting is scheduled in other years. The Green National Committee conducts business online between these in-person meetings.\nOfficeholders.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], 143 officeholders in the United States were affiliated with the Green Party. The party has not had any representation in federal or statewide offices.\nPreviously in 2016, the majority of them were in California, several in Illinois, Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, with five or fewer in ten other states. These included one mayor and one deputy mayor and fourteen county or city commissioners (or equivalent). The remainder were members of school boards, clerks and other local administrative bodies and positions.\nSeveral Green Party members have been elected to state-level office, though not always as affiliates of the party. John Eder was elected to the Maine House of Representatives, re-elected in 2004, but defeated in 2006. Audie Bock was elected to the California State Assembly in 1999, but switched her registration to independent seven months later running as such in the 2000 election. Richard Carroll was elected to the Arkansas House of Representatives in 2008, but switched parties to become a Democrat five months after his election. Fred Smith was elected to the Arkansas House of Representatives in 2012, but re-registered as a Democrat in 2014. In 2010, former Green Party leader Ben Chipman was elected to the Maine House of Representatives as an unenrolled candidate and was re-elected in 2012 and 2014. He has since registered as a Democrat, and is serving in the Maine Senate.\nGayle McLaughlin was twice elected mayor of Richmond, California, defeating two Democrats in 2006 and then reelected in 2010; and elected to City Council in 2014 after completing her second term as mayor. With a population of over 100,000 people, it was the largest American city with a Green mayor. Fairfax, California; Arcata, California; Sebastopol, California; and New Paltz, New York are the only towns in the United States to have had a Green Party majority in their town councils. Twin Ridges Elementary in Nevada County, California held the first Green Party majority school board in the United States.\nOn September 21, 2017, Ralph Chapman, a member of the Maine House of Representatives, switched his party registration from unaffiliated to Green, providing the Green Party with their first state-level representative since 2014. Henry John Bear became a member of the Green Party in the same year as Chapman, giving the Maine Green Independent Party and GPUS its second currently-serving state representative, though Bear is a nonvoting tribal member of the Maine House of Representatives.\nThough several Green congressional candidates have topped 20%, no nominee of the Green Party has been elected to office in the federal government. In 2016, Mark Salazar set a new record for a Green Party nominee for Congress. Running in the Arizona 8th district against incumbent Republican Congressman Trent Franks, Salazar received 93,954 votes or 31.43%.\nLegislative caucuses.\nWith exception to state legislatures and major city councils, all other legislative bodies included in the following chronological table had/have more than two affiliated members simultaneously serving in office.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther notable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPresidential ballot access.\n2004 to present.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1996 and 2000.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nElectoral results.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBest results in major races.\n\"Bold indicates race where Green candidate was elected to office\"\nCriticism and controversies.\nSpoiler campaigns.\nCampaigns run by the Green Party have been seen by some analysts and academics as tossing the election outcomes in favor of Republican candidates \u2013 most notably George W. Bush in 2000 and Donald Trump in 2016. In 2019, former Green presidential candidate Ralph Nader told the \"Washingtonian\" that, while he still does not consider himself a spoiler, he regretted not entering the 2000 Democratic primary.\nA 2020 \"New York Times\" article highlighted instances where supporters of a Republican candidate worked to get the Green Party on ballots in close races hoping that it would split votes away from Democratic candidate, including during the 2020 presidential election.\nIn September 2024, Democratic Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez criticized the Green Party's political strategy as \"predatory\", alleging that they have failed to build political power at the local level while only \"show[ing] up every four years\" to run presidential candidates. She contrasted their approach with that of the Working Families Party.\nOn November 1, 2024, Green parties across Europe urged Jill Stein to drop out and endorse Kamala Harris, arguing that Stein risked electing Donald Trump by staying in the race.\nOn December 27, 2024, James Skoufis accused the Green Party of spoiling the 2024 United States Senate election in Pennsylvania in favor of Dave McCormick.\nRussia.\nThe United States Senate's probe into Russian election interference investigated Jill Stein and the Green Party for potential collusion and looked to better understand why and how Russia was promoting the party. \"Politico\" and \"Newsweek\" reported that Russian state actors covertly promoted Stein and other Green Party candidates on Facebook prior to the 2016 elections. NBC News reported that a \"growing body of evidence [exists] that [shows] the Russians worked to boost the Stein campaign as part of the effort to siphon support away from Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton and tilt the election to Trump.\" NBC News additionally documented over 100 instances where Stein appeared on Russian state media, receiving favorable coverage. In 2015, Stein was photographed dining at the same table as Russian president Vladimir Putin at the RT 10th anniversary gala in Moscow, leading to further controversy. Stein contended that she had no contact with Putin at the dinner and described the situation as a \"non-event\". One of the possible Green Party 2016 VP candidates worked for RT while the VP candidate Stein ultimately chosen also often appeared on the network criticizing NATO as 'Gangster states'. Stein also met with Sergey Lavrov at an RT Gala in New York.\nStein's 2016 foreign policy positions regarding Russian topics have been considered by some to have mirrored those of the Russian government, in some instances, including concerning the annexation of Crimea. Stein condemned Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, but claimed that Russia was provoked by NATO's eastward expansion.\nAllegations of irregularities in primary elections.\nOn October 16, 2019, a joint candidate letter called for reform in the Green Party's presidential primary process in response to the party's announcement that it would remove unrecognized candidates from its website list that November, an effort which Green candidates claimed was being to done to help the Hawkins campaign secure the party's nomination. This was followed by allegations of conflicts of interest among the party's leadership, members of which the candidates believed were helping party co-founder Howie Hawkins, and of an alleged overlooking of a violation of Green Party rules that would have disqualified Hawkins from running as a Green, due to him also seeking the Socialist Party's nomination.\nAfter the 2020 Green Party Nominating Convention named Hawkins as their presidential candidate, runner-up Dario Hunter announced that he would run as an independent candidate. Hunter cited alleged irregularities and undemocratic processes throughout the primary, arguing that party leaders had committed \"ethical lapses\" to ensure Hawkins' nomination, and criticizing Hawkins for what he saw as his \"imperialist perspective\" and \"CIA talking points.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30697", "revid": "50281986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30697", "title": "Triple jump", "text": "Track and field event\nThe triple jump, sometimes referred to as the hop, step and jump or the hop, skip and jump, is a track and field event, similar to long jump. As a group, the two events are referred to as the \"horizontal jumps\". The competitor runs down the track and performs a hop, a bound and then a jump into the sand pit. The triple jump was inspired by accounts of lengthy jumps at the ancient Olympic Games and has been a modern Olympics event since the Games' inception in 1896.\nAccording to World Athletics rules, \"the hop shall be made so that an athlete lands first on the same foot\nas that from which he has taken off; in the step he shall land on the\nother foot, from which, subsequently, the jump is performed.\"\nThe male world record holder is Jonathan Edwards of the United Kingdom, with a jump of 18.29\u00a0m (). The female world record holder is Yulimar Rojas of Venezuela, with a jump of 15.74\u00a0m ().\nHistory.\nHistorical sources on the ancient Olympic Games occasionally mention jumps of 15 metres or more. This led sports historians to conclude that these must have been a series of jumps, thus providing the basis for the triple jump. However, there is no evidence for the triple jump being included in the ancient Olympic Games, and the recorded extraordinary distances may be due to the artistic license of the authors of victory poems, rather than attempts to report accurate results.\nThe triple jump was a part of the inaugural modern Olympics in 1896 in Athens, although at the time it consisted of two hops on the same foot and then a jump. The first modern Olympic champion, James Connolly, was a triple jumper. Early Olympics also included the standing triple jump, although this has since been removed from the Olympic program and is rarely performed in competition today. The women's triple jump was introduced into the Atlanta Olympics in 1996.\nIn Irish mythology the geal-ruith (triple jump) was an event contested in the ancient Irish Tailteann Games as early as 1829 BC.\nTechnique.\nApproach.\nThe approach is one of the most important parts of an athlete's jump. The athlete sprints down a runway to a takeoff mark, from which the triple jump is measured. The takeoff mark is commonly either a piece of wood or similar material embedded in the runway, or a rectangle painted on the runway surface. In modern championships, a strip of plasticine, tape, or modeling clay is attached to the far edge of the board to record athletes overstepping or \"scratching\" the mark, defined by the trailing edge of the board. These boards are placed at different places on the runway depending on how far the athlete can jump. Typically the boards are set , , and from the pit. These are the most common boards seen at the high school and junior levels, but boards can be placed anywhere on the runway. There are three phases of the triple jump: the \"hop\" phase, the \"bound\" or \"step\" phase, and the \"jump\" phase. They all play an important role in the jump itself. These three phases are executed in one continuous sequence. The athlete has to maintain a good speed through each phase. They should also try to stay consistent to avoid fouls.\nHop.\nThe hop begins with the athlete jumping from the take-off board on one leg, which for descriptive purposes, will be the right leg. Precise placement of the foot on the take-off is important for the athlete to avoid a foul. The objective of the first phase is to hop \"out\", with athletes focusing all momentum forward. The hop landing phase is very active, involving a powerful backward \"pawing\" action of the right leg, with the right take-off foot landing heel first on the runway.\nStep.\nThe hop landing also marks the beginning of the step phase, where the athlete utilizes the backward momentum of the right leg to immediately execute a powerful jump forward and upwards, the left leg assisting the take-off with a hip flexion thrust similar to a bounding motion. This leads to the step-phase mid-air position, with the right take-off leg trailing flexed at the knee, and the left leg now leading flexed at the hip and knee. The jumper then holds this position for as long as possible, before extending the knee of the leading left leg and then immediately beginning a powerful backward motion of the whole left leg, again landing on the runway with a powerful backward pawing action. The takeoff leg should be fully extended with the drive leg thigh just below parallel to the ground. The takeoff leg stays extended behind the body with the heel held high. The drive leg extends with a flexed ankle and snaps downward for a quick transition into the jump phase. The athlete tries to take the farthest step they can while maintaining balance and control, using techniques such as pulling their leg up as high as possible.\nJump.\nThe step landing forms the take-off of the final phase (the jump), where the athlete utilizes the backward force from the left leg to take off again. The jump phase is very similar to the long jump although most athletes have lost too much speed by this time to manage a full hitch kick, and mostly used is a hang or sail technique.\nWhen landing in the sand-filled pit, the jumper should aim to avoid sitting back on landing or placing either hand behind the feet. The sandpit usually begins 13m from the take-off board for male international competition or 11m from the board for international female and club-level male competition. Each phase of the triple jump should get progressively higher, and there should be a regular rhythm to the three landings.\nFoul.\nA \"foul\", also known as a \"scratch\", or missed jump, occurs when a jumper oversteps the takeoff mark, misses the pit entirely, does not use the correct foot sequence throughout the phases, or does not perform the attempt in the allotted amount of time (usually about 90 seconds). When a jumper \"scratches\", the seated official will raise a red flag, and the jumper who was \"on deck\", or up next, prepares to jump.\nIt shall not be considered a foul if an athlete while jumping, should touch or scrape the ground with his/her \"sleeping leg\". Also called a \"scrape foul\", \"sleeping leg\" touch violations were ruled as fouls before the mid-1980s. The IAAF changed the rules following outrage at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when Soviet field officials in the men's triple jump final ruled as foul eight of the twelve jumps made by two leading competitors (from Brazil and Australia) thus helping two Soviet jumpers win the gold and silver medals.\nRecords.\n\"Note: results cannot count towards records if they are wind-assisted (&gt;2.0 m/s).\"\nAll-time top 25.\nMen (indoor).\n\"Only one performance (best) per athlete\"\nWomen (indoor).\n\"Only one performance (best) per athlete\"\nSeason's bests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30698", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30698", "title": "TNT", "text": "Impact-resistant high explosive\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nTrinitrotoluene ( ), more commonly known as TNT (and more specifically 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene, and by its preferred IUPAC name 2-methyl-1,3,5-trinitrobenzene), is a chemical compound with the formula . TNT is occasionally used as a reagent in chemical synthesis, but it is best known as an explosive material with convenient handling properties. The explosive yield of TNT is considered to be the standard comparative convention of bombs and asteroid impacts. In chemistry, TNT is used to generate charge transfer salts.\nHistory.\nTNT was first synthesized in 1863 by German chemist Julius Wilbrand and was originally used as a yellow dye. Its potential as an explosive was not recognized for three decades, mainly because it was so much less sensitive than other explosives known at the time. Its explosive properties were discovered in 1891 by another German chemist, Carl H\u00e4ussermann. TNT can be safely poured when liquid into shell cases, and is so insensitive that in 1910 it was exempted from the UK's Explosives Act 1875 and was not considered an explosive for the purposes of manufacture and storage.\nThe German armed forces adopted it as a filling for artillery shells in 1902. TNT-filled armour-piercing shells would explode after they had penetrated the armour of British capital ships, whereas the British Lyddite-filled shells tended to explode upon striking armour, thus expending much of their energy outside the ship. The British started replacing Lyddite with TNT in 1907.\nThe United States Navy continued filling armour-piercing shells with explosive D after some other nations had switched to TNT, but began filling naval mines, bombs, depth charges, and torpedo warheads with burster charges of crude grade B TNT with the color of brown sugar and requiring an explosive booster charge of granular crystallized grade A TNT for detonation. High-explosive shells were filled with grade A TNT, which became preferred for other uses as industrial chemical capacity became available for removing xylene and similar hydrocarbons from the toluene feedstock and other nitrotoluene isomer byproducts from the nitrating reactions.\nPreparation.\nIn industry, TNT is produced in a three-step process. First, toluene is nitrated with a mixture of sulfuric and nitric acid to produce mononitrotoluene (MNT). The MNT is separated and then renitrated to dinitrotoluene (DNT). In the final step, the DNT is nitrated to trinitrotoluene (TNT) using an anhydrous mixture of nitric acid and fuming sulfuric acid (oleum). Nitric acid is consumed by the manufacturing process, but the diluted sulfuric acid can be reconcentrated and reused.\nAfter nitration, TNT can either be purified by crystallization from an organic solvent or stabilized by a process called sulfitation, where the crude TNT is treated with aqueous sodium sulfite solution to remove less stable isomers of TNT and other undesired reaction products. The rinse water from sulfitation is known as red water and is a significant pollutant and waste product of TNT manufacture.\nControl of nitrogen oxides in feed nitric acid is very important because free nitrogen dioxide can result in oxidation of the methyl group of toluene. This reaction is highly exothermic and carries with it the risk of a runaway reaction leading to an explosion.\nIn the laboratory, 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene is produced by a two-step process. A nitrating mixture of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids is used to nitrate toluene to a mixture of mono- and di-nitrotoluene isomers, with careful cooling to maintain temperature. The nitrated toluenes are then separated, washed with dilute sodium bicarbonate to remove oxides of nitrogen, and then carefully nitrated with a mixture of fuming nitric acid and sulfuric acid.\nX-ray crystallography determined that each of the three planar nitro groups is substantially rotated out of the plane of the benzene ring.\nApplications.\nTNT is one of the most commonly used explosives for military, industrial, and mining applications. TNT has been used in oil and gas fracking (hydraulic fracturing) in shale formations. The technique involves displacing and detonating nitroglycerin in hydraulically induced fractures followed by wellbore shots using pelletized TNT.\nTNT is valued partly because of its insensitivity to shock and friction, with reduced risk of accidental detonation compared to more sensitive explosives such as nitroglycerin. TNT melts at 80\u00a0\u00b0C (176\u00a0\u00b0F), far below the temperature at which it will spontaneously detonate, allowing it to be poured or safely combined with other explosives. TNT neither absorbs nor dissolves in water, which allows it to be used effectively in wet environments. To detonate, TNT must be triggered by a pressure wave from a starter explosive, called an explosive booster.\nAlthough blocks of TNT are available in various sizes (e.g., 250\u00a0g, 500\u00a0g, 1,000\u00a0g), it is more commonly encountered in synergistic explosive blends comprising a variable percentage of TNT plus other ingredients. Examples of explosive blends containing TNT include:\nExplosive character.\nUpon detonation, TNT undergoes a decomposition equivalent to the reaction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nplus some of the reactions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;.\nThe reaction is exothermic but has a high activation energy in the gas phase (~62 kcal/mol). The condensed phases (solid or liquid) show markedly lower activation energies of roughly 35 kcal/mol due to unique bimolecular decomposition routes at elevated densities. Because of the production of carbon, TNT explosions have a sooty appearance. Because TNT has an excess of carbon, explosive mixtures with oxygen-rich compounds can yield more energy per kilogram than TNT alone. During the 20th century amatol, a mixture of TNT with ammonium nitrate, was a widely used military explosive.\nTNT can be detonated with a high velocity initiator or by efficient concussion. For many years, TNT used to be the reference point for the Figure of Insensitivity. TNT had a rating of exactly 100 on the \"F of I\" scale. The reference has since been changed to a more sensitive explosive called RDX, which has an F of I rating of 80.\nEnergy content.\nThe energy density of TNT is used as a reference point for many other explosives, including nuclear weapons, as their energy content is measured in equivalent tonnes (metric tons, t) of TNT. The energy used by NIST to define the equivalent is 4.184 GJ/t or exactly 1 kcal/g.\nFor safety assessments, it has been stated that the detonation of TNT, depending on circumstances, can release 2.673\u20136.702 GJ/t.\nThe heat of combustion however is 14.5 GJ/t (14.5 MJ/kg or 4.027 kWh/kg), which requires that the carbon in TNT fully react with atmospheric oxygen, which does not occur in the initial event.\nFor comparison, gunpowder contains 3 MJ/kg, dynamite contains 7.5 MJ/kg, and gasoline contains 47.2 MJ/kg (though gasoline requires an oxidant, so an optimized gasoline and O2 mixture contains 10.4 MJ/kg).\nDetection.\nVarious methods can be used to detect TNT, including optical and electrochemical sensors and explosive-sniffing dogs. In 2013, researchers from the Indian Institutes of Technology using noble-metal quantum clusters could detect TNT at the sub-zeptomolar (10\u221218 mol/m3) level.\nSafety and toxicity.\nTNT is poisonous, and skin contact can cause skin irritation, causing the skin to turn a bright yellow-orange color. During the First World War, female munition workers who handled the chemical found that their skin turned bright yellow, which resulted in their acquiring the nickname \"canary girls\" or simply \"canaries\".\nPeople exposed to TNT over a prolonged period tend to experience anemia and abnormal liver functions. Blood and liver effects, spleen enlargement and other harmful effects on the immune system have also been found in animals that ingested or breathed trinitrotoluene. There is evidence that TNT adversely affects male fertility. TNT is listed as a possible human carcinogen, with carcinogenic effects demonstrated in animal experiments with rats, although effects upon humans so far amount to none (according to IRIS of March 15, 2000). Consumption of TNT produces red urine through the presence of breakdown products and not blood as sometimes believed.\nSome military testing grounds are contaminated with wastewater from munitions programs, including contamination of surface and subsurface waters which may be colored pink because of the presence of TNT. Such contamination, called \"pink water\", may be difficult and expensive to remedy.\nTNT is prone to exudation of dinitrotoluenes and other isomers of trinitrotoluene when projectiles containing TNT are stored at higher temperatures in warmer climates. Exudation of impurities leads to formation of pores and cracks (which in turn cause increased shock sensitivity). Migration of the exudated liquid into the fuze screw thread can form \"fire channels\", increasing the risk of accidental detonation. Fuze malfunction can also result from the liquid migrating into the fuze mechanism. Calcium silicate is mixed with TNT to mitigate the tendency towards exudation.\nPink and red water.\nPink water is the term used to describe wastewater saturated with trinitrotoluene (at a concentration of up to 150 ppm). Pink water may be produced from equipment washing processes following munitions filling or demilitarization operations. Due to variances in the methods used at different production sites, pink water's composition is indefinite, and depends on the exact process used at a particular site; the runoff from a Munitions factory may also contain RDX or HMX, depending on the mix used.\nRed water is the term given to wastewater formed when crude trinitrotoluene is reacted with an aqueous sodium sulfite solution (referred to as \"sellite\"). Sellite reacts with the undesired components to form water soluble compounts, but leaves the desired isomer unchanged. The water used to wash these now-soluble waste compounds away is referred to as red water, or sometimes \"sellite water\" It has a complex composition containing more than a dozen aromatic compounds, but the principal components are inorganic salts (sodium sulfate, sodium sulfite, sodium nitrite and sodium nitrate) and sulfonated nitroaromatics.\nPink and red water are colorless at the time of generation; the color is produced by photolytic reactions under the influence of sunlight. Despite the names, red and pink water are not necessarily different shades; the color depends mainly on the duration of solar exposure. If exposed long enough, \"pink\" water may turn various shades of pink, red, rusty orange, or black.\nBecause of the toxicity of TNT, the discharge of pink water to the environment has been prohibited in the US and many other countries for decades, but ground contamination may exist in very old plants. However, RDX and tetryl contamination is usually considered more problematic, as TNT has very low soil mobility. Red water is significantly more toxic and as such it has always been considered hazardous waste. It has traditionally been disposed of by evaporation to dryness (as the toxic components are not volatile), followed by incineration. Much research has been conducted to develop better disposal processes.\nEcological impact.\nBecause of its suitability in munitions, TNTs toxicity has been characterized and reported. Residual TNT from manufacture, storage, and use can pollute water, soil, the atmosphere, and the biosphere.\nThe concentration of TNT in contaminated soil can reach 50 g/kg of soil, where the highest concentrations can be found on or near the surface. In September 2001, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) declared TNT a pollutant whose removal is a priority. The USEPA maintains that TNT levels in soil should not exceed 17.2 milligrams per kilogram of soil and 0.01 milligrams per litre of water.\nAqueous solubility.\nDissolution is a measure of the rate that solid TNT in contact with water is dissolved. The relatively low aqueous solubility of TNT causes solid particles to be continuously released to the environment over extended periods of time. Studies have shown that TNT dissolves more slowly in saline water than in freshwater. However, when salinity is altered, TNT dissolves at the same speed. Because TNT is moderately soluble in water, it can migrate through subsurface soil, and cause groundwater contamination.\nSoil adsorption.\nTNT and its transformation products are known to adsorb to surface soils and sediments, where they undergo reactive transformation or remained stored. The movement of organic contaminants through soils is a function of their ability to associate with the mobile phase (water) and a stationary phase (soil). Materials that associate strongly with soils move slowly through soil. The association constant for TNT with soil is 2.7 to 11 L/kg of soil. This means that TNT has a one- to tenfold tendency to adhere to soil particulates than not when introduced into the soil. Hydrogen bonding and ion exchange are two suggested mechanisms of adsorption between the nitro functional groups and soil colloids.\nThe adsorption of TNT is sensitive to soil type.\nAdditional studies have shown that the mobility of TNT degradation products is likely to be lower \"than TNT in subsurface environments where specific adsorption to clay minerals dominates the sorption process.\" Thus, the mobility of TNT and its transformation products are dependent on the characteristics of the sorbent. The mobility of TNT in groundwater and soil has been extrapolated from \"sorption and desorption isotherm models determined with humic acids, in aquifer sediments, and soils\". From these models, it is predicted that TNT has a low retention and transports readily in the environment.\nCompared to other explosives, TNT has a higher association constant with soil, meaning it adheres more with soil than with water. Conversely, other explosives, such as RDX and HMX with low association constants (ranging from 0.06 to 7.3 L/kg and 0 to 1.6 L/kg respectively) can move more rapidly in water.\nChemical breakdown.\nThe transformation of TNT is significantly enhanced under anaerobic conditions as well as under highly reducing conditions. TNT transformations in soils can occur both biologically and abiotically.\nBiodegradation.\nWhile some bacteria and fungi can incorporate and transform TNT into various aromatic compounds, bio-mineralization of large amounts of TNT by soil organisms has yet to be reported. Wild and transgenic plants have also demonstrated the ability to phytoremediate TNT by absorption from soil and water. The primary mechanism of degradation within plants is believed to be via the enzyme nitroreductase .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30699", "revid": "45042592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30699", "title": "Toluene", "text": "Aromatic hydrocarbon\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nToluene (), also known as toluol (), is a substituted aromatic hydrocarbon with the chemical formula , often abbreviated as , where Ph stands for the phenyl group. It is a colorless, water-insoluble liquid with the odor associated with paint thinners. It is a mono-substituted benzene derivative, consisting of a methyl group (CH3) attached to a phenyl group by a single bond. As such, its systematic IUPAC name is methylbenzene. Toluene is predominantly used as an industrial feedstock and a solvent.\nAs the solvent in some types of paint thinner, permanent markers, contact cement and certain types of glue, toluene is sometimes used as a recreational inhalant and has the potential of causing severe neurological harm.\nHistory.\nThe compound was first isolated in 1837 through a distillation of pine oil by Pierre Joseph Pelletier and Filip Neriusz Walter, who named it \"r\u00e9tinnaphte\". In 1841, Henri \u00c9tienne Sainte-Claire Deville isolated a hydrocarbon from balsam of Tolu (an aromatic extract from the tropical Colombian tree \"Myroxylon balsamum\"), which Deville recognized as similar to Walter's \"r\u00e9tinnaphte\" and to benzene; hence he called the new hydrocarbon \"benzo\u00e8ne\". In 1843, J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius recommended the name \"toluin\". In 1850, French chemist Auguste Cahours isolated from a distillate of wood a hydrocarbon which he recognized as similar to Deville's \"benzo\u00e8ne\" and which Cahours named \"tolu\u00e8ne\".\nChemical properties.\nThe distance between carbon atoms in the toluene ring is 0.1399\u00a0nm. The C-CH3 bond is longer at 0.1524\u00a0nm, while the average C-H bond length is 0.111\u00a0nm.\nRing reactions.\nToluene reacts as a normal aromatic hydrocarbon in electrophilic aromatic substitution. Because the methyl group has greater electron-releasing properties than a hydrogen atom in the same position, toluene is more reactive than benzene toward electrophiles. It undergoes sulfonation to give \"p\"-toluenesulfonic acid, and chlorination by Cl2 in the presence of FeCl3 to give ortho- and para- isomers of chlorotoluene.\nNitration of toluene gives mono-, di-, and trinitrotoluene, all of which are widely used. Dinitrotoluene is the precursor to toluene diisocyanate, a precursor to polyurethane foam. Trinitrotoluene (TNT) is an explosive.\nComplete hydrogenation of toluene gives methylcyclohexane. The reaction requires a high pressure of hydrogen and a catalyst.\nSide chain reactions.\nThe C-H bonds of the methyl group in toluene are benzylic, therefore they are weaker than C-H bonds in simpler alkanes. Reflecting this weakness, the methyl group in toluene undergoes a variety of free radical reactions. For example, when heated with \"N\"-bromosuccinimide (NBS) in the presence of AIBN, toluene converts to benzyl bromide. The same conversion can be effected with elemental bromine in the presence of UV light or even sunlight.\nToluene may also be brominated by treating it with HBr and H2O2 in the presence of light.\nC6H5CH3 + Br2 \u2192 C6H5CH2Br + HBr\nBenzoic acid and benzaldehyde are produced commercially by partial oxidation of toluene with oxygen. Typical catalysts include cobalt or manganese naphthenates. Related but laboratory-scale oxidations involve the use of potassium permanganate to yield benzoic acid and chromyl chloride to yield benzaldehyde (\u00c9tard reaction).\nThe methyl group in toluene undergoes deprotonation only with very strong bases; its p\"K\"a is estimated using acidity trends to be approximately 43 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and its ion pair acidity is extrapolated to be 41.2 in cyclohexylamine (Cesium Cyclohexylamide) using a Bronsted correlation.\nMiscibility.\nToluene is miscible (soluble in all proportions) with ethanol, benzene, diethyl ether, acetone, chloroform, glacial acetic acid and carbon disulfide, but immiscible with water.\nProduction.\nToluene occurs naturally at low levels in crude oil and is a byproduct in the production of gasoline by a catalytic reformer or ethylene cracker. It is also a byproduct of the production of coke from coal. Final separation and purification is done by any of the distillation or solvent extraction processes used for BTX aromatics (benzene, toluene, and xylene isomers).\nOther preparative routes.\nToluene can be prepared by a variety of methods. For example, benzene reacts with methanol in presence of a solid acid to give toluene and water:\n&lt;chem&gt;C6H6 + CH3OH -&gt;[t^o]C6H5CH3 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nUses.\nToluene is one of the most abundantly produced chemicals. Its main uses are (1) as a precursor to benzene and xylenes, (2) as a solvent for thinners, paints, lacquers, adhesives, and (3) as an additive for gasoline. In 2013, worldwide sales of toluene amounted to about 24.5\u00a0billion US dollars.\nPrecursor to benzene and xylenes.\nToluene is converted to benzene via hydrodealkylation:\nC6H5CH3 + H2 \u2192 C6H6 + CH4\nIts transalkylation gives a mixture of benzene and xylenes.\nSolvent.\nToluene is widely used in the paint, dye, rubber, chemical, glue, printing, and pharmaceutical industries as a solvent. Nail polish, paintbrush cleaners, and stain removers may contain toluene. Manufacturing of explosives (TNT) uses it as well. Toluene is also found in cigarette smoke and car exhaust. If not in contact with air, toluene can remain unchanged in soil or water for a long time.\nToluene is a common solvent, e.g. for paints, paint thinners, strippers, silicone sealants, many chemical reactants, rubber, printing ink, adhesives (glues), lacquers, leather tanners, and disinfectants.\nFuel.\nToluene is an octane booster in gasoline fuels for internal combustion engines as well as jet fuel and turbocharged engines in Formula One.\nIn Australia in 2003, toluene was found to have been illegally combined with petrol in fuel outlets for sale as standard vehicular fuel. Toluene incurs no fuel excise tax, while other fuels are taxed at more than 40%, providing a greater profit margin for fuel suppliers. The extent of toluene substitution is claimed to be 60%.\nNiche applications.\nIn the laboratory, toluene is used as a solvent for carbon nanomaterials, including nanotubes and fullerenes, and it can also be used as a fullerene indicator. The color of the toluene solution of C60 is bright purple. Toluene is used as a cement for fine polystyrene kits (by dissolving and then fusing surfaces) as it can be applied very precisely by brush and contains none of the bulk of an adhesive. Toluene can be used to break open red blood cells in order to extract hemoglobin in biochemistry experiments. Toluene has also been used as a coolant for its good heat transfer capabilities in sodium cold traps used in nuclear reactor system loops. Toluene had also been used in the process of removing the cocaine from coca leaves in the production of Coca-Cola syrup.\nToxicology and metabolism.\nThe environmental and toxicological effects of toluene have been extensively studied.\nToluene is irritating to the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract. It is absorbed slowly through the skin. It can cause systemic toxicity by inhalation or ingestion. Inhalation is the most common route of exposure. Symptoms of toluene poisoning include central nervous system effects (headache, dizziness, drowsiness, ataxia, euphoria, tremors, hallucinations, seizures, and coma), chemical pneumonitis, respiratory depression, ventricular arrhythmias, nausea, vomiting, and electrolyte imbalances.\nInhalation of toluene in low to moderate levels can cause tiredness, confusion, weakness, drunken-type actions, memory loss, nausea, loss of appetite, hearing loss, and colour vision loss. Some of these symptoms usually disappear when exposure is stopped. Inhaling high levels of toluene in a short time may cause light-headedness, nausea, or sleepiness, unconsciousness, and even death. Toluene is, however, much less toxic than benzene, and as a consequence, largely replaced it as an aromatic solvent in chemical preparation. The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) states that the carcinogenic potential of toluene cannot be evaluated due to insufficient information. \nToluene occurs as an indoor air pollutant in a number of processes including electrosurgery, and can be removed from the air with an activated carbon filter.\nSimilarly to many other solvents such as 1,1,1-trichloroethane and some alkylbenzenes, toluene has been shown to act as a non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist and GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulator. Additionally, toluene has been shown to display antidepressant-like effects in rodents in the forced swim test (FST) and the tail suspension test (TST), likely due to its NMDA antagonist properties.\nToluene inhibits excitatory ion channels such as the NMDA receptor, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, and the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. It also potentiates the function of inhibitory ion channels, such as the GABAA and glycine receptors. In addition, toluene disrupts voltage-gated calcium channels and ATP-gated ion channels.\nRecreational use.\nToluene is sometimes used as a recreational inhalant (\"glue sniffing\"), likely on account of its euphoric and dissociative effects, in a manner unintended by manufacturers. People inhale toluene-containing products (e.g., paint thinner, contact cement, correction pens, model glue, etc.) for its intoxicating effect. The possession and use of toluene and products containing it are regulated in many jurisdictions, for the supposed reason of preventing minors from obtaining these products for recreational drug purposes. As of 2007, 24 US states had laws penalizing use, possession with intent to use, and/or distribution of such inhalants. In 2005 the European Union banned the general sale of products consisting of greater than 0.5% toluene.\nBioremediation.\nSeveral types of fungi including \"Cladophialophora\", \"Exophiala\", \"Leptodontidium\" (syn. \"Leptodontium\"), \"Pseudeurotium zonatum\", and \"Cladosporium sphaerospermum\", and certain species of bacteria can degrade toluene, using it as a source of carbon and energy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30701", "revid": "17820167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30701", "title": "The Computer Contradictionary", "text": "Satirical dictionary of computer industry terms\nThe Computer Contradictionary is a non-fiction book by Stan Kelly-Bootle that compiles a satirical list of definitions of computer industry terms. It is an example of \"cynical lexicography\" in the tradition of Ambrose Bierce's \"The Devil's Dictionary\". Rather than offering a factual account of usage, its definitions are largely made up by the author.\nThe book was published in May 1995 by MIT Press and is an update of Kelly-Bootle's \"The Devil's DP Dictionary\" which appeared in 1981.\nEndless loop. See: \"Loop, endless\"\nLoop, endless. See: \"Endless loop\"\nRecursion. See: \"Recursion\"\nReception.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\", which praised the book, wrote that it was \"smartly-titled\" but was an \"awfully stupid book\". \"ACM Computing Reviews\" recommended dipping into it because \"a dictionary is a difficult read\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30702", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30702", "title": "The Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel", "text": ""}
{"id": "30703", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30703", "title": "TRN", "text": "TRN may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30706", "revid": "940017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30706", "title": "The Great Divorce", "text": "1945 novel by C. S. Lewis\nThe Great Divorce is a novel by the British author C. S. Lewis, published in 1945, based on a theological dream vision of his in which he reflects on the Christian conceptions of Heaven and Hell.\nThe working title was \"Who Goes Home?\" but the final name was changed at the publisher's insistence. The title refers to William Blake's poem \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\". \"The Great Divorce\" was first printed as a serial in an Anglican newspaper called \"The Guardian\" in 1944 and 1945 and soon thereafter in book form.\nSources.\nLewis's diverse sources for this work include the works of St. Augustine, Dante Aligheri, John Milton, John Bunyan, Emanuel Swedenborg and Lewis Carroll, as well as an American science fiction author whose name Lewis had forgotten but whose work he mentions in his preface George MacDonald, whom Lewis utilizes as a character in the story, Dante, Prudentius and Jeremy Taylor are alluded to in the text of chapter 9.\nPlot summary.\nThe narrator inexplicably finds himself in a grim and joyless city, the \"grey town\", where it rains continuously, even indoors, which is either Hell or Purgatory depending on whether or not one stays there. He eventually finds a bus stop for those who desire an excursion to some other place. (\"The grey town\" is only called such; the destination later turns out to be the foothills of Heaven). He waits in line for the bus and listens to the arguments between his fellow passengers. As they await the bus's arrival, many of them quit the line in disgust before the bus pulls up. The driver is an angel who casually shields his face from the passengers. Once the few remaining passengers have boarded, the bus flies upward, off the pavement into the grey, rainy sky.\nThe ascending bus breaks out of the rain clouds into a clear, pre-dawn sky, and as it rises its occupants' bodies change from being normal and solid into being transparent, faint, and vapor-like. When it reaches its destination the passengers on the bus\u2014 including the narrator\u2014are gradually revealed to be ghosts. Although the country they disembark into is the most beautiful they have ever seen, every feature of the landscape, including streams of water and blades of grass, is unyieldingly solid compared to themselves: It causes them immense pain even to walk on the grass, whose blades pierce their shadowy feet, and even a single leaf is far too heavy for any to lift.\nShining figures, men and women whom they have known on Earth, come to meet them and to urge them to repent and walk into Heaven proper. They promise as the ghosts travel onward and upward that they will become more solid and thus feel less and less discomfort, and more truly real; this process is also in an aside called \"thickening\". These luminous psychopomps, deemed \"spirits\" to distinguish them from the insubstantial ghosts, offer to help them journey toward the mountains and the sunrise. (One of the earlier ghosts, the narrator learns with a start, had committed suicide by throwing himself under a train, whereas one of the final spirits had died peacefully in bed in a nursing home.)\nAlmost all of the ghosts choose to return to the grey town instead, giving various reasons and excuses. Much of the interest of the book lies in the recognition it awakens of the plausibility and familiarity\u2013and the thinness and self-deception\u2013of the excuses which the ghosts ultimately refuse to abandon, even though to do so would bring them to \"reality\" and \"joy forevermore\". A former bishop refuses, having grown so used to framing his faith in abstract, pseudo-intellectual terms that he can no longer definitively say whether he believes in God; an artist refuses, arguing that he must preserve the reputation of his school of painting; a bitter cynic predicts that Heaven is a trick (as is much else); a bully (\"Big Man\") is offended that people he believes beneath him are there; a nagging wife is angry that she will not be allowed to dominate her husband in Heaven. However one man corrupted on Earth by lust, which rides on his ghost in the form of an ugly lizard, permits an angel to kill the lizard and becomes a little more solid, and journeys forward, out of the cautionary narrative.\nThe narrator, a writer when alive, is met by the writer George MacDonald; the narrator hails MacDonald as his mentor, just as Dante did when first meeting Virgil in the \"Divine Comedy\"; and MacDonald becomes the narrator's psychopomp in his journey, just as Virgil became Dante's. MacDonald explains that it is possible for a soul to choose to remain in Heaven despite having been in the grey town; for such souls, the goodness of Heaven will work backwards into their lives, turning even their worst sorrows into joy, and changing their experience on Earth to an extension of Heaven. Conversely, the evil of Hell works so that if a soul remains in, or returns to, the grey town, even any remembered happiness from life on Earth will lose its meaning, and the soul's experience on Earth would retrospectively become Hell.\nFew of the ghosts realize that the grey town is, in fact, Hell. Indeed, it is not that much different from the life they led on Earth \u2013joyless, friendless, monotonous and uncomfortable. It merely expand its sprawl forever with its new occupants, and becomes more and more isolating, with some characters whispering their fear of the \"night\" that is eventually to come. According to MacDonald, whilst it \"is\" possible to leave Hell and enter Heaven, doing so requires turning away from the cherished evils (repentance) that took them to Hell in the first place; or, as is characterized by Lewis, embracing ultimate and unceasing joy itself. This is most grossly and strikingly illustrated in an encounter of a blessed woman who had come to meet her husband: She is surrounded by gleaming attendants whilst he shrinks down to invisibility as he uses a collared tragedian who is chained to him\u2014representative of his persistent use of the self-punishing emotional blackmail of others\u2014to speak for him. The narrator is unsure whether her husband had become an insect crawling on this chain, or if his sin had, ultimately, consumed him.\nPenultimately MacDonald has the narrator crouch down to look at a tiny crack in the soil, and tells him that the bus came up through a crack no bigger than that, which contained the once vast grey town, which is actually minuscule to the point of being invisible compared with the immensity of Heaven and reality. An inconclusive dialogue about the unfathomable mysteries of eschatology and soteriology ensues featuring the visions of Swedenbourg and Hildegard of Bingen, the crux of the matter being eternity vis-\u00e0-vis time.\nIn answer to the narrator's question, MacDonald confirms that when he writes about it \"Of course you should tell them it is a dream!\" Towards this end, the narrator expresses his terror of remaining a ghost in the advent of full daybreak in Heaven, comparing the weight of the sunlight on a ghost as like having large blocks fall on one's body \u2013at which point his falling books awaken him at his desk during The Blitz.\nThe framing of the dream follows that of \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" in which the protagonist dreams of judgment day in the House of the Interpreter. The (metaphysical) use of chess imagery as well as the correspondence of dream elements to aspects of the narrator's waking life is reminiscent of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and \"Through the Looking-Glass\". The book ends with the narrator awakening from his dream of Heaven into the unpleasant reality of wartime Britain, in conscious imitation of the \"First Part\" of \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", the last sentence of which is: \"So I awoke, and behold: It was a Dream.\"\nStage adaptation.\nPhiladelphia playwright and actor Anthony Lawton's original adaptation of \"The Great Divorce\" has been staged several times by Lantern Theater Company, including a weeklong run in February 2012. It also was adapted by Robert Smyth at Lamb's Players Theatre in San Diego, California, in 2004, and was included in their mainstage season for that year. Smyth originally adapted it for a C.\u00a0S. Lewis conference in Oxford and Cambridge, England, before securing permission to include it in their season a year later.\nIn 2007 the Magis Theatre Company of New York City presented their adaptation in an off-Broadway run at Theatre 315 in the Theatre District with music by award-winning composer Elizabeth Swados and puppets by Ralph Lee. Lauded by the \"New York Times\" for its imagination, theatrical skill and daring, theatre critic Neil Genzlinger called the production thought provoking \"with plenty to say to those interested in matters of the spirit.\" In the following years Magis worked closely with the C.\u00a0S. Lewis estate to make its adaptation available to over a dozen theatre companies from Canada to Ecuador. The Taproot Theatre of Seattle chose the Magis adaptation to open its new Theater Space in 2010 and extended the run due to popular demand. The Pacific Theatre Company presented the Magis adaptation in its 2010\u20132011 season.\nIn late 2012, the Fellowship for the Performing Arts received permission from the C.\u00a0S. Lewis estate to produce a stage version of \"The Great Divorce\". The production premiered in Phoenix on 14 December 2013, toured throughout the United States from 2014 to 2016, opened briefly in 2020 and resumed in 2021.\nMotion picture.\nIn 2010, Mpower Pictures and Beloved Pictures announced that they were working on a film adaptation of \"The Great Divorce\". Stephen McEveety was to lead the production team and author N. D. Wilson had been tapped to write the script. A first draft of the script was finalized by N.D. Wilson in 2011. A 2013 release was originally planned for the film. As of 2025 it has not yet been produced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30707", "revid": "40906110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30707", "title": "Temporomandibular joint dysfunction", "text": "Disorders of the muscles and joints connecting the jaw to the skull\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTemporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD, TMJD) is an umbrella term covering pain and dysfunction of the muscles of mastication (the muscles that move the jaw) and the temporomandibular joints (the joints which connect the mandible to the skull). The most important feature is pain, followed by restricted mandibular movement, and noises from the temporomandibular joints (TMJ) during jaw movement. Although TMD is not life-threatening, it can be detrimental to quality of life; this is because the symptoms can become chronic and difficult to manage.\nIn this article, the term \"temporomandibular disorder\" is taken to mean any disorder that affects the temporomandibular joint, and \"temporomandibular joint dysfunction\" (here also abbreviated to TMD) is taken to mean symptomatic (e.g. pain, limitation of movement, clicking) dysfunction of the temporomandibular joint. However, there is no single, globally accepted term or definition concerning this topic.\nTMDs have a range of causes and often co-occur with a number of overlapping medical conditions, including headaches, fibromyalgia, back pain, and irritable bowel. However, these factors are poorly understood, and there is disagreement as to their relative importance. There are many treatments available, although there is a general lack of evidence for any treatment in TMD, and no widely accepted treatment protocol. Common treatments include provision of occlusal splints, psychosocial interventions like cognitive behavioral therapy, physical therapy, and pain medication or others. Most sources agree that no irreversible treatment should be carried out for TMD.\nThe prevalence of TMD in the global population is 34%. It varies by continent: the highest rate is in South America at 47%, followed by Asia at 33%, Europe at 29%, and North America at 26%. About 20% to 30% of the adult population are affected to some degree. Usually people affected by TMD are between 20 and 40 years of age, and it is more common in females than males. TMD is the second most frequent cause of orofacial pain after dental pain (i.e. toothache). By 2050, the global prevalence of TMD may approach 44%.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nTMD is considered by some to be one of the four major symptom complexes in chronic orofacial pain, along with burning mouth syndrome, atypical facial pain and atypical odontalgia. TMD has been considered as a type of musculoskeletal, neuromuscular, or rheumatological disorder. It has also been called a functional pain syndrome, and a psychogenic disorder. It is hypothesized that there is a great deal of similarity between TMD and other pain syndromes like fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis, headache, chronic lower back pain and chronic neck pain.\nDefinitions and terminology.\nFrequently, TMD has been treated as a single syndrome, but the prevailing modern view is that TMD is a cluster of related disorders with many common features. Indeed, some have suggested that, in the future, the term 'TMD' may be discarded as the different causes are fully identified and separated into different conditions. Sometimes, \"temporomandibular joint dysfunction\" is described as the most common form of temporomandibular disorder, whereas many other sources use the term 'temporomandibular disorder' synonymously, or instead of the term 'temporomandibular joint dysfunction'. In turn, the term 'temporomandibular disorder' is defined as \"musculoskeletal disorders affecting the temporomandibular joints and their associated musculature. It is a collective term which represents a diverse group of pathologies involving the temporomandibular joint, the muscles of mastication, or both\". Another definition of temporomandibular disorders is \"a group of conditions with similar signs and symptoms that affect the temporomandibular joints, the muscles of mastication, or both.\" 'Temporomandibular disorder' is a term that creates confusion since it refers to a group of similarly symptomatic conditions, whilst many sources use the term temporomandibular disorders as a vague description, rather than a specific syndrome, and refer to any condition which may affect the temporomandibular joints (see table). The temporomandibular joint is susceptible to a huge range of diseases, some rarer than others, and there is no implication that all of these will cause any symptoms or limitation in function at all.\nThe preferred terms in medical publications is to an extent influenced by geographic location. For example, in the United Kingdom, the term 'pain dysfunction syndrome' is in common use. In the United States, the term 'temporomandibular disorder' is generally favored. The American Academy of Orofacial Pain uses 'temporomandibular disorder', whilst the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research uses 'temporomandibular joint disorder'. A more complete list of synonyms for this topic is extensive, with some being more commonly used than others. In addition to those already mentioned, examples include 'temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome', 'temporomandibular pain dysfunction syndrome', 'temporomandibular joint syndrome', 'temporomandibular dysfunction syndrome', 'temporomandibular dysfunction', 'temporomandibular disorder', 'temporomandibular syndrome', 'facial arthromyalgia', 'myofacial pain dysfunction syndrome', 'craniomandibular dysfunction' (CMD), 'myofacial pain dysfunction', 'masticatory myalgia', 'mandibular dysfunction', and 'Costen's syndrome'.\nThe lack of standardization in terms is not restricted to medical papers. Notable internationally recognized sources vary in both their preferred term, and their offered definition. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Temporomandibular joint-pain-dysfunction syndrome\" listed in turn under \"Temporomandibular joint disorders\" (International Classification of Diseases 10th revision, World Health Organization).\nBy cause and symptoms.\nIt has been suggested that TMD may develop following physical trauma, particularly whiplash injury, although the evidence for this is not conclusive. This type of TMD is sometimes termed \"posttraumatic TMD\" (pTMD) to distinguish it from TMD of unknown cause, sometimes termed \"idiopathic TMD\" (iTMD). Sometimes muscle-related (myogenous) TMD (also termed myogenous TMD, or TMD secondary to myofascial pain and dysfunction) is distinguished from joint-related TMD (also termed arthogenous TMD, or TMD secondary to true articular disease), based upon whether the muscles of mastication or the TMJs themselves are predominantly involved. This classification, which effectively divides TMD into 2 syndromes, is followed by the American Academy of Orofacial Pain. However, since most people with TMD could be placed into both of these groups, which makes a single diagnosis difficult when this classification is used. The Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC/TMD) allows for multiple diagnoses in an attempt to overcome the problems with other classifications. RDC/TMD considers temporomandibular disorders in 2 axes; axis I is the physical aspects, and axis II involves assessment of psychological status, mandibular function and TMD-related psychosocial disability. Axis I is further divided into 3 general groups. Group I are muscle disorders, group II are disc displacements and group III are joint disorders, although it is common for people with TMD to fit into more than one of these groups.\nBy duration.\nSometimes distinction is made between acute TMD, where symptoms last for less than three months, and chronic TMD, where symptoms last for more than three months. Not much is known about acute TMD since these individuals do not typically attend in secondary care (hospital).\nSigns and symptoms.\nSigns and symptoms of temporomandibular joint disorder vary in their presentation. The symptoms will usually involve more than one of the various components of the masticatory system, muscles, nerves, tendons, ligaments, bones, connective tissue, or the teeth.\nThe three classically described, cardinal signs and symptoms of TMD are:\nTMJ dysfunction is commonly associated with symptoms affecting cervical spine dysfunction and altered head and cervical spine posture.\nOther signs and symptoms have also been described, although these are less common and less significant than the cardinal signs and symptoms listed above. Examples include:\nCauses.\nTMD is a symptom complex (i.e. a group of symptoms occurring together and characterizing a particular disease), which is thought to be caused by multiple, poorly understood factors, but the exact etiology is unknown. There are factors which appear to predispose to TMD (genetic, hormonal, anatomical), factors which may precipitate it (trauma, occlusal changes, parafunction), and also factors which may prolong it (stress and again parafunction). Overall, two hypotheses have dominated research into the causes of TMD, namely a psychosocial model and a theory of occlusal dysharmony. Interest in occlusal factors as a causative factor in TMD was especially widespread in the past, and the theory has since fallen out of favor and become controversial due to lack of evidence.\nDisc displacement.\nIn people with TMD, it has been shown that the lower head of lateral pterygoid contracts during mouth closing (when it should relax), and is often tender to palpation. To theorize upon this observation, some have suggested that due to a tear in the back of the joint capsule, the articular disc may be displaced forwards (anterior disc displacement), stopping the upper head of lateral pterygoid from acting to stabilize the disc as it would do normally. As a biologic compensatory mechanism, the lower head tries to fill this role, hence the abnormal muscle activity during mouth closure. There is some evidence that anterior disc displacement is present in a proportion of TMD cases. Anterior disc displacement with reduction refers to abnormal forward movement of the disc during opening which reduces upon closing. Anterior disc displacement without reduction refers to an abnormal forward, bunched-up position of the articular disc which does not reduce. In this latter scenario, the disc is not intermediary between the condyle and the articular fossa as it should be, and hence the articular surfaces of the bones themselves are exposed to a greater degree of wear (which may predispose to osteoarthritis in later life).\nDegenerative joint disease.\nThe general term \"degenerative joint disease\" refers to arthritis (both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis) and arthrosis. The term arthrosis may cause confusion since in the specialized TMD literature it means something slightly different from in the wider medical literature. In medicine generally, arthrosis can be a nonspecific term for a joint, any disease of a joint (or specifically degenerative joint disease), and is also used as a synonym for osteoarthritis. In the specialized literature that has evolved around TMD research, arthrosis is differentiated from arthritis by the presence of low and no inflammation respectively. Both are however equally degenerative. The TMJs are sometimes described as one of the most used joints in the body. Over time, either with normal use or with parafunctional use of the joint, wear and degeneration can occur, termed osteoarthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis, an autoimmune joint disease, can also affect the TMJs. Degenerative joint diseases may lead to defects in the shape of the tissues of the joint, limitation of function (e.g. restricted mandibular movements), and joint pain.\nPsychosocial factors.\nEmotional stress (anxiety, depression, anger) may increase pain by causing autonomic, visceral and skeletal activity and by reduced inhibition via the descending pathways of the limbic system. The interactions of these biological systems have been described as a vicious \"anxiety-pain-tension\" cycle which is thought to be frequently involved in TMD. Put simply, stress and anxiety cause grinding of teeth and sustained muscular contraction in the face. This produces pain which causes further anxiety which in turn causes prolonged muscular spasm at trigger points, vasoconstriction, ischemia and release of pain mediators. The pain discourages use of the masticatory system (a similar phenomenon in other chronic pain conditions is termed \"fear avoidance\" behavior), which leads to reduced muscle flexibility, tone, strength and endurance. This manifests as limited mouth opening and a sensation that the teeth are not fitting properly.\nPersons with TMD have a higher prevalence of psychological disorders than people without TMD. People with TMD have been shown to have higher levels of anxiety, depression, somatization and sleep deprivation, and these could be considered important risk factors for the development of TMD. In the 6 months before the onset, 50\u201370% of people with TMD report experiencing stressful life events (e.g. involving work, money, health or relationship loss). It has been postulated that such events induce anxiety and cause increased jaw muscle activity. Muscular hyperactivity has also been shown in people with TMD whilst taking examinations or watching horror films.\nOthers argue that a link between muscular hyperactivity and TMD has not been convincingly demonstrated, and that emotional distress may be more of a consequence of pain rather than a cause.\nBruxism.\nBruxism is an oral parafunctional activity where there is excessive clenching and grinding of the teeth. It can occur during sleep or whilst awake. The cause of bruxism itself is not completely understood, but psychosocial factors appear to be implicated in awake bruxism and dopaminergic dysfunction and other central nervous system mechanisms may be involved in sleep bruxism. If TMD pain and limitation of mandibular movement are greatest upon waking, and then slowly resolve throughout the day, this may indicate sleep bruxism. Conversely, awake bruxism tends to cause symptoms that slowly get worse throughout the day, and there may be no pain at all upon waking.\nThe relationship of bruxism with TMD is debated. The global prevalence of bruxism and TMD co-occurrence is 17%, with regional variations: 70% in North America; 24% in South America; 14% in Europe; and 9% in Asia. Many suggest that sleep bruxism can be a causative or contributory factor to pain symptoms in TMD. Indeed, the symptoms of TMD overlap with those of bruxism. Others suggest that there is no strong association between TMD and bruxism. A systematic review investigating the possible relationship concluded that when self-reported bruxism is used to diagnose bruxism, there is a positive association with TMD pain, and when more strict diagnostic criteria for bruxism are used, the association with TMD symptoms is much lower. Self-reported bruxism is probably a poor method of identifying bruxism. There are also very many people who grind their teeth and who do not develop TMD. Bruxism and other parafunctional activities may play a role in perpetuating symptoms in some cases.\nOther parafunctional habits such as pen chewing, lip and cheek biting (which may manifest as morsicatio buccarum or linea alba), are also suggested to contribute to the development of TMD. Other parafunctional activities might include jaw thrusting, excessive gum chewing, nail biting and eating very hard foods.\nTrauma.\nTrauma, both micro and macrotrauma, is sometimes identified as a possible cause of TMD; however, the evidence for this is not strong. Prolonged mouth opening (hyper-extension) is also suggested as a possible cause. It is thought that this leads to microtrauma and subsequent muscular hyperactivity. This may occur during dental treatment, with oral intubation whilst under a general anesthetic, during singing or wind instrument practice (really these can be thought of as parafunctional activities). Damage may be incurred during violent yawning, laughing, road traffic accidents, sports injuries, interpersonal violence, or during dental treatment, (such as tooth extraction).\nIt has been proposed that a link exists between whiplash injuries (sudden neck hyper-extension usually occurring in road traffic accidents), and the development of TMD. This has been termed \"post-traumatic TMD\", to separate it from \"idiopathic TMD\". Despite multiple studies having been performed over the years, the cumulative evidence has been described as conflicting, with moderate evidence that TMD can occasionally follow whiplash injury. The research that suggests a link appears to demonstrate a low to moderate incidence of TMD following whiplash injury, and that pTMD has a poorer response to treatment than TMD which has not developed in relation to trauma.\nOcclusal factors.\nOcclusal factors as an etiologic factor in TMD is a controversial topic. Abnormalities of occlusion (problems with the bite) are often blamed for TMD but there is no evidence that these factors are involved. Occlusal abnormalities are incredibly common, and most people with occlusal abnormalities do not have TMD. Although occlusal features may affect observed electrical activity in masticatory muscles, there are no statistically significant differences in the number of occlusal abnormalities in people with TMD and in people without TMD. There is also no evidence for a causal link between orthodontic treatment and TMD. The modern, mainstream view is that the vast majority of people with TMD, occlusal factors are not related. Theories of occlusal factors in TMD are largely of historical interest. A causal relationship between occlusal factors and TMD was championed by Ramfjord in the 1960s. A small minority of dentists continue to prescribe occlusal adjustments in the belief that this will prevent or treat TMD despite the existence of systematic reviews of the subject which state that there is no evidence for such practices, and the vast majority of opinion being that no irreversible treatment should be carried out in TMD (see Occlusal adjustment).\nGenetic factors.\nTMD does not obviously run in families like a genetic disease. It has been suggested that a genetic predisposition for developing TMD (and chronic pain syndromes generally) could exist. This has been postulated to be explained by variations of the gene which codes for the enzyme catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) which may produce 3 different phenotypes with regards pain sensitivity. COMT (together with monoamine oxidase) is involved in breaking down catecholamines (e.g. dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine). The variation of the COMT gene which produces less of this enzyme is associated with a high sensitivity to pain. Females with this variation, are at 2\u20133 times greater risk of developing TMD than females without this variant. However this theory is controversial since there is conflicting evidence.\nHormonal factors.\nSince females are more often affected by TMD than males, the female sex hormone estrogen has been suggested to be involved. The results of one study suggested that the periods of highest pain in TMD can be correlated with rapid periods of change in the circulating estrogen level. Low estrogen was also correlated to higher pain. In the menstrual cycle, estrogen levels fluctuate rapidly during ovulation, and also rapidly increases just before menstruation and rapidly decreases during menstruation. Post-menopausal females who are treated with hormone replacement therapy are more likely to develop TMD, or may experience an exacerbation if they already had TMD. Several possible mechanisms by which estrogen might be involved in TMD symptoms have been proposed. Estrogen may play a role in modulating joint inflammation, nociceptive neurons in the trigeminal nerve, muscle reflexes to pain and \u03bc-opioid receptors.\nPossible associations.\nTMD has been suggested to be associated with other conditions or factors, with varying degrees of evidence and some more commonly than others. 75% of people with TMD qualify for a fibromyalgia diagnosis and, conversely, 18% of people with fibromyalgia met diagnostic criteria for TMD. A possible link between many of these chronic pain conditions has been hypothesized to be due to shared pathophysiological mechanisms, and they have been collectively termed \"central sensitivity syndromes\", although other apparent associations cannot be explained in this manner. Recently a plethora of research has substantiated a causal relationship between TMD and Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA). Severe TMD restricts oral airway opening, and can result in a retrognathic posture that results in glossal blockage of the oropharynx as the tongue relaxes in sleep. This mechanism is exacerbated by alcohol consumption, as well as other chemicals that result in reduced myotonic status of the oropharynx.\nPathophysiology.\nAnatomy and physiology.\nTemporomandibular joints.\nThe temporomandibular joints are the dual articulation of the mandible with the skull. Each TMJ is classed as a \"ginglymoarthrodial\" joint since it is both a ginglymus (hinging joint) and an arthrodial (sliding) joint, and involves the condylar process of the mandible below, and the articular fossa (or glenoid fossa) of the temporal bone above. Between these articular surfaces is the articular disc (or meniscus), which is a biconcave, transversely oval disc composed of dense fibrous connective tissue. Each TMJ is covered by a fibrous capsule. There are tight fibers connecting the mandible to the disc, and loose fibers which connect the disc to the temporal bone, meaning there are in effect 2 joint capsules, creating an upper joint space and a lower joint space, with the articular disc in between. The synovial membrane of the TMJ lines the inside of the fibrous capsule apart from the articular surfaces and the disc. This membrane secretes synovial fluid, which is both a lubricant to fill the joint spaces, and a means to convey nutrients to the tissues inside the joint. Behind the disc is loose vascular tissue termed the \"bilaminar region\" which serves as a posterior attachment for the disc and also fills with blood to fill the space created when the head of the condyle translates down the articular eminence. Due to its concave shape, sometimes the articular disc is described as having an anterior band, intermediate zone and a posterior band. When the mouth is opened, the initial movement of the mandibular condyle is rotational, and this involves mainly the lower joint space, and when the mouth is opened further, the movement of the condyle is translational, involving mainly the upper joint space. This translation movement is achieved by the condylar head sliding down the articular eminence, which constitutes the front border of the articular fossa. The function of the articular eminence is to limit the forwards movement of the condyle. The ligament directly associated with the TMJ is the temporomandibular ligament, also termed the lateral ligament, which really is a thickening of the lateral aspect of the fibrous capsule. The stylomandibular ligament and the sphenomandibular ligament are not directly associated with the joint capsule. Together, these ligaments act to restrict the extreme movements of the joint.\nMuscles of mastication.\nThe muscles of mastication are paired on each side and work together to produce the movements of the mandible. The main muscles involved are the masseter, temporalis and medial and lateral pterygoid muscles.\nThey can be thought of in terms of the directions they move the mandible, with most being involved in more than one type of movement due to the variation in the orientation of muscle fibers within some of these muscles.\nEach lateral pterygoid muscle is composed of 2 heads, the upper or superior head and the lower or inferior head. The lower head originates from the lateral surface of the lateral pterygoid plate and inserts at a depression on the neck of mandibular condyle, just below the articular surface, termed the pterygoid fovea. The upper head originates from the infratemporal surface and the infratemporal crest of the greater wing of the sphenoid bone. The upper head also inserts at the fovea, but a part may be attached directly to the joint capsule and to the anterior and medial borders of the articular disc. The 2 parts of lateral pterygoid have different actions. The lower head contracts during mouth opening, and the upper head contracts during mouth closing. The function of the lower head is to steady the articular disc as it moves back with the condyle into the articular fossa. It is relaxed during mouth closure.\nMechanisms of symptoms.\nJoint noises.\nNoises from the TMJs are a symptom of dysfunction of these joints. The sounds commonly produced by TMD are usually described as a \"click\" or a \"pop\" when a single sound is heard and as \"crepitation\" or \"crepitus\" when there are multiple, grating, rough sounds. Most joint sounds are due to internal derangement of the joint, which is instability or abnormal position of the articular disc. Clicking often accompanies either jaw opening or closing, and usually occurs towards the end of the movement. The noise indicates that the articular disc has suddenly moved to and from a temporarily displaced position (disk displacement with reduction) to allow completion of a phase of movement of the mandible. If the disc displaces and does not reduce (move back into position) this may be associated with locking. Clicking alone is not diagnostic of TMD since it is present in high proportion of the general population, mostly in people who have no pain. Crepitus often indicates arthritic changes in the joint, and may occur at any time during mandibular movement, especially lateral movements. Perforation of the disc may also cause crepitus. Due to the proximity of the TMJ to the ear canal, joint noises are perceived to be much louder to the individual than to others. Often people with TMD are surprised that what sounds to them like very loud noises cannot be heard at all by others next to them. However, it is occasionally possible for loud joint noises to be easily heard by others in some cases and this can be a source of embarrassment e.g. when eating in company.\nPain.\nPain symptoms in TMD can be thought of as originating from the joint (arthralgia), or from the muscles (myofascial), or both. There is a poor correlation between TMD pain severity and evidence of tissue pathology.\nGenerally, degenerative joint changes are associated with greater pain.\nMyofascial Pain.\nPain originating from the muscles of mastication as a result of abnormal muscular function or hyperactivity. The muscular pain is frequently, but not always, associated with daytime clenching or nocturnal bruxism.\nLimitation of mandibular movement.\nThe jaw deviates to the affected side during opening, and restricted mouth opening usually signifies that both TMJs are involved, but severe trismus rarely occurs. If the greatest reduction in movement occurs upon waking then this may indicate that there is concomitant sleep bruxism. In other cases the limitation in movement gets worse throughout the day.\nThe jaw may lock entirely.\nLimitation of mandibular movement itself may lead to further problems involving the TMJs and the muscles of mastication. Changes in the synovial membrane may lead to a reduction in lubrication of the joint and contribute to degenerative joint changes. The muscles become weak, and fibrosis may occur. All these factors may lead to a further limitation of jaw movement and increase in pain.\nDegenerative joint disease, such as osteoarthritis or organic degeneration of the articular surfaces, recurrent fibrous or bony ankylosis, developmental abnormality, or pathologic lesions within the TMJ. Myofascial pain syndrome.\nReferred TMD pain.\nSometimes TMD pain can radiate or be referred from its cause (i.e. the TMJ or the muscles of mastication) and be felt as headaches, earache or toothache.\nDue to the proximity of the ear to the temporomandibular joint, TMJ pain can often be confused with ear pain. The pain may be referred in around half of all patients and experienced as otalgia (earache). Conversely, TMD is an important possible cause of secondary otalgia. Treatment of TMD may then significantly reduce symptoms of otalgia and tinnitus, as well as atypical facial pain. Despite some of these findings, some researchers question whether TMJD therapy can reduce symptoms in the ear, and there is currently an ongoing debate to settle the controversy.\nDiagnosis.\nPain is the most common reason for people with TMD to seek medical advice. \nJoint noises may require auscultation with a stethoscope to detect. Clicks of the joint may also be palpated, over the joint itself in the preauricular region, or via a finger inserted in the external acoustic meatus, which lies directly behind the TMJ.\nThe differential diagnosis is with degenerative joint disease (e.g. osteoarthritis), rheumatoid arthritis, temporal arteritis, otitis media, parotitis, mandibular osteomyelitis, Eagle syndrome, trigeminal neuralgia, oromandibular dystonia, deafferentation pains, and psychogenic pain.\nDiagnostic criteria.\nVarious diagnostic systems have been described. Some consider the Research Diagnostic Criteria method the gold standard. Abbreviated to \"RDC/TMD\", this was first introduced in 1992 by Dworkin and LeResche in an attempt to classify temporomandibular disorders by etiology and apply universal standards for research into TMD. This method involves 2 diagnostic axes, namely axis I, the physical diagnosis, and axis II, the psychologic diagnosis. Axis I contains 3 different groups which can occur in combinations of 2 or all 3 groups, (see table).\nMcNeill 1997 described TMD diagnostic criteria as follows:\nThe International Headache Society's diagnostic criteria for \"headache or facial pain attributed to temporomandibular joint disorder\" is similar to the above:\nMedical imaging.\nThe advantages brought about by diagnostic imaging mainly lie within diagnosing TMD of articular origin. Additional benefits of imaging the TMJ are as follows:\nWhen clinical examination alone is unable to bring sufficient detail to ascertain the state of the TMJ, imaging methods can act as an adjuvant to clinical examination in the diagnosis of TMD.\nPlain radiography.\nThis method of imaging allows the visualisation of the joint's mineralised areas, therefore excluding the cartilage and soft tissues. A disadvantage of plain radiography is that images are prone to superimposition from surrounding anatomical structures, thereby complicating radiographic interpretation. It was concluded that there is no evidence to support the use of plain radiography in the diagnosis of joint erosions and osteophytes. It is reasonable to conclude that plain film can only be used to diagnose extensive lesions.\nPanoramic tomography.\nThe distortion brought about by panoramic imaging decreases its overall reliability. Data concluded from a systematic review showed that only extensive erosions and large osteophytes can be detected by panoramic imaging.\nComputerised tomography (CT).\nStudies have shown that tomography of the TMJ provided supplementary information that supersedes what is obtainable from clinical examination alone. However, the issues lies in the fact that it is impossible to determine whether certain patient groups would benefit more or less from a radiographic examination.\nThe main indications of CT and CBCT examinations are to assess the bony components of the TMJ, specifically the location and extent of any abnormalities present.\nThe introduction of cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) imaging allowed a lower radiation dose to patients, in comparison to conventional CT. Hintze et al. compared CBCT and CT techniques and their ability to detect morphological TMJ changes. No significant difference was concluded in terms of their diagnostic accuracy.\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI).\nMRI is the optimal choice for the imaging of soft tissues surrounding the TMJ. It allows three-dimensional evaluation of the axial, coronal and sagittal plane. It is the gold standard method for assessing disc position and is sensitive for intra-articular degenerative alterations.\nIndications for MRI are pre-auricular pain, detection of joint clicking and crepitus, frequent incidents of subluxation and jaw dislocation, limited mouth opening with terminal stiffness, suspicion of neoplastic growth, and osteoarthritic symptoms. It is also useful for assessing the integrity of neural tissues, which may produce orofacial pain when compressed.\nMRI provides evaluation of pathology such as necrosis and oedema all without any exposure to ionizing radiation. However, there is a high cost associated with this method of imaging, due to the need for sophisticated facilities. Caution should be taken in patient selection, as MRI is contraindicated in those with claustrophobic tendencies, pacemakers and metallic heart valves, ferromagnetic foreign bodies and pregnant women.\nUltrasound.\nWhere internal TMJ disorders are concerned, ultrasound (US) imaging can be a useful alternative in assessing the position of the disc While having significant diagnostic sensitivity, US has inadequate specificity when identifying osteoarthrosis. Moreover, it is not accurate enough for the diagnosis of cortical and articular disc morphology based on the findings done related to morphological alterations. However, with US, identification of effusion in individuals with inflammatory conditions associated with pain is possible and confirmed by MRI\nUS can be a useful alternative in initial investigation of internal TMJ dysfunctions especially in MRI contraindicated individuals despite its limitations. in addition to being less costly, US provides a quick and comfortable real-time imaging without exposing the individual to ionizing radiation\nUS is commonly assessed in the differential diagnosis of alterations of glandular and neighbouring structures, such as the TMJ and the masseter muscle. Symptoms of sialendenitis and sialothiasis cases can be confused with Eagle syndrome, TMD, myofascial and nerve pain, and other pain of the orofacial region.\nUS assessment is also indicated where there is need to identify the correct position of the joint spaces for infiltrative procedures, arthrocentesis, and viscosupplementation. This is due to the fact that US provides a dynamic and real-time location of the component of the joints, while providing adequate lubrication and washing, which can be confirmed by the joint space increase post-treatment.\nManagement.\nTMD can be difficult to manage, and since the disorder transcends the boundaries between several health-care disciplines \u2013 in particular, dentistry and neurology, the treatment may often involve multiple approaches and be multidisciplinary. Most who are involved in treating and researching TMD now agree that any treatment carried out should not permanently alter the jaw or teeth, and should be reversible. To avoid permanent change, over-the-counter or prescription pain medications may be prescribed.\nPsychosocial and behavioral interventions.\nGiven the important role that psychosocial factors appear to play in TMD, psychosocial interventions could be viewed to be central to management of the condition. There is a suggestion that treatment of factors that modulate pain sensitivity such as mood disorders, anxiety and fatigue, may be important in the treatment of TMD, which often tends to attempt to address the pain directly.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has been used in TMD and has been shown to be efficacious by meta analyses.\nHypnosis is suggested by some to be appropriate for TMD. Studies have suggested that it may even be more beneficial than occlusal splint therapy, and has comparable effects to relaxation techniques.\nRelaxation techniques include progressive muscle relaxation, yoga, and meditation. It has been suggested that TMD involves increased sensitivity to external stimuli leading to an increased sympathetic (\"fight or flight\") response with cardiovascular and respiratory alterations. Relaxation techniques cause reduced sympathetic activity, including muscle relaxation and reducing sensitivity to external stimuli, and provoke a general sense of well-being and reduced anxiety.\nDevices.\nOcclusal splints (also termed bite plates or intra-oral appliances) are often used by dentists to treat TMD. They are usually made of acrylic and can be hard or soft. They can be designed to fit onto the upper teeth or the lower teeth. They may cover all the teeth in one arch (full coverage splint) or only some (partial coverage splint). Splints are also termed according to their intended mechanism, such as the anterior positioning splint or the stabilization splint. Although occlusal splints are generally considered a reversible treatment, sometimes partial coverage splints lead to pathologic tooth migration (changes in the position of teeth). Normally splints are only worn during sleep, and therefore probably do nothing for people who engage in parafunctional activities during wakefulness rather than during sleep. There is slightly more evidence for the use of occlusal splints in sleep bruxism than in TMD. A splint can also have a diagnostic role if it demonstrates excessive occlusal wear after a period of wearing it each night. This may confirm the presence of sleep bruxism if it was in doubt. Soft splints are occasionally reported to worsen discomfort related to TMD. Specific types of occlusal splint are discussed below.\nA stabilization splint is a hard acrylic splint that forces the teeth to meet in an \"ideal\" relationship for the muscles of mastication and the TMJs. It is claimed that this technique reduces abnormal muscular activity and promotes \"neuromuscular balance\". A stabilization splint is only intended to be used for about 2\u20133 months. It is more complicated to construct than other types of splint since a face bow record is required and significantly more skill on the part of the dental technician. This kind of splint should be properly fitted to avoid exacerbating the problem and used for brief periods of time. The use of the splint should be discontinued if it is painful or increases existing pain. A systematic review of all the scientific studies investigating the efficacy of stabilization splints concluded the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPartial coverage splints are recommended by some experts, but they have the potential to cause unwanted tooth movements, which can occasionally be severe. The mechanism of this tooth movement is that the splint effectively holds some teeth out of contact and puts all the force of the bite onto the teeth which the splint covers. This can cause the covered teeth to be intruded, and those that are not covered to over-erupted. I.e. a partial coverage splint can act as a Dahl appliance. Examples of partial coverage splints include the NTI-TSS (\"nociceptive trigeminal inhibitor tension suppression system\"), which covers the upper front teeth only. Due to the risks involved with long term use, some discourage the use of any type of partial coverage splint.\nAn anterior positioning splint is a splint that designed to promote an anteriorly displaced disc. It is rarely used. A 2010 review of all the scientific studies carried out to investigate the use of occlusal splints in TMD concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hard stabilization appliances, when adjusted properly, have good evidence of modest efficacy in the treatment of TMD pain compared to non-occluding appliances and no treatment. Other types of appliances, including soft stabilization appliances, anterior positioning appliances, and anterior bite appliances, have some RCT evidence of efficacy in reducing TMD pain. However, the potential for adverse events with these appliances is higher and suggests the need for close monitoring in their use.\" \nEar canal inserts are also available, but no published peer-reviewed clinical trials have shown them to be useful.\nMedication.\nMedication is the main method of managing pain in TMD, mostly because there is little if any evidence of the effectiveness of surgical or dental interventions. Many drugs have been used to treat TMD pain, such as analgesics (pain killers), benzodiazepines (e.g. clonazepam, prazepam, diazepam), anticonvulsants (e.g. gabapentin), muscle relaxants (e.g. cyclobenzaprine), and others. Analgesics that have been studied in TMD include non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g. piroxicam, diclofenac, naproxen, celecoxib).\nTopical methyl salicylate and topical capsaicin have also been used.\nOther drugs that have been described for use in TMD include glucosamine hydrochloride/chondroitin sulphate and propranolol. Low-doses of anti-muscarinic tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline, or nortriptyline have also been described.\nDespite many randomized control trials being conducted on these commonly used medications for TMD a systematic review carried out in 2010 concluded that there was insufficient evidence to support or not to support the use of these drugs in TMD.\nIn a subset of people with TMD who are not helped by either noninvasive and invasive treatments, long term use of opiate analgesics has been suggested, although these drugs carry a risk of drug dependence and other side effects. Examples include morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone, tramadol, hydrocodone, and methadone.\nInjections of local anesthetic, sometimes combined with steroids, into the muscles (e.g. the temoralis muscle or its tendon) are also sometimes used. Local anesthetics may provide temporary pain relief, and steroids inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokines. Steroids and other medications are sometimes injected directly into the joint (See Intra-articular injections). Platelet-rich fibrin injection, alone or associated with arthrocentesis, can be considered a very suitable.\nBotulinum toxin solution (\"Botox\") is sometimes used to treat TMD. Injection of botox into the lateral pterygoid muscle has been investigated in multiple randomized control trials, and there is evidence that it is of benefit in TMD. It is theorized that spasm of lateral pterygoid causes anterior disc displacement. Botulinum toxin causes temporary muscular paralysis by inhibiting acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction. The effects usually last for a period of months before they wear off. Complications include the creation of a \"fixed\" expression due to diffusion of the solution and subsequent involvement of the muscles of facial expression, which lasts until the effects of the botox wear off.\nPhysiotherapy.\nPhysiotherapy (physical therapy) is sometimes used as an adjuvant to other methods of treatment in TMD. There are many different approaches described, but exercises aiming to increase the range of mandibular movements are commonly involved. Jaw exercises aim to directly oppose the negative effects of disuse that may occur in TMD, due to pain discouraging people from moving their jaw. After initial instruction, people are able to perform a physical therapy regimen at home. The most simple method is by regular stretching within pain tolerance, using the thumb and a finger in a \"scissor\" maneuver. Gentle force is applied until pain of resistance is felt, and then the position is held for several seconds. Commercial devices have been developed to carry out this stretching exercise (e.g. the \"Therabite\" appliance). Over time, the amount of mouth opening possible without pain can be gradually increased. A baseline record of the distance at the start of physical therapy (e.g. the number of fingers that can be placed vertically between the upper and lower incisors), can chart any improvement over time.\nIt has been suggested that massage therapy for TMD improves both the subjective and objective health status. \"Friction massage\" uses surface pressure to cause temporary ischemia and subsequent hyperemia in the muscles, and this is hypothesized to inactivate trigger points and disrupt small fibrous adhesions within the muscle that have formed following surgery or muscular shortening due to restricted movement.\nOccasionally physiotherapy for TMD may include the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), which may override pain by stimulation of superficial nerve fibers and lead to pain reduction which extends after the time where the TENS is being actually being applied, possibly due to release of endorphins. Others recommend the use of ultrasound, theorized to produce tissue heating, alter blood flow and metabolic activity at a level that is deeper than possible with surface heat applications. There is tentative evidence that low level laser therapy may help with pain.\nThe goals of a PT in reference to treatment of TMD should be to decrease pain, enable muscle relaxation, reduce muscular hyperactivity, and reestablish muscle function and joint mobility. PT treatment is non-invasive and includes self-care management in an environment to create patient responsibility for their own health.\nTherapeutic exercise and Manual Therapy (MT) are used to improve strength, coordination and mobility and to reduce pain. Treatment may focus on poor posture, cervical muscle spasms and treatment for referred cervical origin (pain referred from upper levels of the cervical spine) or orofacial pain. MT has been used to restore normal range of motion, promoting circulation, stimulate proprioception, break fibrous adhesions, stimulate synovial fluid production and reduce pain. Exercises and MT are safe and simple interventions that could potentially be beneficial for patients with TMD. No adverse events regarding exercise therapy and manual therapy have been reported.\nThere have been positive results when using postural exercises and jaw exercises to treat both myogenous (muscular) and arthrogenous (articular) TMJ dysfunction. MT alone or in combination with exercises shows promising effects.\nIt is necessary that trials be performed isolating the type of exercise and manual techniques to allow a better understanding of the effectiveness of this treatment. Additionally, details of exercise, dosage, and frequency as well as details on manual techniques should be reported to create reproducible results. High quality trials with larger sample sizes are needed.\nThere is some evidence that some people who use nighttime biofeedback to reduce nighttime clenching experience a reduction in TMD.\nOcclusal adjustment.\nThis is the adjustment or reorganizing of the existing occlusion, carried out in the belief that this will redistribute forces evenly across the dental arches or achieve a more favorable position of the condyles in the fossae, which is purported to lessen tooth wear, bruxism and TMD, but this is controversial. These techniques are sometimes termed \"occlusal rehabilitation\" or \"occlusal equilibration\". At its simplest, an occlusal adjustment involves selective grinding (with a dental drill) of the enamel of the occlusal surfaces of teeth, with the aim of allowing the upper teeth to fit with the lower teeth in a more harmonious way. However, there is much disagreement between proponents of these techniques on most of the aspects involved, including the indications and the exact goals. Occlusal adjustment can also be very complex, involving orthodontics, restorative dentistry or even orthognathic surgery. Some have criticized these occlusal reorganizations as having no evidence base, and irreversibly damaging the dentition on top of the damage already caused by bruxism. A \"middle ground\" view of these techniques is that occlusal adjustment in most cases of TMD is neither desirable nor helpful as a first-line treatment, and furthermore, with few exceptions, any adjustments should be reversible. However, most dentists consider this unnecessary overtreatment, with no evidence of benefit. Specifically, orthodontics and orthognathic surgery are not considered by most to be appropriate treatments for TMD. A systematic review investigating all the scientific studies carried out on occlusal adjustments in TMD concluded the following: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese conclusions were based largely on the fact that, despite many different scientific studies investigating this measure as a therapy, overall no statistically significant differences can be demonstrated between treatment with occlusal adjustment and treatment with placebo. The reviewers also stated that there are ethical implications if occlusal adjustment was found to be ineffective in preventing TMD.\nOrthodontic treatment, as described earlier, is sometimes listed as a possible predisposing factor in the development of TMD. On the other hand, orthodontic treatment is also often carried out in the belief that it may treat or prevent TMD. Another systematic review investigating the relationship between orthodontics and TMD concluded the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA common scenario where a newly placed dental restoration (e.g. a crown or a filling) is incorrectly contoured, and creates a premature contact in the bite. This may localize all the force of the bite onto one tooth, and cause inflammation of the periodontal ligament and reversible increase in tooth mobility. The tooth may become tender to bite on. Here, the \"occlusal adjustment\" has already taken place inadvertently, and the adjustment aims to return to the pre-existing occlusion. This should be distinguished from attempts to deliberately reorganize the native occlusion.\nSurgery.\nAttempts in the last decade to develop surgical treatments based on MRI and CAT scans now receive less attention. These techniques are reserved for the most difficult cases where other therapeutic modalities have failed. The American Society of Maxillofacial Surgeons recommends a conservative/non-surgical approach first. Only 20% of patients need to proceed to surgery.\nExamples of surgical procedures that are used in TMD, some more commonly than others, include arthrocentesis, arthroscopy, meniscectomy, disc repositioning, condylotomy or joint replacement. Invasive surgical procedures in TMD may cause symptoms to worsen. Meniscectomy, also termed discectomy refers to surgical removal of the articular disc. This is rarely carried out in TMD, it may have some benefits for pain, but dysfunction may persist and overall it leads to degeneration or remodeling of the TMJ.\nAlternative medicine.\nAcupuncture.\nAcupuncture is sometimes used for TMD. There is limited evidence that acupuncture is an effective symptomatic treatment for TMD. A short-term reduction in muscular pain of muscular origin can usually be observed after acupuncture in TMD, and this is more than is seen with placebo. There are no reported adverse events of acupuncture when used for TMD, and some suggest that acupuncture is best employed as an adjuvant to other treatments in TMD. However, some suggest that acupuncture may be no more effective than sham acupuncture, that many of the studies investigating acupuncture and TMD have significant risk of bias, and that the long term efficacy of acupuncture for TMD is unknown.\nChiropractic.\nChiropractic adjustments (also termed manipulations or mobilizations) are sometimes used in the belief that this will treat TMD. There is no credible evidence of efficacy in TMD. However, there is some evidence of possible adverse effects from cervical (neck) vertebral manipulation, which sometimes may be serious.\nPrognosis.\nIt has been suggested that the natural history of TMD is benign and self-limiting, with symptoms slowly improving and resolving over time. The prognosis is therefore good. However, the persistent pain symptoms, psychological discomfort, physical disability and functional limitations may detriment quality of life. It has been suggested that TMD does not cause permanent damage and does not progress to arthritis in later life, however, degenerative disorders of the TMJ such as osteoarthritis are included within the spectrum of TMDs in some classifications.\nEpidemiology.\nTMD mostly affects people in the 20 \u2013 40 age group, and the average age is 33.9 years. People with TMD tend to be younger adults, who are otherwise healthy. Within the catchall umbrella of TMD, there are peaks for disc displacements at age 30, and for inflammatory-degenerative joint disorders at age 50.\nAbout 75% of the general population may have at least one abnormal sign associated with the TMJ (e.g. clicking), and about 33% have at least one symptom of TMD. However, only in 3.6\u20137% will this be of sufficient severity to trigger the individual to seek medical advice.\nFor unknown reasons, females are more likely to be affected than males, in a ratio of about 2:1, although others report this ratio to be as high as 9:1. Females are more likely to request treatment for TMD, and their symptoms are less likely to resolve. Females with TMD are more likely to be nulliparous than females without TMD. It has also been reported that female Caucasians are more likely to be affected by TMD, and at an earlier age, than female African Americans.\nAccording to the most recent analyses of epidemiologic data using the RDC/TMD diagnostic criteria, of all TMD cases, group I (muscle disorders) accounts for 45.3%, group II (disc displacements) 41.1%, and group III (joint disorders) 30.1% (individuals may have diagnoses from more than one group). Using the RDC/TMD criteria, TMD has a prevalence in the general population of 9.7% for group I, 11.4% for group IIa, and 2.6% for group IIIa.\nThe highest prevalence of TMD (regardless of type) is in South America at 47%, followed by Asia at 33%, Europe at 29%, and North America at 26%.\nHistory.\nTemporomandibular disorders were described as early as ancient Egypt. An older name for the condition is \"Costen's syndrome\", eponymously referring to James B. Costen. Costen was an otolaryngologist, and although he was not the first physician to describe TMD, he wrote extensively on the topic, starting in 1934, and was the first to approach the disorder in an integrated and systematic way. Costen hypothesized that malocclusion caused TMD, and placed emphasis on ear symptoms, such as tinnitus, otalgia, impaired hearing, and even dizziness. Specifically, Costen believed that the cause of TMD was mandibular over-closure, recommending a treatment revolving around building up the bite. The eponym \"Costen syndrome\" became commonly used shortly after his initial work, but in modern times it has been dropped, partially because occlusal factors are now thought to play little, if any, role in the development of TMD, and also because ear problems are now thought to be less associated with TMD. Other historically important terms that were used for TMD include \"TMJ disease\" or \"TMJ syndrome\", which are now rarely used.\nOn March 31, 2020, The American Dental Association officially recognized orofacial pain as a dental speciality.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30709", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30709", "title": "The Screwtape Letters", "text": "1942 Christian apologetic novel by C. S. Lewis\nThe Screwtape Letters is a Christian apologetic novel by C. S. Lewis and dedicated to J. R. R. Tolkien. It is written in a satirical, epistolary style and, while it is fictional in format, the plot and characters are used to address Christian theological issues, primarily those to do with temptation and resistance to it.\nFirst published in February 1942, the story takes the form of a series of letters from a senior devil, Screwtape, to his nephew, Wormwood, a junior tempter. The uncle's mentorship pertains to the nephew's responsibility in securing the damnation of a British man known only as \"the Patient\".\nBy 1999, the novel had 26 English and 15 German editions, with around half a million copies sold.\nSummary.\nIn \"The Screwtape Letters\", Lewis imagines a series of lessons on the importance of taking a deliberate role in Christian faith by portraying a typical human life, with all its temptations and failings, seen from devils' viewpoints. Screwtape holds an administrative post in the bureaucracy (\"Lowerarchy\") of Hell. Until the book's final pages, Screwtape acts as a mentor to his nephew Wormwood, an inexperienced and incompetent tempter.\nIn the 31 letters which compose the book, Screwtape gives Wormwood detailed advice on various methods of undermining God's words and of promoting abandonment of God in \"the Patient\" (whom Wormwood is tempting), interspersed with observations on human nature and the Bible. In Screwtape's advice, selfish gain and power are seen as the only good, and neither devil can comprehend God's love for man or acknowledge human virtue.\nVersions of the letters were originally published weekly in the Anglican periodical \"The Guardian\" during wartime, from May to November 1941. The book adds an introduction explaining how the author chose to write his story.\nLewis wrote a sequel, \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\", in 1959. The satirical essay criticizes trends in British society, education, and public attitudes. The essay was included, with a new preface by Lewis, in editions of \"The Screwtape Letters\" published by Bles in 1961 and by Macmillan in 1962.\n\"The Screwtape Letters\" became one of Lewis' most popular works, although he said it was \"not fun\" to write and \"resolved never to write another 'Letter'\".\nBoth \"The Screwtape Letters\" and \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\" were released on audio cassette and CD, with narrations by John Cleese, Joss Ackland, and Ralph Cosham. Cleese's recording was a Grammy Awards Finalist for Best Spoken Word.\nPlot overview.\n\"The Screwtape Letters\" consists of 31 letters written by a senior devil named Screwtape to his nephew, Wormwood (named after a star in the Book of Revelation), a younger and less experienced devil, charged with guiding a man called \"the Patient\" toward \"Our Father Below\" (Satan), and away from \"the Enemy\" (God).\nAfter the first letter, the Patient converts to Christianity, and Wormwood is chastised for allowing this. A striking contrast is formed between Wormwood and Screwtape during the rest of the book, wherein Wormwood is depicted through Screwtape's letters as anxious to tempt his patient into extravagantly wicked and deplorable sins, often recklessly, while Screwtape takes a more subtle stance, as in Letter XII, wherein he remarks: \"...\u00a0the safest road to hell is the gradual one \u2013 the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without signposts.\"\nIn Letter VIII, Screwtape explains to his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 the different purposes that God and the devils have for the human race: \"We want cattle who can finally become food; He wants servants who can finally become sons.\" With this end in mind, Screwtape urges Wormwood in Letter VI to promote passivity and irresponsibility in the Patient: \"(God) wants men to be concerned with what they do; our business is to keep them thinking about what will happen to them.\"\nWith his own views on theology, Lewis goes on to describe and discuss sex, love, pride, gluttony, and war in successive letters. Lewis, an Oxford and Cambridge scholar himself, suggests in his work that even intellectuals are not impervious to the influence of such devils, especially during complacent acceptance of the \"Historical Point of View\" (Letter XXVII).\nIn Letter XXII, after several attempts to find a licentious woman for the Patient \"to promote a useful marriage\", and after Screwtape's narrowly avoiding a painful punishment for having divulged to Wormwood God's genuine love for humanity (about which Wormwood had promptly informed the Infernal authorities), Screwtape notes that the Patient has fallen in love with a Christian girl, and through her and her family, had adopted a very Christian way of life. Toward the end of this letter, in his anger, Screwtape becomes a large centipede, mimicking a similar transformation in Book X of \"Paradise Lost\", wherein the devils are changed into snakes. Later in the correspondence, it is revealed that the young man may be placed in harm's way by his possible civil defence duties (it is stated in an earlier letter that he is eligible for military service, but it is never actually confirmed that he was indeed called). While Wormwood is delighted with this and by the Second World War in general, Screwtape admonishes Wormwood to keep the Patient safe in hopes that they can compromise his faith over a long lifetime.\nIn the last letter, the Patient has been killed during the Blitz and has gone to Heaven, and for his ultimate failure, Wormwood is doomed to suffer the consumption of his spiritual essence by the other devils, especially by Screwtape himself. He responds to Wormwood's final letter by saying that he may expect as little assistance as Screwtape would expect from Wormwood were their situations reversed (\"My love for you and your love for me are as alike as two peas\u00a0... The difference is that I am the stronger\"), mimicking the situation where Wormwood himself reported his uncle to the Infernal Police for Infernal Heresy (making a religiously positive remark that would offend Satan).\nScrewtape starts every letter with \"My dear Wormwood\", except the last letter, which sarcastically says, \"My dear, my very dear Wormwood; my poppet, my pigsnie.\"\nLiterary sequels.\n\"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\".\nThe short sequel \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\" (1959), first published as an article in \"The Saturday Evening Post\", is an addendum to \"The Screwtape Letters\"; the two works are often published together as one book. The sequel takes the form of an after-dinner speech given by Screwtape at the Tempters' Training College for young devils. In stage adaptations it is sometimes added as a prelude, making the work a prequel. \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\" is Lewis' criticism of leveling and featherbedding trends in public education; more specifically, as he reveals in the foreword to the American edition, public education in America (though in the text, it is English education that is held up as the purportedly awful example).\nThe Cold War opposition between the West and the Communist World is explicitly discussed as a backdrop to the educational issues. Screwtape and other devils are portrayed as consciously using the subversion of education and intellectual thought in the West to bring about its overthrow by the communist enemy from without and within. In this sense \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\" is more strongly political than \"The Screwtape Letters\", wherein no strong stand is made on political issues of the day, such as World War II.\nOther literary sequels.\nThough C. S. Lewis had resolved not to write another letter, and only revisited the character of Screwtape once, in \"Screwtape Proposes a Toast\", the format, referred to by Lewis himself as a kind of \"diabolical ventriloquism\", has inspired other authors to prepare sequels or similar works, such as:\nAdaptations.\nStage adaptations.\nThe stage play \"Dear Wormwood\" (later renamed \"Screwtape\"), written by James Forsyth, was published in 1961. The setting is changed to wartime London, where we actually see Wormwood going about the business of tempting his \"patient\" (in the play, given the name \"Michael Green\"). The ending is changed as well, with Wormwood trying to repent and beg for forgiveness, when it appears that his mission has failed. \"Dear Wormwood\" premiered in Luther High School North, Chicago in April, 1961.\nPhiladelphia playwright and actor Anthony Lawton's original adaptation of \"The Screwtape Letters\" has been staged several times since 2000 by Lantern Theater Company, most recently in May/June 2014. In Lawton's adaptation, each of Screwtape's letters is punctuated by varied dances including tap, Latin ballroom, jazz, martial arts, and rock \u2013 and whips and fire-eating. Screwtape performs these dances with his secretary, Toadpipe.\nThe Fellowship for the Performing Arts obtained from the Lewis estate the rights to adapt \"The Screwtape Letters\" for the stage. The initial production opened off-off-Broadway at Theatre 315 in New York City in January 2006. The initial three-week run was extended to eleven and finally closed because the theater was contractually obligated to another production. It was co-written by Max McLean (who also starred) and Jeffrey Fiske (who also directed). In this production, there are two characters - Screwtape and Toadpipe; the latter is played by a female. A second, expanded production opened off-Broadway at the Theatre at St. Clements on 18 October 2007, originally scheduled to run through 6 January 2008. The production re-opened at the Mercury Theater in Chicago in September 2008, and continued on a national tour including San Francisco, Phoenix, Louisville, Chattanooga, Fort Lauderdale, Houston and Austin, through January 2010 as well as playing at The Shakespeare Theatre in Washington, D.C. for ten weeks. \"The Screwtape Letters\" played for 309 performances at New York City's Westside Theatre in 2010. The 2011 tour visited performing arts venues in cities throughout the United States including Los Angeles, Houston, Dallas, Atlanta, Seattle, Minneapolis, and Boston. The 2012\u20132013 tour began in Los Angeles in January 2012, with return engagements in San Francisco, San Diego, Seattle, Chicago and Atlanta as well as stops in several other cities. \"The Screwtape Letters\" has been described as \"Humorous and lively\u00a0... the Devil has rarely been given his due more perceptively!\" by \"The New York Times\", \"A profound experience\" by \"Christianity Today\" and \"Wickedly witty\u00a0... One hell of a good show!\" by \"The Wall Street Journal\". The production has also toured worldwide.\nIn some productions, the role of Screwtape has been performed by a woman.\nThe Barley Sheaf Players of Lionville, Pennsylvania performed James Forsyth's play \"Screwtape\" in September 2010. It was directed by Scott Ryan and the play ran the last three weekends in September. The production was reviewed by Paul Recupero for \"Stage Magazine\".\nComic book adaptation.\nMarvel Comics and religious book publisher Thomas Nelson produced a comic book adaptation of \"The Screwtape Letters\" in 1994.\nAudio drama.\nFocus on the Family Radio Theatre was granted the rights to dramatize \"The Screwtape Letters\" as a feature-length audio drama. Production began in 2008, and the product was released in the fall of 2009. Andy Serkis, known for playing Gollum in \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy, provided the voice for Screwtape, with Bertie Carvel as Wormwood, Philip Bird as The Patient (identified in this production as \"John Hamilton\"), Laura Michelle Kelly as The Girl (identified in this production as \"Dorothy\"), Roger Hammond as Toadpipe, Christina Greatrex as Slumtrimpet, Janet Henfrey as Glubose, Eileen Page as John Hamilton's mother, Susie Brann as Viv Brett, Robert Benfield as Noel Brett, and Geoffrey Palmer as C.S. Lewis. There is a 7-and-a-half minute video preview of the Radio Theatre production with interviews and making-of footage. This production was a 2010 Audie Awards finalist.\nAnnotated Screwtape Letters.\nAn annotated edition of \"The Screwtape Letters\" was released in 2013 by HarperOne. Paul McCusker, who adapted the book for Focus on the Family's audio drama, wrote the footnotes. McCusker does not provide any theological commentary or interpretation, but instead clarifies vocabulary, literary passages and customs which might not be immediately clear to the modern reader. He also cross-references passages to Lewis' other works dealing with particular subjects.\nIn popular culture.\nComics.\nIn \"Calvin and Hobbes\", Bill Watterson named Miss Wormwood (Calvin's elementary school teacher) after Lewis' apprentice devil.\nDocumentary.\n\"Affectionately Yours, Screwtape: The Devil and C.S. Lewis\" (January 1, 2007), directed by Tom Dallis and written by Amy Dallis, aired on the History Channel.\nLiterature.\nIn 2010, the \"Marine Corps Gazette\" began publishing a series of articles entitled \"The Attritionist Letters\" styled in the manner of \"The Screwtape Letters\". In the letters, General Screwtape chastises Captain Wormwood for his inexperience and naivete while denouncing the concepts of maneuver warfare in favor of attrition warfare.\nWriter David Foster Wallace praised the book in interviews and placed it first on his list of top ten favorite books.\nMusic.\nCalled to Arms' concept album \"Peril and the Patient\" (August 10, 2010) is based entirely on \"The Screwtape Letters\".\nIn U2's music video for the song \"Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me\" (1995), an animated Bono is seen walking down the street holding the book \"The Screwtape Letters\". While on stage during the Zoo TV Tour Bono would dress as Mr. MacPhisto, his alter ego. Bono would wear a gold suit and devil horns and usually make prank calls to politicians.\nThe lyrics for The Receiving End of Sirens' song \"Oubliette (Disappear)\", from the album \"The Earth Sings Mi Fa Mi\" (2007), were inspired by a passage from \"The Screwtape Letters\".\nIn the Christian metal band Living Sacrifice's album \"Ghost Thief\", there is a track titled \"Screwtape\". Frontman Bruce Fitzhugh explained that the song is \"about temptation and the proverbial 'devil on your shoulder.' It's about the thought process we go through to justify a thought or action that is not good for the soul\". Fitzhugh also explains how he thought it was interesting Lewis wrote from the perspective of Screwtape and that he wrote from the same perspective in the song.\nThe group The Oh Hellos released the album \"Dear Wormwood\", which they have described as a form of speculative fiction from the point of view of \"the patient\".\nThe three-part song \"Salt (in the Wounds) of the Earth\" on the 2021 album \"Laysongs\" by mandolinist Chris Thile was inspired by \"The Screwtape Letters\".\nDavid Bazan references the book in the lyrics of the title track of the 2024 Pedro the Lion album \"Santa Cruz\".\nPolitical discourse.\nPresident of the United States Ronald Reagan quoted from \"The Screwtape Letters\" in his 1983 speech to the National Association of Evangelicals.\nAntonin Scalia, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States appointed by Reagan, had professed his admiration for the book. In a 2013 interview with \"New York\" magazine, Scalia remarked: \"\"The Screwtape Letters\" is a great book. It really is, just as a study of human nature.\" The book was mentioned in the highly publicized interview during Scalia's discourse regarding the nature of his Catholic faith.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30710", "revid": "1509627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30710", "title": "Tree of life", "text": "Motif in art and culture\nThe tree of life is a fundamental archetype in many of the world's mythological, religious, and philosophical traditions. It is closely related to the concept of the sacred tree. The tree of the knowledge of good and evil and the tree of life which appear in Genesis' Garden of Eden as part of the Jewish cosmology of creation, and the tree of knowledge connecting to heaven and the underworld such as Yggdrasil, are forms of the world tree or cosmic tree, and are portrayed in various religions and philosophies as the same tree.\nReligion and mythology.\nVarious trees of life are recounted in folklore, culture and fiction, often relating to immortality or fertility. They had their origin in religious symbolism. According to professor Elvyra Usa\u010diovait\u0117, a \"typical\" imagery preserved in ancient iconography is that of two symmetrical figures facing each other, with a tree standing in the middle. The two characters may variously represent rulers, gods, and even a deity and a human follower.\nAncient Mesopotamia.\nThe Assyrian tree of life was represented by a series of nodes and crisscrossing lines. It was apparently an important religious symbol, often attended to in Assyrian palace reliefs by human or eagle-headed winged genies, or the King, and blessed or fertilized with bucket and cone. Assyriologists have not reached consensus as to the meaning of this symbol. The name \"Tree of Life\" has been attributed to it by modern scholarship; it is not used in the Assyrian sources. In fact, no textual evidence pertaining to the symbol is known to exist.\nThe \"Epic of Gilgamesh\" is a similar quest for immortality. In Babylonian religion, Etana, the King of Kish, searched for a 'plant of birth' to provide him with a son. This has a solid provenance of antiquity, being found in cylinder seals from the Akkadian Empire (2390\u20132249 BCE).\nThe tree of life appears in Asherah iconography, particularly on the Lachish ewer and Pithos A from Kuntillet Ajrud, where it is flanked by ibexes. The tree's design, with buds, flowers, and possibly almond drupes, resembles the menorah, which is thought to represent a stylized almond tree in Exodus 25:31-36 This suggests a continuation of Asherah's cultic representation in the temple. Scholars have explored these connections, noting parallels between sacred trees, Asherah, and the menorah.\nUrartu.\nIn Urartu in the Armenian highlands, the tree of life was a religious symbol and was drawn on walls of fortresses and carved on the armor of warriors. The branches of the tree were equally divided on the right and left sides of the stem, with each branch having one leaf, and one leaf on the apex of the tree. Servants stood on each side of the tree with one of their hands up as if they are taking care of the tree.\nAncient Iran.\nIn the Avestan literature and Iranian mythology, there are several sacred vegetal icons related to life, eternality and cure, such as Amesha Spenta; Ameretat, the guardian of plants and goddess of trees and immortality; Gaokerena or white haoma, a tree that its vivacity would certify continuance of life in the universe; the bas tokhmak, a tree with remedial attribute, retentive of all herbal seeds, and destroyer of sorrow; Mashya and Mashyana, the parents of the human race; barsom, copped offshoots of pomegranate, gaz (\"Tamarix gallica\"), or haoma that Zoroastrians use in their rituals; and haoma, a plant, unknown today, that was the source of sacred potable.\nThe Gaokerena is a large, sacred haoma planted by Ahura Mazda. Ahriman created a frog to invade and destroy the tree, aiming to prevent all trees from growing on the earth. As a reaction, Ahura Mazda created two kar-fish staring at the frog to guard the tree. The two fish always stare at the frog and stay ready to react to it. Ahriman is responsible for all evil, including death; Ahura Mazda is responsible for all good (including life).\nHaoma is another sacred plant because of the drink made from it. Preparing the drink by pounding and drinking it is a central feature of Zoroastrian ritual. Haoma is also personified as a divinity. It bestows essential qualities\u2014health, fertility, husbands for maidens, and even immortality. The source of the earthly haoma plant is a shining white tree that grows on a paradisiacal mountain. Sprigs of this white haoma were brought to earth by divine birds. The tree is considerably diverse.\nHaoma is the Avestan form of the Sanskrit soma. The identity of the two in ritual significance is considered by scholars to point to a salient feature of an Indo-Iranian religion antedating Zoroastrianism.\nAnother related issue in Persian mythology is Mashya and Mashyana, two trees that were the ancestors of all living beings. This myth is a prototype for the creation myth, in which gods create living beings.\nHinduism.\nA genre of the sacred books of Hinduism, the Puranas, mention a divine tree called the Kalpavriksha. This divine tree is guarded by gandharvas in the garden of the mythological city of Amaravati under the control of Indra, the king of the devas. In one story, for a very long time, the devas and the asuras decided to churn the milky ocean to obtain amrita, the nectar of immortality, and share it equally. During the churning, along with many other mythical items, emerged the Kalpavriksha. It is described to be gold in colour and bear a mesmerising aura. It is said to be pleased with chanting and offers: when it is pleased, it grants every wish. Hindu tradition holds that there are five separate kalpavrikshas and each of them grant different types of wishes. These trees also appear in the beliefs of Jainism.\nChinese mythology.\nIn Chinese mythology, a carving of a tree of life depicts a phoenix and a dragon; the dragon often represents immortality. A Taoist story tells of a tree that produces a peach of immortality every three thousand years, and anyone who eats the fruit receives immortality.\nAn archaeological discovery in the 1990s was of a sacrificial pit at Sanxingdui in Sichuan, China. Dating from about 1200 BCE, it contained three bronze trees, one of them 4 meters high. At the base was a dragon, and fruit hanging from the lower branches. At the top is a bird-like (Phoenix) creature with claws. Also found in Sichuan, from the late Han dynasty (c. 25\u2013220 CE), is another tree of life. The ceramic base is guarded by a horned beast with wings. The leaves of the tree represent coins and people. At the apex is a bird with coins and the Sun.\nChristianity.\nThe tree of life first appears in Genesis 2:9 and 3:22\u201324 as the source of eternal life in the Garden of Eden, from which access is revoked when man is driven from the garden. It then reappears in the last book of the Bible, the Book of Revelation, and most predominantly in the last chapter of that book (Chapter 22) as a part of the new garden of paradise. Access is then no longer forbidden, for those who \"wash their robes\" (or as the textual variant in the King James Version has it, \"they that do his commandments\") \"have right to the tree of life\" (v. 14). A similar statement appears in Rev 2:7, where the tree of life is promised as a reward to those who overcome. Revelation 22 begins with a reference to the \"pure river of water of life\" which proceeds \"out of the throne of God\". The river seems to feed two trees of life, one \"on either side of the river\" which \"bear twelve manner of fruits\" \"and the leaves of the tree were for healing of the nations\" (v. 1\u20132). Alternatively, this may indicate that the tree of life is a vine that grows on both sides of the river, as John 15:1 would hint at.\nPope Benedict XVI has said that \"the Cross is the true tree of life.\" Saint Bonaventure taught that the medicinal fruit of the tree of life is Christ himself. Saint Albert the Great taught that the Eucharist, the Body and Blood of Christ, is the Fruit of the Tree of Life. Augustine of Hippo said that the tree of life is Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All these things stood for something other than what they were, but all the same they were themselves bodily realities. And when the narrator mentioned them he was not employing figurative language, but giving an explicit account of things which had a forward reference that was figurative. So then the tree of life also was Christ... and indeed God did not wish the man to live in Paradise without the mysteries of spiritual things being presented to him in bodily form. So then in the other trees he was provided with nourishment, in this one with a sacrament... He is rightly called whatever came before him in order to signify him.\nIn Eastern Christianity the tree of life is the love of God.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe tree of life vision is described and discussed in the Book of Mormon. According to the Book of Mormon, the vision was received in a dream by the prophet Lehi, and later in a vision by his son Nephi, who wrote about it in the First Book of Nephi. The vision includes a path leading to a tree, the fruit of the tree symbolizing the love of God, with an iron rod, symbolizing the word of God, along the path whereby followers of Jesus may hold to the rod and avoid wandering off the path into pits or waters symbolizing the ways of sin. The vision also includes a large building wherein the wicked look down at the righteous and mock them.\nThe vision is said to symbolize love of Christ and the way to eternal life and is a well known and cited story with members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A member of the church reflected that the vision is \"one of the richest, most flexible, and far-reaching pieces of symbolic prophecy contained in the standard works [scriptures].\"\nNag Hammadi Gnosticism.\nDifferent views on the Tree of life can be found in the Nag Hammadi library codices, writings belonging to Gnosticism. In On the Origin of the World, the Tree of Life is said to be located to the north of paradise, providing life to the innocent saints who will come out of their material bodies during what is called the consummation of the age. The color of the tree is described as resembling the Sun, its branches are beautiful, its leaves are similar to that of cypress, and its fruit is like clusters of white grapes. However, in the Secret Book of John, the Tree of Life is portrayed negatively. Its roots are described as bitter, its branches are death, its shadow is hatred, a trap is found in its leaves, its seed is desire, and it blossoms in the darkness.\nManichaeism.\nIn the Gnostic religion Manichaeism, the Tree of Life helped Adam obtain the knowledge (gnosis) necessary for salvation and is identified as an image of Jesus.\nEurope.\nIn Greek mythology, Hera is gifted a branch growing golden apples by her grandmother Gaia, which are then planted in Hera's Garden of the Hesperides. The dragon Ladon guards the tree(s) from all who would take the apples. The three golden apples that Aphrodite gave to Hippomenes to distract Atalanta three times during their footrace allowed him to win Atalanta's hand in marriage. Though it is not specified in ancient myth, many assume that Aphrodite gathered those apples from Hera's tree(s). Eris stole one of these apples and carved the words \u03a4\u0397\u0399 \u039a\u0391\u039b\u039b\u0399\u03a3\u03a4\u0397\u0399, \"to the fairest\", upon it to create the Apple of Discord. Heracles retrieved three of the apples as the eleventh of his Twelve Labors. The Garden of the Hesperides is often compared to Eden, the golden apples are compared to the forbidden fruit of the tree in Genesis, and Ladon is often compared to the snake in Eden, all of which is part of why the forbidden fruit of Eden is usually represented as an apple in European art, even though Genesis does not specifically name nor describe \"any\" characteristics of the fruit.\nIn \"Dictionnaire Mytho-Hermetique\" (Paris, 1737), Antoine-Joseph Pernety, a famous alchemist, identified the tree of life with the Elixir of life and the Philosopher's Stone.\nIn \"Eden in the East\" (1998), Stephen Oppenheimer suggests that a tree-worshipping culture arose in Indonesia and was diffused by the so-called Younger Dryas event of c. 10,900 BCE or 12,900 BP, after which the sea level rose. This culture reached China (Sichuan), then India and the Middle East. Finally the Finno-Ugric strand of this diffusion spread through Russia to Finland where the Norse myth of Yggdrasil took root.\nGeorgia.\nThe Borjgali (Georgian: ) is an ancient Georgian tree of life symbol.\nGermanic paganism and Norse mythology.\nIn Germanic paganism, trees played (and, in the form of reconstructive Heathenry and Germanic Neopaganism, continue to play) a prominent role, appearing in various aspects of surviving texts and possibly in the name of gods.\nThe tree of life appears in Norse religion as \"Yggdrasil\", the world tree, a massive tree (sometimes considered a yew or ash tree) with extensive lore surrounding it. Perhaps related to Yggdrasil, accounts have survived of Germanic Tribes honouring sacred trees within their societies. Examples include Thor's Oak, sacred groves, the Sacred tree at Uppsala, and the wooden Irminsul pillar. In Norse Mythology, the apples from I\u00f0unn's ash box provide immortality for the gods.\nIslam.\nThe \"Tree of Immortality\" () is the tree of life motif as it appears in the Quran. It is also alluded to in hadiths and tafsir. Unlike the biblical account, the Quran mentions only one tree in Eden, also called \" the tree of immortality and power that never decays\", which God specifically forbade to Adam and Eve.\nThe tree in Quran is used as an example of a concept, idea, way of life or code of life. A good concept/idea is represented as a good tree and a bad idea/concept is represented as a bad tree Muslims believe that when God created Adam and Eve, he told them that they could enjoy everything in the Garden except this tree (idea, concept, way of life). Satan appeared to them and told them that the only reason God forbade them to eat from that tree was that they would become angels or they start using the idea/concept of Ownership in conjunction with inheritance generations after generations which Iblis convinced Adam to accept\nWhen Adam and Eve ate from this tree their nakedness appeared to them and they began to sew together, for their covering, leaves from the Garden.\nThe hadiths also speak about other trees in heaven. \nThe tree of life in Islamic architecture is a type of biomorphic pattern found in many artistic traditions. It is considered to be any vegetal pattern with a clear origin or growth. The pattern in al-Azhar Mosque, Cairo's mihrab, a unique Fatimid architectural variation, is a series of two or three leave palmettes with a central palmette of five leaves from which the pattern originates. The growth is upwards and outwards and culminates in a lantern like flower towards the top of the niche above which is a small roundel. The curvature of the niche accentuates the undulating movement which despite its complexity is symmetrical along its vertical axis. The representations of varying palm leaves hints to spiritual growth attained through prayer while the upwards and side wards movement of the leaves speaks to the different motions of the worshiper while in salah.\nAhmadiyya.\nAccording to the Indian Ahmadiyya movement founded in 1889, Quranic reference to the tree is symbolic; eating of the forbidden tree signifies that Adam disobeyed God.\nJewish sources.\n (), Hebrew for \"tree of life,\" appears in the Book of Genesis and is part of the story of the creation of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Thus the term is a common term used in Judaism. The expression, found in the Book of Proverbs, is figuratively applied to the Torah itself. is also a common name for yeshivas and synagogues as well as for works of Rabbinic literature. It is also used to describe each of the wooden poles to which the parchment of a Sefer Torah is attached.\nThe tree of life is mentioned in the Book of Genesis; it is distinct from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. After Adam and Eve disobeyed God by eating fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they were driven out of the Garden of Eden. Remaining in the garden, however, was the tree of life. To prevent their access to this tree in the future, Cherubim with a flaming sword were placed at the east of the garden.\nIn the Book of Proverbs, the tree of life is associated with wisdom: \"[Wisdom] is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy \"[is every one]\" that retaineth her.\" In Proverbs 15:4, the tree of life is associated with calmness: \"A soothing tongue is a tree of life; but perverseness therein is a wound to the spirit.\"\nIn the Ashkenazic liturgy, the Eitz Chayim is a piyyut commonly sung as the Sefer Torah is returned to the Torah ark.\nThe Book of Enoch, generally considered non-canonical, states that in the time of the great judgment, God will give all those whose names are in the Book of Life fruit to eat from the tree of life. \nKabbalah.\nJewish mysticism depicts the tree of life in the form of ten interconnected nodes, as the central symbol of the Kabbalah. It comprises the ten powers in the divine realm. The panentheistic and anthropomorphic emphasis of this emanationist theology interpreted the Torah, Jewish observance, and the purpose of Creation as the symbolic esoteric drama of unification in the , restoring harmony to Creation.\nFrom the Renaissance onwards, Kabbalah became incorporated as tradition in Christian Western esotericism as Hermetic Qabalah.\nMandaeism.\nMandaean scrolls often include abstract illustrations of trees of life that represent the living, interconnected nature of the cosmos. One of these trees is given the name of Shatrin.\nMesoamerica.\nThe concept of world trees is a prevalent motif in the Mesoamerican cosmovision and iconography, appearing in the pre-Columbian era. World trees embody the four cardinal directions, which represented also the fourfold nature of a central world tree, a symbolic \"axis mundi\" connecting the planes of the Underworld and the sky with that of the terrestrial world.\nDepictions of world trees, both in their directional and central aspects, are found in the art and mythological traditions of cultures such as the Maya, Aztec, Izapan, Mixtec, Olmec, and others, dating to at least the Mid/Late Formative periods of the Mesoamerican chronology. The tomb of K\u02bcinich Janaab\u02bc Pakal of the Maya city-state of Palenque, who became its ajaw or leader when he was twelve years old, has tree of life inscriptions within the walls of his burial place, showing just how important it was. Among the Maya, the central world tree was conceived as or represented by a \"Ceiba pentandra\" and is known variously as a \"wacah chan\" or \"yax imix che\" in different Mayan languages.\nThe trunk of the tree could also be represented by an upright caiman, whose skin evokes the tree's spiny trunk.\nDirectional world trees are also associated with the four Year Bearers in Mesoamerican calendars and associated with the directional colors and deities. Mesoamerican codices which have this association outlined include the Dresden, Borgia and Fej\u00e9rv\u00e1ry-Mayer codices. It is supposed that Mesoamerican sites and ceremonial centers frequently had actual trees planted at each of the four cardinal directions, representing the quadripartite concept.\nWorld trees are frequently depicted with birds in their branches, and their roots extending into earth or water, sometimes atop a \"water-monster,\" symbolic of the underworld. The central world tree has also been interpreted as a representation of the band of the Milky Way.\nNorthern America.\nIn a myth passed down among the Iroquois, \"The World on the Turtle's Back\", explains the origin of the land in which a tree of life is described. According to the myth, it is found in the heavens, where the first humans lived, until a pregnant woman fell and landed in an endless sea. Saved by a giant turtle from drowning, she formed the world on its back by planting bark taken from the tree.\nThe tree of life motif is present in the traditional Ojibwe cosmology and traditions. It is sometimes described as Grandmother Cedar, or in Anishinaabemowin.\nIn the book Black Elk Speaks, Black Elk, an Oglala Lakota (Sioux) (medicine man and holy man), describes his vision in which after dancing around a dying tree that has never bloomed he is transported to the other world (spirit world) where he meets wise elders, 12 men and 12 women. The elders tell Black Elk that they will bring him to meet \"Our Father, the two-legged chief\" and bring him to the center of a hoop where he sees the tree in full leaf and bloom and the \"chief\" standing against the tree. Coming out of his trance he hopes to see that the earthly tree has bloomed, but it is dead.\nThe Oneidas tell that supernatural beings lived in the Skyworld above the waters which covered the earth. This tree was covered with fruits which gave them their light, and they were instructed that no one should cut into the tree otherwise a great punishment would be given. As the woman had pregnancy cravings, she sent her husband to get bark, but he accidentally dug a hole to the other world. After falling through, she came to rest on the turtle's back, and four animals were sent out to find land, which the muskrat finally did.\nSerer religion.\nIn Serer religion, the tree of life as a religious concept forms the basis of Serer cosmogony. Trees were the first things created on Earth by the supreme being Roog (\"Koox\" among the Cangin). In the competing versions of the Serer creation myth, the \"Somb\" (\"Anonychium africana\") and the \"Saas\" tree (Faidherbia albida) are both viewed as trees of life. However, the prevailing view is that, the \"Somb\" was the first tree on Earth and the progenitor of plant life. The \"Somb\" was also used in the Serer tumuli and burial chambers, many of which have survived for more than a thousand years. Thus, \"Somb\" is not only the tree of life in Serer society but the symbol of immortality.\nTurkic.\nThe tree of life connects the upper world, middle world and underworld. It is also imagined as the \"white creator lord\" (yryn-al-tojon), thus synonymous with the creator deity, giving rise to different worlds.\nThe world tree or tree of life is an important symbol in Turkic mythology. It is a common motif in carpets. It is used in the logo of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) and in 2009 it was introduced as the main design of the common Turkish lira sub-unit 5 kuru\u015f.\nTree of life is known as \"Ulukay\u0131n\" or \"Baiterek\" in Turkic communities. It is a sacred beech tree planted by Kayra Han. Sometimes, it is considered axis mundi.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe concept of the tree of life appears in the writings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, where it can refer to the Manifestation of God, a great teacher who appears to humanity from age to age. An example of this can be found in the \"Hidden Words\" of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Have ye forgotten that true and radiant morn, when in those hallowed and blessed surroundings ye were all gathered in My presence beneath the shade of the tree of life, which is planted in the all-glorious paradise? Awestruck ye listened as I gave utterance to these three most holy words: O friends! Prefer not your will to Mine, never desire that which I have not desired for you, and approach Me not with lifeless hearts, defiled with worldly desires and cravings. Would ye but sanctify your souls, ye would at this present hour recall that place and those surroundings, and the truth of My utterance should be made evident unto all of you.\"\nAlso, in the \"Tablet of Ahmad\" of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h: \"Verily He is the Tree of Life, that bringeth forth the fruits of God, the Exalted, the Powerful, the Great\".\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h refers to his male descendants as branches ( \"\u02beagh\u1e63\u0101n\") and calls women leaves.\nA distinction has been made between the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The latter represents the physical world with its opposites, such as good and evil and light and dark. In a different context from the one above, the tree of life represents the spiritual realm, where this duality does not exist.\nScience perspective.\nIn contemporary biology, the \"tree of life\" is a graphical shorthand for the historical pattern of descent with modification across organisms, not a ladder of progress. Stephen Jay Gould emphasized that trees should be read as branching genealogies rather than hierarchies culminating in humans, and he analyzed how different tree iconographies shape scientific and public thinking about evolution.\nIn art and film.\nAustrian symbolist artist Gustav Klimt portrayed his version of the tree of life in his 1909 painting, \"The Tree of Life, Stoclet Frieze\". It later inspired the external facade of the \"New Residence Hall\" (also called the \"Tree House\"), a colorful 21-story student residence hall at Massachusetts College of Art and Design in Boston, Massachusetts.\nIn his 1927 novella \"Kappa\" (Japanese: \u6cb3\u7ae5) Japanese author Ry\u016bnosuke Akutagawa wrote of a fictitious religion called 'Lifeism' whose adherents believe their God, the Tree of Life, teaches them to 'live avidly'.\nThe 2006 Darren Aronofsky film \"The Fountain\" features the Judeo-Christian tree of life as a major plot element in its non-linear narrative. In Central America during the Age of Discovery, it is the sought-after object of a Spanish conquistador, who believes its gift of eternal life will free Spain and its queen from the tyranny of a religious inquisition. In the present day, a sample from what is implied to be the same tree of life is used by a medical researcher\u2014who seeks a cure for his ailing wife\u2014to develop a serum that reverses the biological aging process. In the distant future, a space traveler (implied to be the same man from the present) uses the last vestiges of a tree's bark (again, implied to be the same tree of life) to keep himself alive as he journeys to Xibalba, a fictional dying star lying inside a nebula in the constellation Orion, which he believes will rejuvenate the tree\u2014thereby granting him eternal life\u2014when it explodes.\nAlex Proyas' 2009 film \"Knowing\" ends with the two young protagonists directed towards the tree of life.\nThere are literal and thematic references to the tree in Terrence Malick's free-flowing 2012 film \"The Tree of Life\", including in the title.\nThe 2021 adventure film \"Jungle Cruise\" follows a boat captain (Dwayne Johnson) who takes a scientist (Emily Blunt) on a quest to find the Tree.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30715", "revid": "29418252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30715", "title": "Technocracy (disambiguation)", "text": "Technocracy is a form of government by technicians; specifically: management of society by technical experts.\nTechnocracy or technocrat may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30717", "revid": "44933079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30717", "title": "Tales of the Reaching Moon", "text": "Fantasy role-playing magazine (1989\u20132002)\nTales of the Reaching Moon (also known as ToTRM) was a British fanzine dedicated to the fantasy world of Glorantha and producing material for fantasy role-playing games.\nPublication history.\nWhen UK fanzine \"Pavic Tales\", the first notable Glorantha fanzine, ended after issue #9 (Spring 1989), \"Tales of the Reaching Moon\" (20 issues, 1989-2002) from British fan organization Reaching Moon Megacorp was the next major fanzine for Glorantha. Reaching Moon Megacorp closed by publishing \"Tales of the Reaching Moon\" #20 (2002).\nThe editor, David Hall, published 20 issues from 1989 to 2002 (2/yr until 1994, then annually). The magazine was originally published with a monochrome cover but had a full colour cover from issue 12 onwards. Most of the later issues had a central theme fleshed out through a variety of related articles by different authors. A list of issues with themes is given below:\nThe fanzine printed gaming material for a variety of rule-systems, including RuneQuest and King Arthur Pendragon. In addition to this it also had fiction, news and a Rumours section based on the format of the RuneQuest supplements.\nReception.\nAllen Varney reviewed the Winter '93 issue of \"Tales of the Reaching Moon\", and said that \"For casual players, \"Tales of the Reaching Moon\" might as well be printed in Sanskrit, as evidenced by cryptic references [...] But if that's music to your ears, consider taking an issue on your next trip to Glorantha.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30718", "revid": "1105020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30718", "title": "Tide", "text": "Rise and fall of the sea level under astronomical gravitational influences\nTides are the rise and fall of sea levels caused by the combined effects of the gravitational forces exerted by the Moon (and to a much lesser extent, the Sun) and are also caused by the Earth and Moon orbiting one another.\nTide tables can be used for any given locale to find the predicted times and amplitude (or \"tidal range\"). \nThe predictions are influenced by many factors including the alignment of the Sun and Moon, the phase and amplitude of the tide (pattern of tides in the deep ocean), the amphidromic systems of the oceans, and the shape of the coastline and near-shore bathymetry (see \"Timing\"). They are however only predictions, and the actual time and height of the tide is affected by wind and atmospheric pressure. Many shorelines experience semi-diurnal tides\u2014two nearly equal high and low tides each day. Other locations have a diurnal tide\u2014one high and low tide each day. A \"mixed tide\"\u2014two uneven magnitude tides a day\u2014is a third regular category.\nTides vary on timescales ranging from hours to years due to a number of factors, which determine the lunitidal interval. To make accurate records, tide gauges at fixed stations measure water level over time. Gauges ignore variations caused by waves with periods shorter than minutes. These data are compared to the reference (or datum) level usually called mean sea level.\nWhile tides are usually the largest source of short-term sea-level fluctuations, sea levels are also subject to change from thermal expansion, wind, and barometric pressure changes, resulting in storm surges, especially in shallow seas and near coasts.\nTidal phenomena are not limited to the oceans, but can occur in other systems whenever a gravitational field that varies in time and space is present. For example, the shape of the solid part of the Earth is affected slightly by Earth tide, though this is not as easily seen as the water tidal movements.\nCharacteristics.\nOcean tides are cyclic, rising and falling approximately twice a day. \nFour stages in the tidal cycle are named:\nOscillating currents produced by tides are known as tidal streams or tidal currents. The moment that the tidal current ceases is called \"slack water\" or \"slack tide\". The tide then reverses direction and is said to be turning. Slack water usually occurs near high water and low water, but there are locations where the moments of slack tide differ significantly from those of high and low water.\nTides are commonly \"semi-diurnal\" (two high waters and two low waters each day), or \"diurnal\" (one tidal cycle per day). The two high waters on a given day are typically not the same height (the daily inequality); these are the \"higher high water\" and the \"lower high water\" in tide tables. Similarly, the two low waters each day are the \"higher low water\" and the \"lower low water\". The daily inequality is not consistent and is generally small when the Moon is over the Equator.\nReference levels.\nThe following reference tide levels can be defined, from the highest level to the lowest:\nRange variation: springs and neaps.\nThe semi-diurnal range (the difference in height between high and low waters over about half a day) varies in a two-week cycle. Approximately twice a month, around new moon and full moon when the Sun, Moon, and Earth form a line (a configuration known as a syzygy), the tidal force due to the Sun reinforces that due to the Moon. The tide's range is then at its maximum; this is called the spring tide. It is not named after the season, but, like that word, derives from the meaning \"jump, burst forth, rise\", as in a natural spring. \nSpring tides are sometimes referred to as \"syzygy tides\".\nWhen the Moon is at first quarter or third quarter, the Sun and Moon are separated by 90\u00b0 when viewed from the Earth (in quadrature), and the solar tidal force partially cancels the Moon's tidal force. At these points in the lunar cycle, the tide's range is at its minimum; this is called the neap tide, or neaps. \"Neap\" is an Anglo-Saxon word meaning \"without the power\".\nNeap tides are sometimes referred to as \"quadrature tides\".\nSpring tides result in high waters that are higher than average, low waters that are lower than average, \"slack water\" time that is shorter than average, and stronger tidal currents than average. Neaps result in less extreme tidal conditions. There is about a seven-day interval between springs and neaps.\nTidal constituents.\n\"Tidal constituents\" are the net result of multiple influences impacting tidal changes over certain periods of time. Primary constituents include the Earth's rotation, the position of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth, the Moon's altitude (elevation) above the Earth's Equator, and bathymetry. Variations with periods of less than half a day are called \"harmonic constituents\". Conversely, cycles of days, months, or years are referred to as \"long period\" constituents.\nTidal forces affect the entire earth, but the movement of solid Earth occurs by mere centimeters. In contrast, the atmosphere is much more fluid and compressible so its surface moves by kilometers, in the sense of the contour level of a particular low pressure in the outer atmosphere.\nPrincipal lunar semi-diurnal constituent.\nIn most locations, the largest constituent is the \"principal lunar semi-diurnal\", also known as the \"M2 tidal constituent\" or \"M2 tidal constituent\". Its period is about 12 hours and 25.2 minutes, exactly half a \"tidal lunar day\", which is the average time separating one lunar zenith from the next, and thus is the time required for the Earth to rotate once relative to the Moon. Simple tide clocks track this constituent. The lunar day is longer than the Earth day because the Moon orbits in the same direction the Earth spins.\nThe Moon orbits the Earth in the same direction as the Earth rotates on its axis, so it takes slightly more than a day\u2014about 24 hours and 50 minutes\u2014for the Moon to return to the same location in the sky. During this time, it has passed overhead (culmination) once and underfoot once (at an hour angle of 00:00 and 12:00 respectively), so in many places the period of strongest tidal forcing is the above-mentioned, about 12 hours and 25 minutes. The moment of highest tide is not necessarily when the Moon is nearest to zenith or nadir, but the period of the forcing still determines the time between high tides.\nBecause the gravitational field created by the Moon weakens with distance from the Moon, it exerts a slightly stronger than average force on the side of the Earth facing the Moon, and a slightly weaker force on the opposite side. The Moon thus tends to \"stretch\" the Earth slightly along the line connecting the two bodies. The solid Earth deforms a bit, but ocean water, being fluid, is free to move much more in response to the tidal force, particularly horizontally (see equilibrium tide).\nAs the Earth rotates, the magnitude and direction of the tidal force at any particular point on the Earth's surface change constantly; although the ocean never reaches equilibrium\u2014there is never time for the fluid to \"catch up\" to the state it would eventually reach if the tidal force were constant\u2014the changing tidal force nonetheless causes rhythmic changes in sea surface height.\nWhen there are two high tides each day with different heights (and two low tides also of different heights), the pattern is called a \"mixed semi-diurnal tide\".\nLunar distance.\nThe changing distance separating the Moon and Earth also affects tide heights. When the Moon is closest, at perigee, the range increases, and when it is at apogee, the range shrinks. Six or eight times a year perigee coincides with either a new or full moon causing perigean spring tides with the largest \"tidal range\". The difference between the height of a tide at perigean spring tide and the spring tide when the moon is at apogee depends on location but can be as large as a foot higher.\nOther constituents.\nThese include solar gravitational effects, the obliquity (tilt) of the Earth's Equator and rotational axis, the inclination of the plane of the lunar orbit and the elliptical shape of the Earth's orbit of the Sun.\nA compound tide (or overtide) results from the shallow-water interaction of its two parent waves.\nPhase and amplitude.\nBecause the \"M\"2 tidal constituent dominates in most locations, the stage or \"phase\" of a tide, denoted by the time in hours after high water, is a useful concept. Tidal stage is also measured in degrees, with 360\u00b0 per tidal cycle. Lines of constant tidal phase are called \"cotidal lines\", which are analogous to contour lines of constant altitude on topographical maps, and when plotted form a \"cotidal map\" or \"cotidal chart\". High water is reached simultaneously along the cotidal lines extending from the coast out into the ocean, and cotidal lines (and hence tidal phases) advance along the coast. Semi-diurnal and long phase constituents are measured from high water, diurnal from maximum flood tide. This and the discussion that follows is precisely true only for a single tidal constituent.\nFor an ocean in the shape of a circular basin enclosed by a coastline, the cotidal lines point radially inward and must eventually meet at a common point, the amphidromic point. The amphidromic point is at once cotidal with high and low waters, which is satisfied by \"zero\" tidal motion. (The rare exception occurs when the tide encircles an island, as it does around New Zealand, Iceland and Madagascar.) Tidal motion generally lessens moving away from continental coasts, so that crossing the cotidal lines are contours of constant \"amplitude\" (half the distance between high and low water) which decrease to zero at the amphidromic point. For a semi-diurnal tide the amphidromic point can be thought of roughly like the center of a clock face, with the hour hand pointing in the direction of the high water cotidal line, which is directly opposite the low water cotidal line. High water rotates about the amphidromic point once every 12 hours in the direction of rising cotidal lines, and away from ebbing cotidal lines. This rotation, caused by the Coriolis effect, is generally clockwise in the southern hemisphere and counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere. The difference of cotidal phase from the phase of a reference tide is the \"epoch\". The reference tide is the hypothetical constituent \"equilibrium tide\" on a landless Earth measured at 0\u00b0 longitude, the Greenwich meridian.\nIn the North Atlantic, because the cotidal lines circulate counterclockwise around the amphidromic point, the high tide passes New York Harbor approximately an hour ahead of Norfolk Harbor. South of Cape Hatteras the tidal forces are more complex, and cannot be predicted reliably based on the North Atlantic cotidal lines.\nHistory.\nHistory of tidal theory.\nInvestigation into tidal physics was important in the early development of celestial mechanics, with the existence of two daily tides being explained by the Moon's gravity. Later the daily tides were explained more precisely by the interaction of the Moon's and the Sun's gravity.\nSeleucus of Seleucia theorized around 150 BC that tides were caused by the Moon. The influence of the Moon on bodies of water was also mentioned in Ptolemy's \"Tetrabiblos\".\nIn (\"The Reckoning of Time\") of 725 Bede linked semidurnal tides and the phenomenon of varying tidal heights to the Moon and its phases. Bede starts by noting that the tides rise and fall 4/5 of an hour later each day, just as the Moon rises and sets 4/5 of an hour later. He goes on to emphasise that in two lunar months (59 days) the Moon circles the Earth 57 times and there are 114 tides. Bede then observes that the height of tides varies over the month. Increasing tides are called \"malinae\" and decreasing tides \"ledones\" and that the month is divided into four parts of seven or eight days with alternating \"malinae\" and \"ledones\". In the same passage he also notes the effect of winds to hold back tides. Bede also records that the time of tides varies from place to place. To the north of Bede's location (Monkwearmouth) the tides are earlier, to the south later. He explains that the tide \"deserts these shores in order to be able all the more to be able to flood other [shores] when it arrives there\" noting that \"the Moon which signals the rise of tide here, signals its retreat in other regions far from this quarter of the heavens\".\nLater medieval understanding of the tides was primarily based on works of Muslim astronomers, which became available through Latin translation starting from the 12th century. Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (d. circa 886), in his , taught that ebb and flood tides were caused by the Moon. Abu Ma'shar discussed the effects of wind and Moon's phases relative to the Sun on the tides. In the 12th century, al-Bitruji (d. circa 1204) contributed the notion that the tides were caused by the general circulation of the heavens.\nSimon Stevin, in his 1608 (\"The theory of ebb and flood\"), dismissed a large number of misconceptions that still existed about ebb and flood. Stevin pleaded for the idea that the attraction of the Moon was responsible for the tides and spoke in clear terms about ebb, flood, spring tide and neap tide, stressing that further research needed to be made.\nIn 1609 Johannes Kepler also correctly suggested that the gravitation of the Moon caused the tides, which he based upon ancient observations and correlations.\nGalileo Galilei in his 1632 \"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\", whose working title was \"Dialogue on the Tides\", gave an explanation of the tides. The resulting theory, however, was incorrect as he attributed the tides to the sloshing of water caused by the Earth's movement around the Sun. He hoped to provide mechanical proof of the Earth's movement. The value of his tidal theory is disputed. Galileo rejected Kepler's explanation of the tides.\nIsaac Newton (1642\u20131727) was the first person to explain tides as the product of the gravitational attraction of astronomical masses. His explanation of the tides (and many other phenomena) was published in the \"Principia\" (1687) and used his theory of universal gravitation to explain the lunar and solar attractions as the origin of the tide-generating forces.\nNewton and others before Pierre-Simon Laplace worked the problem from the perspective of a static system (equilibrium theory), that provided an approximation that described the tides that would occur in a non-inertial ocean evenly covering the whole Earth. The tide-generating force (or its corresponding potential) is still relevant to tidal theory, but as an intermediate quantity (forcing function) rather than as a final result; theory must also consider the Earth's accumulated dynamic tidal response to the applied forces, which response is influenced by ocean depth, the Earth's rotation, and other factors.\nIn 1740, the Acad\u00e9mie Royale des Sciences in Paris offered a prize for the best theoretical essay on tides. Daniel Bernoulli, Leonhard Euler, Colin Maclaurin and Antoine Cavalleri shared the prize.\nMaclaurin used Newton's theory to show that a smooth sphere covered by a sufficiently deep ocean under the tidal force of a single deforming body is a prolate spheroid (essentially a three-dimensional oval) with major axis directed toward the deforming body. Maclaurin was the first to write about the Earth's rotational effects on motion. Euler realized that the tidal force's \"horizontal\" component (more than the vertical) drives the tide. In 1744 Jean le Rond d'Alembert studied tidal equations for the atmosphere which did not include rotation.\nIn 1770 James Cook's barque HMS \"Endeavour\" grounded on the Great Barrier Reef. Attempts were made to refloat her on the following tide which failed, but the tide after that lifted her clear with ease. Whilst she was being repaired in the mouth of the Endeavour River Cook observed the tides over a period of seven weeks. At neap tides both tides in a day were similar, but at springs the tides rose in the morning but in the evening.\nPierre-Simon Laplace formulated a system of partial differential equations relating the ocean's horizontal flow to its surface height, the first major dynamic theory for water tides. The Laplace tidal equations are still in use today. William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, rewrote Laplace's equations in terms of vorticity which allowed for solutions describing tidally driven coastally trapped waves, known as Kelvin waves.\nOthers including Kelvin and Henri Poincar\u00e9 further developed Laplace's theory. Based on these developments and the lunar theory of E W Brown describing the motions of the Moon, Arthur Thomas Doodson developed and published in 1921 the first modern development of the tide-generating potential in harmonic form: Doodson distinguished 388 tidal frequencies. Some of his methods remain in use.\nHistory of tidal observation.\nFrom ancient times, tidal observation and discussion has increased in sophistication, first marking the daily recurrence, then tides' relationship to the Sun and moon. Pytheas travelled to the British Isles about 325 BC and seems to be the first to have related spring tides to the phase of the moon.\nIn the 2nd century BC, the Hellenistic astronomer Seleucus of Seleucia correctly described the phenomenon of tides in order to support his heliocentric theory. He correctly theorized that tides were caused by the moon, although he believed that the interaction was mediated by the pneuma. He noted that tides varied in time and strength in different parts of the world. According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to link tides to the lunar attraction, and that the height of the tides depends on the moon's position relative to the Sun.\nThe \"Naturalis Historia\" of Pliny the Elder collates many tidal observations, e.g., the spring tides are a few days after (or before) new and full moon and are highest around the equinoxes, though Pliny noted many relationships now regarded as fanciful. In his \"Geography\", Strabo described tides in the Persian Gulf having their greatest range when the moon was furthest from the plane of the Equator. All this despite the relatively small amplitude of Mediterranean basin tides. (The strong currents through the Euripus Strait and the Strait of Messina puzzled Aristotle.) Philostratus discussed tides in Book Five of \"The Life of Apollonius of Tyana\". Philostratus mentions the moon, but attributes tides to \"spirits\". In Europe around 730 AD, the Venerable Bede described how the rising tide on one coast of the British Isles coincided with the fall on the other and described the time progression of high water along the Northumbrian coast.\nThe first tide table in China was recorded in 1056 AD primarily for visitors wishing to see the famous tidal bore in the Qiantang River. The first known British tide table is thought to be that of John Wallingford, who died Abbot of St. Albans in 1213, based on high water occurring 48 minutes later each day, and three hours earlier at the Thames mouth than upriver at London.\nIn 1614 Claude d'Abbeville published the work \"\", where he exposed that the Tupinamb\u00e1 people already had an understanding of the relation between the Moon and the tides before Europe.\nWilliam Thomson (Lord Kelvin) led the first systematic harmonic analysis of tidal records starting in 1867. The main result was the building of a tide-predicting machine using a system of pulleys to add together six harmonic time functions. It was \"programmed\" by resetting gears and chains to adjust phasing and amplitudes. Similar machines were used until the 1960s.\nThe first known sea-level record of an entire spring\u2013neap cycle was made in 1831 on the Navy Dock in the Thames Estuary. Many large ports had automatic tide gauge stations by 1850.\nJohn Lubbock was one of the first to map co-tidal lines, for Great Britain, Ireland and adjacent coasts, in 1840. William Whewell expanded this work ending with a nearly global chart in 1836. In order to make these maps consistent, he hypothesized the existence of a region with no tidal rise or fall where co-tidal lines meet in the mid-ocean. The existence of such an amphidromic point, as they are now known, was confirmed in 1840 by Captain William Hewett, RN, from careful soundings in the North Sea.\nMuch later, in the late 20th century, geologists noticed tidal rhythmites, which document the occurrence of ancient tides in the geological record, notably in the Carboniferous.\nPhysics.\nBasic theory of two tides.\nThe two tidal bulges arise from the \"difference\" in the Moon\u2019s gravitational pull across Earth: relative to the force acting on Earth\u2019s centre, the pull on the near-side oceans is slightly stronger, drawing the water toward the Moon to form the first bulge, while the pull on the far-side oceans is slightly weaker, so that region lags behind the solid Earth, producing the second bulge. Both the oceans' water and the solid Earth experience these differences in pull, but the rigid Earth resists deformation and keeps its roughly spherical shape, while the fluid redistributes to match the imbalance, forming the bulges.\nForces.\nThe tidal force produced by a massive object (Moon, hereafter) on a small particle located on or in an extensive body (Earth, hereafter) is the vector difference between the gravitational force exerted by the Moon on the particle, and the gravitational force that would be exerted on the particle if it were located at the Earth's center of mass.\nWhereas the gravitational force subjected by a celestial body on Earth varies inversely as the square of its distance to the Earth, the maximal tidal force varies inversely as, approximately, the cube of this distance. If the tidal force caused by each body were instead equal to its full gravitational force (which is not the case due to the free fall of the whole Earth, not only the oceans, towards these bodies) a different pattern of tidal forces would be observed, e.g. with a much stronger influence from the Sun than from the Moon: The solar gravitational force on the Earth is on average 179 times stronger than the lunar, but because the Sun is on average 389 times farther from the Earth, its field gradient is weaker. The overall proportionality is\n formula_1\nwhere M is the mass of the heavenly body, d is its distance, \u03c1 is its average density, and r is its radius. The ratio \"r\"/\"d\" is related to the angle subtended by the object in the sky. Since the Sun and the Moon have practically the same diameter in the sky, the tidal force of the Sun is less than that of the Moon because its average density is much less, and it is only 46% as large as the lunar, thus during a spring tide, the Moon contributes 69% while the Sun contributes 31%. More precisely, the lunar tidal acceleration (along the Moon\u2013Earth axis, at the Earth's surface) is about 1.1\u00d710\u22127\u00a0\"g\", while the solar tidal acceleration (along the Sun\u2013Earth axis, at the Earth's surface) is about 0.52\u00d710\u22127\u00a0\"g\", where \"g\" is the gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface. The effects of the other planets vary as their distances from Earth vary. When Venus is closest to Earth, its effect is 0.000113 times the solar effect. At other times, Jupiter or Mars may have the most effect.\nThe ocean's surface is approximated by a surface referred to as the geoid, which takes into consideration the gravitational force exerted by the earth as well as centrifugal force due to rotation. Now consider the effect of massive external bodies such as the Moon and Sun. These bodies have strong gravitational fields that diminish with distance and cause the ocean's surface to deviate from the geoid. They establish a new equilibrium ocean surface which bulges toward the moon on one side and away from the moon on the other side. The earth's rotation relative to this shape causes the daily tidal cycle. The ocean surface tends toward this equilibrium shape, which is constantly changing, and never quite attains it. When the ocean surface is not aligned with it, it's as though the surface is sloping, and water accelerates in the down-slope direction.\nEquilibrium.\nThe equilibrium tide is the idealized tide assuming a landless Earth.\nIt would produce a tidal bulge in the ocean, elongated towards the attracting body (Moon or Sun).\nIt is \"not\" caused by the vertical pull nearest or farthest from the body, which is very weak; rather, it is caused by the tangential or tractive tidal force, which is strongest at about 45 degrees from the body, resulting in a horizontal tidal current.\nLaplace's tidal equations.\nOcean depths are much smaller than their horizontal extent. Thus, the response to tidal forcing can be modelled using the Laplace tidal equations which incorporate the following features:\nThe boundary conditions dictate no flow across the coastline and free slip at the bottom.\nThe Coriolis effect (inertial force) steers flows moving towards the Equator to the west and flows moving away from the Equator toward the east, allowing coastally trapped waves. Finally, a dissipation term can be added which is an analog to viscosity.\nAmplitude and cycle time.\nThe theoretical amplitude of oceanic tides caused by the Moon is about at the highest point, which corresponds to the amplitude that would be reached if the ocean possessed a uniform depth, there were no landmasses, and the Earth were rotating in step with the Moon's orbit. The Sun similarly causes tides, of which the theoretical amplitude is about (46% of that of the Moon) with a cycle time of 12 hours. At spring tide the two effects add to each other to a theoretical level of , while at neap tide the theoretical level is reduced to . Since the orbits of the Earth about the Sun, and the Moon about the Earth, are elliptical, tidal amplitudes change somewhat as a result of the varying Earth\u2013Sun and Earth\u2013Moon distances. This causes a variation in the tidal force and theoretical amplitude of about \u00b118% for the Moon and \u00b15% for the Sun. If both the Sun and Moon were at their closest positions and aligned at new moon, the theoretical amplitude would reach .\nReal amplitudes differ considerably, not only because of depth variations and continental obstacles, but also because wave propagation across the ocean has a natural period of the same order of magnitude as the rotation period: if there were no land masses, it would take about 30 hours for a long wavelength surface wave to propagate along the Equator halfway around the Earth (by comparison, the Earth's lithosphere has a natural period of about 57 minutes). Earth tides, which raise and lower the bottom of the ocean, and the tide's own gravitational self attraction are both significant and further complicate the ocean's response to tidal forces.\nDissipation.\nDay length has increased by about 2 hours in the last 600 million years. Assuming (as a crude approximation) that the deceleration rate has been constant, this would imply that 70 million years ago, day length was on the order of 1% shorter with about 4 more days per year.\nBathymetry.\nThe shape of the shoreline and the ocean floor changes the way that tides propagate, so there is no simple, general rule that predicts the time of high water from the Moon's position in the sky. Coastal characteristics such as underwater bathymetry and coastline shape mean that individual location characteristics affect tide forecasting; actual high water time and height may differ from model predictions due to the coastal morphology's effects on tidal flow. However, for a given location the relationship between lunar altitude and the time of high or low tide (the lunitidal interval) is relatively constant and predictable, as is the time of high or low tide relative to other points on the same coast. For example, the high tide at Norfolk, Virginia, U.S., predictably occurs approximately two and a half hours before the Moon passes directly overhead.\nLand masses and ocean basins act as barriers against water moving freely around the globe, and their varied shapes and sizes affect the size of tidal frequencies. As a result, tidal patterns vary. For example, in the U.S., the East coast has predominantly semi-diurnal tides, as do Europe's Atlantic coasts, while the West coast predominantly has mixed tides. Human changes to the landscape can also significantly alter local tides.\nObservation and prediction.\nTiming.\nThe tidal forces due to the Moon and Sun generate very long waves which travel all around the ocean following the paths shown in co-tidal charts. The time when the crest of the wave reaches a port then gives the time of high water at the port. The time taken for the wave to travel around the ocean also means that there is a delay between the phases of the Moon and their effect on the tide. Springs and neaps in the North Sea, for example, are two days behind the new/full moon and first/third quarter moon. This is called the tide's \"age\".\nThe ocean bathymetry greatly influences the tide's exact time and height at a particular coastal point. There are some extreme cases; the Bay of Fundy, on the east coast of Canada, is often stated to have the world's highest tides because of its shape, bathymetry, and its distance from the continental shelf edge. Measurements made in November 1998 at Burntcoat Head in the Bay of Fundy recorded a maximum range of {{convert|16.3|m|ft}} and a highest predicted extreme of {{convert|17|m|ft}}. Similar measurements made in March 2002 at Leaf Basin, Ungava Bay in northern Quebec gave similar values (allowing for measurement errors), a maximum range of {{convert|16.2|m|ft}} and a highest predicted extreme of {{convert|16.8|m|ft}}. Ungava Bay and the Bay of Fundy lie similar distances from the continental shelf edge, but Ungava Bay is only free of pack ice for about four months every year while the Bay of Fundy rarely freezes.\nSouthampton in the United Kingdom has a double high water caused by the interaction between the \"M\"2 and \"M\"4 tidal constituents (Shallow water overtides of principal lunar). Portland has double low waters for the same reason. The \"M\"4 tide is found all along the south coast of the United Kingdom, but its effect is most noticeable between the Isle of Wight and Portland because the \"M\"2 tide is lowest in this region.\nBecause the oscillation modes of the Mediterranean Sea and the Baltic Sea do not coincide with any significant astronomical forcing period, the largest tides are close to their narrow connections with the Atlantic Ocean. Extremely small tides also occur for the same reason in the Gulf of Mexico and Sea of Japan. Elsewhere, as along the southern coast of Australia, low tides can be due to the presence of a nearby amphidrome.\nAnalysis.\nIsaac Newton's theory of gravitation first enabled an explanation of why there were generally two tides a day, not one, and offered hope for a detailed understanding of tidal forces and behavior. Although it may seem that tides could be predicted via a sufficiently detailed knowledge of instantaneous astronomical forcings, the actual tide at a given location is determined by astronomical forces accumulated by the body of water over many days. In addition, accurate results would require detailed knowledge of the shape of all the ocean basins\u2014their bathymetry, and coastline shape.\nCurrent procedure for analysing tides follows the method of harmonic analysis introduced in the 1860s by William Thomson. It is based on the principle that the astronomical theories of the motions of Sun and Moon determine a large number of component frequencies, and at each frequency there is a component of force tending to produce tidal motion, but that at each place of interest on the Earth, the tides respond at each frequency with an amplitude and phase peculiar to that locality. At each place of interest, the tide heights are therefore measured for a period of time sufficiently long (usually more than a year in the case of a new port not previously studied) to enable the response at each significant tide-generating frequency to be distinguished by analysis, and to extract the tidal constants for a sufficient number of the strongest known components of the astronomical tidal forces to enable practical tide prediction. The tide heights are expected to follow the tidal force, with a constant amplitude and phase delay for each component. Because astronomical frequencies and phases can be calculated with certainty, the tide height at other times can then be predicted once the response to the harmonic components of the astronomical tide-generating forces has been found.\nThe main patterns in the tides are\nThe \"Highest Astronomical Tide\" is the perigean spring tide when both the Sun and Moon are closest to the Earth.\nWhen confronted by a periodically varying function, the standard approach is to employ Fourier series, a form of analysis that uses sinusoidal functions as a \"basis\" set, having frequencies that are zero, one, two, three, etc. times the frequency of a particular fundamental cycle. These multiples are called \"harmonics\" of the fundamental frequency, and the process is termed harmonic analysis. If the basis set of sinusoidal functions suit the behaviour being modelled, relatively few harmonic terms need to be added. Orbital paths are very nearly circular, so sinusoidal variations are suitable for tides.\nFor the analysis of tide heights, the Fourier series approach has in practice to be made more elaborate than the use of a single frequency and its harmonics. The tidal patterns are decomposed into many sinusoids having many fundamental frequencies, corresponding (as in the lunar theory) to many different combinations of the motions of the Earth, the Moon, and the angles that define the shape and location of their orbits.\nFor tides, then, \"harmonic analysis\" is not limited to harmonics of a single frequency.{{efn|To demonstrate this http:// offers a tidal height pattern converted into an \".mp3\" sound file, and the rich sound is quite different from a pure tone.}} In other words, the harmonies are multiples of many fundamental frequencies, not just of the fundamental frequency of the simpler Fourier series approach. Their representation as a Fourier series having only one fundamental frequency and its (integer) multiples would require many terms, and would be severely limited in the time-range for which it would be valid.\nThe study of tide height by harmonic analysis was begun by Laplace, William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), and George Darwin. A.T. Doodson extended their work, introducing the \"Doodson Number\" notation to organise the hundreds of resulting terms. This approach has been the international standard ever since, and the complications arise as follows: the tide-raising force is notionally given by sums of several terms. Each term is of the form\n formula_2\nwhere\n {{math|Ao}} is the amplitude,\n {{math|\u03c9}} is the angular frequency, usually given in degrees per hour, corresponding to {{math|t}} measured in hours,\n {{math|p}} is the phase offset with regard to the astronomical state at time \"t\" = 0.\nThere is one term for the Moon and a second term for the Sun. The phase {{math|p}} of the first harmonic for the Moon term is called the lunitidal interval or high water interval.\nThe next refinement is to accommodate the harmonic terms due to the elliptical shape of the orbits. To do so, the value of the amplitude is taken to be not a constant, but varying with time, about the average amplitude {{math|Ao}}. To do so, replace {{math|Ao}} in the above equation with {{math|A(t)}} where {{math|A}} is another sinusoid, similar to the cycles and epicycles of Ptolemaic theory. This gives\n formula_3\nwhich is to say an average value {{math|Ao}} with a sinusoidal variation about it of magnitude {{math|Aa}}, with frequency {{math|\u03c9a}} and phase {{math|pa}}. Substituting this for {{math|Ao}} in the original equation gives a product of two cosine factors:\n formula_4\n formula_5\nit is clear that a compound term involving the product of two cosine terms each with their own frequency is the same as \"three\" simple cosine terms that are to be added at the original frequency and also at frequencies which are the sum and difference of the two frequencies of the product term. (Three, not two terms, since the whole expression is formula_6.) Consider further that the tidal force on a location depends also on whether the Moon (or the Sun) is above or below the plane of the Equator, and that these attributes have their own periods also incommensurable with a day and a month, and it is clear that many combinations result. With a careful choice of the basic astronomical frequencies, the Doodson Number annotates the particular additions and differences to form the frequency of each simple cosine term.\nRemember that astronomical tides do \"not\" include weather effects. Also, changes to local conditions (sandbank movement, dredging harbour mouths, etc.) away from those prevailing at the measurement time affect the tide's actual timing and magnitude. Organisations quoting a \"highest astronomical tide\" for some location may exaggerate the figure as a safety factor against analytical uncertainties, distance from the nearest measurement point, changes since the last observation time, ground subsidence, etc., to avert liability should an engineering work be overtopped. Special care is needed when assessing the size of a \"weather surge\" by subtracting the astronomical tide from the observed tide.\nCareful Fourier data analysis over a nineteen-year period (the \"National Tidal Datum Epoch\" in the U.S.) uses frequencies called the \"tidal harmonic constituents\". Nineteen years is preferred because the Earth, Moon and Sun's relative positions repeat almost exactly in the Metonic cycle of 19\u00a0years, which is long enough to include the 18.613 year lunar nodal tidal constituent. This analysis can be done using only the knowledge of the forcing \"period\", but without detailed understanding of the mathematical derivation, which means that useful tidal tables have been constructed for centuries. The resulting amplitudes and phases can then be used to predict the expected tides. These are usually dominated by the constituents near 12\u00a0hours (the \"semi-diurnal\" constituents), but there are major constituents near 24\u00a0hours (\"diurnal\") as well. Longer term constituents are 14\u00a0day or \"fortnightly\", monthly, and semiannual. Semi-diurnal tides dominated coastline, but some areas such as the South China Sea and the Gulf of Mexico are primarily diurnal. In the semi-diurnal areas, the primary constituents \"M\"2\u00a0(lunar) and \"S\"2\u00a0(solar) periods differ slightly, so that the relative phases, and thus the amplitude of the combined tide, change fortnightly (14\u00a0day period).\nIn the \"M\"2 plot above, each cotidal line differs by one hour from its neighbors, and the thicker lines show tides in phase with equilibrium at Greenwich. The lines rotate around the amphidromic points counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere so that from Baja California Peninsula to Alaska and from France to Ireland the \"M\"2 tide propagates northward. In the southern hemisphere this direction is clockwise. On the other hand, \"M\"2 tide propagates counterclockwise around New Zealand, but this is because the islands act as a dam and permit the tides to have different heights on the islands' opposite sides. (The tides do propagate northward on the east side and southward on the west coast, as predicted by theory.)\nThe exception is at Cook Strait where the tidal currents periodically link high to low water. This is because cotidal lines 180\u00b0 around the amphidromes are in opposite phase, for example high water across from low water at each end of Cook Strait. Each tidal constituent has a different pattern of amplitudes, phases, and amphidromic points, so the \"M\"2 patterns cannot be used for other tide components.\nExample calculation.\nBecause the Moon is moving in its orbit around the Earth and in the same sense as the Earth's rotation, a point on the Earth must rotate slightly further to catch up so that the time between semi-diurnal tides is not twelve but 12.4206 hours\u2014a bit over twenty-five minutes extra. The two peaks are not equal. The two high tides a day alternate in maximum heights: lower high (just under three feet), higher high (just over three feet), and again lower high. Likewise for the low tides.\nWhen the Earth, Moon, and Sun are in line (Sun\u2013Earth\u2013Moon, or Sun\u2013Moon\u2013Earth) the two main influences combine to produce spring tides; when the two forces are opposing each other as when the angle Moon\u2013Earth\u2013Sun is close to ninety degrees, neap tides result. As the Moon moves around its orbit it changes from north of the Equator to south of the Equator. The alternation in high tide heights becomes smaller, until they are the same (at the lunar equinox, the Moon is above the Equator), then redevelop but with the other polarity, waxing to a maximum difference and then waning again.\nCurrent.\nThe tides' influence on current or flow is much more difficult to analyze, and data is much more difficult to collect. A tidal height is a scalar quantity and varies smoothly over a wide region. A flow is a vector quantity, with magnitude and direction, both of which can vary substantially with depth and over short distances due to local bathymetry. Also, although a water channel's center is the most useful measuring site, mariners object when current-measuring equipment obstructs waterways. A flow proceeding up a curved channel may have similar magnitude, even though its direction varies continuously along the channel. Surprisingly, flood and ebb flows are often not in opposite directions. Flow direction is determined by the upstream channel's shape, not the downstream channel's shape. Likewise, eddies may form in only one flow direction.\nNevertheless, tidal current analysis is similar to tidal heights analysis: in the simple case, at a given location the flood flow is in mostly one direction, and the ebb flow in another direction. Flood velocities are given positive sign, and ebb velocities negative sign. Analysis proceeds as though these are tide heights.\nIn more complex situations, the main ebb and flood flows do not dominate. Instead, the flow direction and magnitude trace an ellipse over a tidal cycle (on a polar plot) instead of along the ebb and flood lines. In this case, analysis might proceed along pairs of directions, with the primary and secondary directions at right angles. An alternative is to treat the tidal flows as complex numbers, as each value has both a magnitude and a direction.\nTide flow information is most commonly seen on nautical charts, presented as a table of flow speeds and bearings at hourly intervals, with separate tables for spring and neap tides. The timing is relative to high water at some harbour where the tidal behaviour is similar in pattern, though it may be far away.\nAs with tide height predictions, tide flow predictions based only on astronomical factors do not incorporate weather conditions, which can \"completely\" change the outcome.\nThe tidal flow through Cook Strait between the two main islands of New Zealand is particularly interesting, as the tides on each side of the strait are almost exactly out of phase, so that one side's high water is simultaneous with the other's low water. Strong currents result, with almost zero tidal height change in the strait's center. Yet, although the tidal surge normally flows in one direction for six hours and in the reverse direction for six hours, a particular surge might last eight or ten hours with the reverse surge enfeebled. In especially boisterous weather conditions, the reverse surge might be entirely overcome so that the flow continues in the same direction through three or more surge periods.\nA further complication for Cook Strait's flow pattern is that the tide at the south side (e.g. at Nelson) follows the common bi-weekly spring\u2013neap tide cycle (as found along the west side of the country), but the north side's tidal pattern has only \"one\" cycle per month, as on the east side: Wellington, and Napier.\nPower generation.\nTidal energy can be extracted by two means: inserting a water turbine into a tidal current, or building ponds that release/admit water through a turbine. In the first case, the energy amount is entirely determined by the timing and tidal current magnitude. However, the best currents may be unavailable because the turbines would obstruct ships. In the second, the impoundment dams are expensive to construct, natural water cycles are completely disrupted, ship navigation is disrupted. However, with multiple ponds, power can be generated at chosen times. So far, there are few installed systems for tidal power generation (most famously, La Rance at Saint Malo, France) which face many difficulties. Aside from environmental issues, simply withstanding corrosion and biological fouling pose engineering challenges.\nTidal power proponents point out that, unlike wind power systems, generation levels can be reliably predicted, save for weather effects. While some generation is possible for most of the tidal cycle, in practice turbines lose efficiency at lower operating rates. Since the power available from a flow is proportional to the cube of the flow speed, the times during which high power generation is possible are brief.\nNavigation.\nTidal flows are important for navigation, and significant errors in position occur if they are not accommodated. Tidal heights are also important; for example many rivers and harbours have a shallow \"bar\" at the entrance which prevents boats with significant draft from entering at low tide.\nUntil the advent of automated navigation, competence in calculating tidal effects was important to naval officers. The certificate of examination for lieutenants in the Royal Navy once declared that the prospective officer was able to \"shift his tides\".\nTidal flow timings and velocities appear in \"tide charts\" or a tidal stream atlas. Tide charts come in sets. Each chart covers a single hour between one high water and another (they ignore the leftover 24 minutes) and show the average tidal flow for that hour. An arrow on the tidal chart indicates the direction and the average flow speed (usually in knots) for spring and neap tides. If a tide chart is not available, most nautical charts have \"tidal diamonds\" which relate specific points on the chart to a table giving tidal flow direction and speed.\nThe standard procedure to counteract tidal effects on navigation is to (1) calculate a \"dead reckoning\" position (or DR) from travel distance and direction, (2) mark the chart (with a vertical cross like a plus sign) and (3) draw a line from the DR in the tide's direction. The distance the tide moves the boat along this line is computed by the tidal speed, and this gives an \"estimated position\" or EP (traditionally marked with a dot in a triangle).\nNautical charts display the water's \"charted depth\" at specific locations with \"soundings\" and the use of bathymetric contour lines to depict the submerged surface's shape. These depths are relative to a \"chart datum\", which is typically the water level at the lowest possible astronomical tide (although other datums are commonly used, especially historically, and tides may be lower or higher for meteorological reasons) and are therefore the minimum possible water depth during the tidal cycle. \"Drying heights\" may also be shown on the chart, which are the heights of the exposed seabed at the lowest astronomical tide.\nTide tables list each day's high and low water heights and times. To calculate the actual water depth, add the charted depth to the published tide height. Depth for other times can be derived from tidal curves published for major ports. The rule of twelfths can suffice if an accurate curve is not available. This approximation presumes that the increase in depth in the six hours between low and high water is: first hour \u2014 1/12, second \u2014 2/12, third \u2014 3/12, fourth \u2014 3/12, fifth \u2014 2/12, sixth \u2014 1/12.\nBiological aspects.\nIntertidal ecology.\nIntertidal ecology is the study of ecosystems between the low- and high-water lines along a shore. At low water, the intertidal zone is exposed (or \"emersed\"), whereas at high water, it is underwater (or \"immersed\"). Intertidal ecologists therefore study the interactions between intertidal organisms and their environment, as well as among the different species. The most important interactions may vary according to the type of intertidal community. The broadest classifications are based on substrates \u2014 rocky shore or soft bottom.\nIntertidal organisms experience a highly variable and often hostile environment, and have adapted to cope with and even exploit these conditions. One easily visible feature is vertical zonation, in which the community divides into distinct horizontal bands of specific species at each elevation above low water. A species' ability to cope with desiccation determines its upper limit, while competition with other species sets its lower limit.\nHumans use intertidal regions for food and recreation. Overexploitation can damage intertidals directly. Other anthropogenic actions such as introducing invasive species and climate change have large negative effects. Marine Protected Areas are one option communities can apply to protect these areas and aid scientific research.\nBiological rhythms.\nThe approximately 12-hour and fortnightly tidal cycle has large effects on intertidal and marine organisms. Hence their biological rhythms tend to occur in rough multiples of these periods. Many other animals such as the vertebrates, display similar circatidal rhythms. Examples include gestation and egg hatching. In humans, the menstrual cycle lasts roughly a lunar month, an even multiple of the tidal period. Such parallels at least hint at the common descent of all animals from a marine ancestor.\nOther tides.\nWhen oscillating tidal currents in the stratified ocean flow over uneven bottom topography, they generate internal waves with tidal frequencies. Such waves are called \"internal tides\".\nShallow areas in otherwise open water can experience rotary tidal currents, flowing in directions that continually change and thus the flow direction (not the flow) completes a full rotation in {{frac|12|1|2}} hours (for example, the Nantucket Shoals).\nIn addition to oceanic tides, large lakes can experience small tides and even planets can experience \"atmospheric tides\" and \"Earth tides\". These are continuum mechanical phenomena. The first two take place in fluids. The third affects the Earth's thin solid crust surrounding its semi-liquid interior (with various modifications).\nLake tides.\nLarge lakes such as Superior and Erie can experience tides of {{convert|1|to|4|cm|in|abbr=on|sigfig=2}}, but these can be masked by meteorologically induced phenomena such as seiche. The tide in Lake Michigan is described as {{convert|0.5|to|1.5|in|cm|abbr=on|order=flip}} or {{convert|1+3/4|in|cm|order=flip|abbr=on}}. This is so small that other larger effects completely mask any tide, and as such these lakes are considered non-tidal.\nAtmospheric tides.\nAtmospheric tides are negligible at ground level and aviation altitudes, masked by weather's much more important effects. Atmospheric tides are both gravitational and thermal in origin and are the dominant dynamics from about {{convert|80| to |120|km|mi}}, above which the molecular density becomes too low to support fluid behavior.\nGalactic tides.\n\"Galactic tides\" are the tidal forces exerted by galaxies on stars within them and satellite galaxies orbiting them. The galactic tide's effects on the Solar System's Oort cloud are believed to cause 90 percent of long-period comets.\nMisnomers.\nTsunamis, the large waves that occur after earthquakes, are sometimes called \"tidal waves\", but this name is given by their \"resemblance\" to the tide, rather than any causal link to the tide. Other phenomena unrelated to tides but using the word \"tide\" are rip tide, storm tide, hurricane tide, and black or red tides. Many of these usages are historic and refer to the earlier meaning of tide as \"a portion of time, a season\" and \"a stream, current or flood\"."}
{"id": "30719", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30719", "title": "Tidal force", "text": "Gravitational effect also known as the differential force and the perturbing force\nThe tidal force or tide-generating force is the difference in gravitational attraction between different points in a gravitational field, causing bodies to be pulled unevenly and as a result are being stretched towards the attraction. It is the differential force of gravity, the net between gravitational forces, the derivative of gravitational potential, the gradient of gravitational fields. Therefore tidal forces are a residual force, a secondary effect of gravity, highlighting its spatial elements, making the closer near-side more attracted than the more distant far-side.\nThis produces a range of tidal phenomena, such as ocean tides. Earth's tides are mainly produced by the relative close gravitational field of the Moon \nand to a lesser extent by the stronger, but further away gravitational field of the Sun. The ocean on the side of Earth facing the Moon is being pulled by the gravity of the Moon away from Earth's crust, while on the other side of Earth there the crust is being pulled away from the ocean, resulting in Earth being stretched, bulging on both sides, and having opposite high-tides. Tidal forces viewed from Earth, that is from a rotating reference frame, appear as centripetal and centrifugal forces, but are not caused by the rotation.\nFurther tidal phenomena include solid-earth tides, tidal locking, breaking apart of celestial bodies and formation of ring systems within the Roche limit, and in extreme cases, spaghettification of objects. Tidal forces have also been shown to be fundamentally related to gravitational waves.\nIn celestial mechanics, the expression \"tidal force\" can refer to a situation in which a body or material (for example, tidal water) is mainly under the gravitational influence of a second body (for example, the Earth), but is also perturbed by the gravitational effects of a third body (for example, the Moon). The perturbing force is sometimes in such cases called a tidal force (for example, the perturbing force on the Moon): it is the difference between the force exerted by the third body on the second and the force exerted by the third body on the first.\nExplanation.\nWhen a body (body 1) is acted on by the gravity of another body (body 2), the field can vary significantly on body 1 between the side of the body facing body 2 and the side facing away from body 2. Figure 2 shows the differential force of gravity on a spherical body (body 1) exerted by another body (body 2).\nThese \"tidal forces\" cause strains on both bodies and may distort them or even, in extreme cases, break one or the other apart. The Roche limit is the distance from a planet at which tidal effects would cause an object to disintegrate because the differential force of gravity from the planet overcomes the attraction of the parts of the object for one another. These strains would not occur if the gravitational field were uniform, because a uniform field only causes the entire body to accelerate together in the same direction and at the same rate.\nSize and distance.\nThe relationship of an astronomical body's size, to its distance from another body, strongly influences the magnitude of tidal force. The tidal force acting on an astronomical body, such as the Earth, is directly proportional to the diameter of the Earth and inversely proportional to the cube of the distance from another body producing a gravitational attraction, such as the Moon or the Sun. Tidal action on bath tubs, swimming pools, lakes, and other small bodies of water is negligible.\nFigure 3 is a graph showing how gravitational force declines with distance. In this graph, the attractive force decreases in proportion to the square of the distance (\"Y\" = 1/\"X\"2), while the slope (\"Y\"\u2032 = \u22122/\"X\"3) is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance.\nThe tidal force corresponds to the difference in Y between two points on the graph, with one point on the near side of the body, and the other point on the far side. The tidal force becomes larger, when the two points are either farther apart, or when they are more to the left on the graph, meaning closer to the attracting body.\nFor example, even though the Sun has a stronger overall gravitational pull on Earth, the Moon creates a larger tidal bulge because the Moon is closer. This difference is due to the way gravity weakens with distance: the Moon's closer proximity creates a steeper decline in its gravitational pull as you move across Earth (compared to the Sun's very gradual decline from its vast distance). This steeper gradient in the Moon's pull results in a larger difference in force between the near and far sides of Earth, which is what creates the bigger tidal bulge.\nGravitational attraction is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the source. The attraction will be stronger on the side of a body facing the source, and weaker on the side away from the source. The tidal force is proportional to the difference.\nSun, Earth, and Moon.\nThe Sun is about 20 million times the Moon's mass, and acts on the Earth over a distance about 400 times larger than that of the Moon. Because of the cubic dependence on distance, this results in the solar tidal force on the Earth being about half that of the lunar tidal force.\nEffects.\nIn the case of an infinitesimally small elastic sphere, the effect of a tidal force is to distort the shape of the body without any change in volume. The sphere becomes an ellipsoid with two bulges, pointing towards and away from the other body. Larger objects distort into an ovoid, and are slightly compressed, which is what happens to the Earth's oceans under the action of the Moon. All parts of the Earth are subject to the Moon's gravitational forces, causing the water in the oceans to redistribute, forming bulges on the sides near the Moon and far from the Moon.\nWhen a body rotates while subject to tidal forces, internal friction results in the gradual dissipation of its rotational kinetic energy as heat. In the case for the Earth, and Earth's Moon, the loss of rotational kinetic energy results in a gain of about 2 milliseconds per century. If the body is close enough to its primary, this can result in a rotation which is tidally locked to the orbital motion, as in the case of the Earth's moon. Tidal heating produces dramatic volcanic effects on Jupiter's moon Io. Stresses caused by tidal forces also cause a regular monthly pattern of moonquakes on Earth's Moon.\nTidal forces contribute to ocean currents, which moderate global temperatures by transporting heat energy toward the poles. It has been suggested that variations in tidal forces correlate with cool periods in the global temperature record at 6- to 10-year intervals, and that harmonic beat variations in tidal forcing may contribute to millennial climate changes. No strong link to millennial climate changes has been found to date.\nTidal effects become particularly pronounced near small bodies of high mass, such as neutron stars or black holes, where they are responsible for the \"spaghettification\" of infalling matter. Tidal forces create the oceanic tide of Earth's oceans, where the attracting bodies are the Moon and, to a lesser extent, the Sun. Tidal forces are also responsible for tidal locking, tidal acceleration, and tidal heating. Tides may also induce seismicity.\nBy generating conducting fluids within the interior of the Earth, tidal forces also affect the Earth's magnetic field.\nFormulation.\nFor a given (externally generated) gravitational field, the tidal acceleration at a point with respect to a body is obtained by vector subtraction of the gravitational acceleration at the center of the body (due to the given externally generated field) from the gravitational acceleration (due to the same field) at the given point. Correspondingly, the term \"tidal force\" is used to describe the forces due to tidal acceleration. Note that for these purposes the only gravitational field considered is the external one; the gravitational field of the body (as shown in the graphic) is not relevant. (In other words, the comparison is with the conditions at the given point as they would be if there were no externally generated field acting unequally at the given point and at the center of the reference body. The externally generated field is usually that produced by a perturbing third body, often the Sun or the Moon in the frequent example-cases of points on or above the Earth's surface in a geocentric reference frame.)\nTidal acceleration does not require rotation or orbiting bodies; for example, the body may be freefalling in a straight line under the influence of a gravitational field while still being influenced by (changing) tidal acceleration.\nBy Newton's law of universal gravitation and laws of motion, a body of mass \"m\" at distance \"R\" from the center of a sphere of mass \"M\" feels a force formula_1,\nformula_2\nequivalent to an acceleration formula_3,\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is a unit vector pointing from the body \"M\" to the body \"m\" (here, acceleration from \"m\" towards \"M\" has negative sign).\nConsider now the acceleration due to the sphere of mass \"M\" experienced by a particle in the vicinity of the body of mass \"m\". With \"R\" as the distance from the center of \"M\" to the center of \"m\", let \u2206\"r\" be the (relatively small) distance of the particle from the center of the body of mass \"m\". For simplicity, distances are first considered only in the direction pointing towards or away from the sphere of mass \"M\". If the body of mass \"m\" is itself a sphere of radius \u2206\"r\", then the new particle considered may be located on its surface, at a distance (\"R\" \u00b1 \"\u2206r\") from the centre of the sphere of mass \"M\", and \"\u2206r\" may be taken as positive where the particle's distance from \"M\" is greater than \"R\". Leaving aside whatever gravitational acceleration may be experienced by the particle towards \"m\" on account of \"m\"'s own mass, we have the acceleration on the particle due to gravitational force towards \"M\" as:\nformula_6\nPulling out the \"R\"2 term from the denominator gives:\nformula_7\nThe Maclaurin series of formula_8 is formula_9 which gives a series expansion of:\nformula_10\nThe first term is the gravitational acceleration due to \"M\" at the center of the reference body formula_11, i.e., at the point where formula_12 is zero. This term does not affect the observed acceleration of particles on the surface of \"m\" because with respect to \"M\", \"m\" (and everything on its surface) is in free fall. When the force on the far particle is subtracted from the force on the near particle, this first term cancels, as do all other even-order terms. The remaining (residual) terms represent the difference mentioned above and are tidal force (acceleration) terms. When \u2206\"r\" is small compared to \"R\", the terms after the first residual term are very small and can be neglected, giving the approximate tidal acceleration formula_13 for the distances \u2206\"r\" considered, along the axis joining the centers of \"m\" and \"M\":\nformula_14\nWhen calculated in this way for the case where \u2206\"r\" is a distance along the axis joining the centers of \"m\" and \"M\", formula_15 is directed outwards from to the center of \"m\" (where \u2206\"r\" is zero).\nTidal accelerations can also be calculated away from the axis connecting the bodies \"m\" and \"M\", requiring a vector calculation. In the plane perpendicular to that axis, the tidal acceleration is directed inwards (towards the center where \u2206\"r\" is zero), and its magnitude is formula_16 in linear approximation as in Figure 2.\nThe tidal accelerations at the surfaces of planets in the Solar System are generally very small. For example, the lunar tidal acceleration at the Earth's surface along the Moon\u2013Earth axis is about , while the solar tidal acceleration at the Earth's surface along the Sun\u2013Earth axis is about , where \"g\" is the gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface. Hence the tide-raising force (acceleration) due to the Sun is about 45% of that due to the Moon. The solar tidal acceleration at the Earth's surface was first given by Newton in the \"Principia\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30720", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30720", "title": "Tone Row", "text": ""}
{"id": "30722", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30722", "title": "Theremin", "text": "Electronic musical instrument\nThe theremin (; originally known as the \u00e6therphone, etherphone, thereminophone or termenvox/thereminvox) is an electronic musical instrument controlled without physical contact by the performer (who is known as a thereminist). It is named after its inventor, Leon Theremin, who patented the device in 1928.\nThe instrument's controlling section usually consists of two metal antennas that function not as radio antennas but rather as position sensors. Each antenna forms one half of a capacitor with each of the thereminist's hands as the other half of the capacitor. These antennas capacitively sense the relative position of the hands and control oscillators for frequency with one hand, and amplitude (volume) with the other. The electric signals from the theremin are amplified and sent to a loudspeaker.\nThe sound of the instrument is often associated with eerie situations.\nHistory.\nThe theremin was the product of Soviet government-sponsored research into proximity sensors. The instrument was invented in October 1920 by the Russian physicist Lev Sergeyevich Termen, known in the West as Leon Theremin. After a lengthy tour of Europe, during which time he demonstrated his invention to packed houses, Theremin moved to the United States, where he patented his invention in 1928. Subsequently, Theremin granted commercial production rights to RCA.\nAlthough the RCA Thereminvox (released immediately following the stock market crash of 1929) was not a commercial success, it fascinated audiences in America and abroad. Clara Rockmore, a well-known thereminist, toured to wide acclaim, performing a classical repertoire in concert halls around the United States, often sharing the bill with bass-baritone Paul Robeson. Joseph Whiteley (1894\u20131984) performed under the stage name Musaire and his 1930 RCA Theremin can be seen, played and heard at the Musical Museum, Brentford, England.\nDuring the 1930s, Lucie Bigelow Rosen was also taken with the theremin and together with her husband Walter Bigelow Rosen provided both financial and artistic support to the development and popularisation of the instrument.\nIn 1938, Theremin left the United States, though the circumstances related to his departure are in dispute. Many accounts claim he was taken from his New York City apartment by NKVD agents (preceding the KGB), taken back to the Soviet Union and made to work in a \"sharashka\" laboratory prison camp at Magadan, Siberia. He reappeared 30 years later. In his 2000 biography of the inventor, \"Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage\", Albert Glinsky suggested he had fled to escape crushing personal debts, and was then caught up in Stalin's political purges. In any case, Theremin did not return to the United States until 1991.\nAfter a flurry of interest in America following the end of the Second World War, the theremin soon fell into disuse with serious musicians, mainly because newer electronic instruments were introduced that were easier to play. However, a niche interest in the theremin persisted, mostly among electronics enthusiasts and kit-building hobbyists. One of these electronics enthusiasts, Robert Moog, began building theremins in the 1950s, while he was a high-school student. Moog subsequently published a number of articles about building theremins, and sold theremin kits that were intended to be assembled by the customer. Moog credited what he learned from the experience as leading directly to his groundbreaking synthesizer, the Moog. (Around 1955, a colleague of Moog's, electronic music pioneer Raymond Scott, purchased one of Moog's theremin subassemblies to incorporate into a new invention, the Clavivox, which was intended to be an easy-to-use keyboard theremin.)\nBoth theremin instruments and kits are available. The Open Theremin, an open hardware and open software project, was developed by Swiss microengineer Urz Gaudenz, using the original heterodyne oscillator architecture for a good playing experience, combined with Arduino. Using a few extra components, a MIDI interface can be added to the Open Theremin, enabling a player to use their theremin to control different instrument sounds.\nThe theremin's singular operation method has been praised for providing an accessible route to music-making for people with disabilities.\nOperating principles.\nThe theremin is distinguished among musical instruments in that it is played without physical contact. The thereminist stands in front of the instrument and moves their hands in the proximity of two metal antennas. While commonly called antennas, they are not used as radio antennae for receiving or broadcasting radio waves, but rather act as plates of capacitors. The distance from one antenna determines frequency (pitch), and the distance from the other controls amplitude (volume). Higher notes are played by moving the hand closer to the pitch antenna. Louder notes are played by moving the hand away from the volume antenna.\nMost frequently, the right hand controls the pitch and the left controls the volume, although some performers reverse this arrangement. Some low-cost theremins use a conventional, knob-operated volume control and have only the pitch antenna.\nThe theremin uses the heterodyne principle to generate an audio signal. The instrument's pitch circuitry includes two radio frequency oscillators set below 500 kHz to minimize radio interference. One oscillator operates at a fixed frequency. The frequency of the other oscillator is almost identical, and is controlled by the performer's distance from the pitch control antenna.\nThe performer's hand has significant body capacitance, and thus can be treated as the grounded plate of a variable capacitor in an L-C (inductance-capacitance) circuit, which is part of the oscillator and determines its frequency. In the simplest designs, the antenna is directly coupled to the tuned circuit of the oscillator and the 'pitch field', that is the change of note with distance, is highly nonlinear, as the capacitance change with distance is far greater near the antenna. In such systems, when the antenna is removed, the oscillator moves up in frequency.\nTo partly linearise the pitch field, the antenna may be wired in series with an inductor to form a series tuned circuit, resonating with the parallel combination of the antenna's intrinsic capacitance and the capacitance of the player's hand in proximity to the antenna. This series tuned circuit is then connected in parallel with the parallel tuned circuit of the variable pitch oscillator. With the antenna circuit disconnected, the oscillator is tuned to a frequency slightly higher than the stand-alone resonant frequency of the antenna circuit. At that frequency, the antenna and its linearisation coil present an inductive impedance; and when connected, behaves as an inductor in parallel with the oscillator. Thus, connecting the antenna and linearising coil raises the oscillation frequency. Close to the resonant frequency of the antenna circuit, the effective inductance is small, and the effect on the oscillator is greatest; farther from it, the effective inductance is larger, and fractional change on the oscillator is reduced.\nWhen the hand is distant from the antenna, the resonant frequency of the antenna series circuit is at its highest; i.e., it is closest to the free running frequency of the oscillator, and small changes in antenna capacitance have greatest effect. Under this condition, the effective inductance in the tank circuit is at its minimum and the oscillation frequency is at its maximum. The steepening rate of change of shunt impedance with hand position compensates for the reduced influence of the hand being further away. With careful tuning, a near linear region of pitch field can be created over the central two or three octaves of operation. Using optimized pitch field linearisation, circuits can be made where a change in capacitance between the performer and the instrument in the order of 0.01 picofarads produces a full octave of frequency shift.\nThe mixer produces the audio-range difference between the frequencies of the two oscillators at each moment, which is the tone that is then wave shaped and amplified and sent to a loudspeaker.\nTo control volume, the performer's other hand acts as the grounded plate of another variable capacitor. As in the tone circuit, the distance between the performer's hand and the volume control antenna determines the capacitance and hence natural resonant frequency of an LC circuit inductively coupled to another fixed LC oscillator circuit operating at a slightly higher resonant frequency. When a hand approaches the antenna, the natural frequency of that circuit is lowered by the extra capacitance, which detunes the oscillator and lowers its resonant plate current.\nIn the earliest theremins, the radio frequency plate current of the oscillator is picked up by another winding and used to power the filament of another diode-connected triode, which thus acts as a variable conductance element changing the output amplitude. The harmonic timbre of the output, not being a pure tone, was an important feature of the theremin. Theremin's original design included audio frequency series/parallel LC formant filters as well as a 3-winding variable-saturation transformer to control or induce harmonics in the audio output.\nModern circuit designs often simplify this circuit and avoid the complexity of two heterodyne oscillators by having a single pitch oscillator, akin to the original theremin's volume circuit. This approach is usually less stable and cannot generate the low frequencies that a heterodyne oscillator can. Better designs (e.g., Moog, Theremax) may use two pairs of heterodyne oscillators, for both pitch and volume.\nPerformance technique.\nImportant in theremin articulation is the use of the volume control antenna. Unlike touched instruments, where simply halting play or damping a resonator in the traditional sense silences the instrument, the thereminist must \"play the rests, as well as the notes\", as Clara Rockmore observed.\nIf the pitch hand is moved between notes, without first lowering the volume hand, the result is a \"swooping\" sound akin to a swanee whistle or a glissando played on the violin. Small flutters of the pitch hand can be used to produce a vibrato effect. To produce distinct notes requires a pecking action with the volume hand to mute the volume while the pitch hand moves between positions.\nThereminists such as Carolina Eyck use a fixed arm position per octave, and use fixed positions of the fingers to create the notes within the octave, allowing very fast transitions between adjacent notes.\nAlthough volume technique is less developed than pitch technique, some thereminists have worked to extend it, especially Pamelia Kurstin with her \"walking bass\" technique and Rupert Chappelle.\nThe critic Harold C. Schonberg described the sound of the theremin as \"[a] cello lost in a dense fog, crying because it does not know how to get home\".\nUses.\nConcert music.\nThe first orchestral composition written for theremin was Andrei Pashchenko's \"Symphonic Mystery\", which premiered in 1924. However, most of the sheet music was lost after its second performance.\nOther concert composers who have written for theremin include Bohuslav Martin\u016f, Percy Grainger, Christian Wolff, Joseph Schillinger, Moritz Eggert, Iraida Yusupova, Jorge Antunes, Vladimir Komarov, Anis Fuleihan, and Faz\u0131l Say.\nEdgard Var\u00e8se completed the composition \"Equatorial\" for two theremin cellos and percussion in 1934. His work was a stated influence throughout the career of Frank Zappa, who also composed for theremin.\nMaverick composer Percy Grainger chose to use ensembles of four or six theremins (in preference to a string quartet) for his two earliest experimental \"Free Music\" compositions (1935\u20131937) because of the instrument's complete 'gliding' freedom of pitch.\nMusician Jean-Michel Jarre used the instrument in his concerts Oxyg\u00e8ne in Moscow in 1997 and Space of Freedom in Gda\u0144sk in 2005, providing also a short history of Leon Theremin's life.\nThe five-piece Spaghetti Western Orchestra use a theremin as a replacement for Edda Dell'Orso's vocals in their interpretation of Ennio Morricone's \"Once Upon a Time in the West\".\nA large-scale theremin concerto is Kalevi Aho's Concerto for Theremin and Chamber Orchestra \"Eight Seasons\" (2011), written for Carolina Eyck.\nOther notable contemporary theremin players include Pamelia Kurstin, Peter Theremin, Natasha Theremin, Katica Ill\u00e9nyi. and Lydia Kavina, Dutch classical musician Thorwald J\u00f8rgensen has been described as \"one of the most important exponents of classical music on the theremin\". Carolina Eyck started playing the theremin at the age of seven and published the book \"The Art of Playing the Theremin\" in English and German when she was 19 and has since played with chamber and symphony orchestras in many countries.\nIn 2019 in Kobe, Japan, the Matryomin ensemble, a group of 289 theremin players that included Natasha Theremin, Masha Theremin and Peter Theremin, the daughter, granddaughter and great-grandson of the inventor, achieved a Guinness world record as the largest ensemble of the instrument. The name \"Matryomin\" is a portmanteau by its inventor of the words \"matryoshka\" and \"theremin\". The theremin concerto \"Dancefloor With Pulsing\" by the French composer R\u00e9gis Campo was written for Carolina Eyck and premiered with the Brussels Philharmonic in 2018.\nPopular music.\nTheremins and theremin-like sounds started to be incorporated into popular music from the end of the 1940s (with a series of Samuel Hoffman/Harry Revel collaborations) and has continued, with various degrees of popularity, to the present.\nLothar and the Hand People were the first rock band known to perform live with a theremin in November 1965. In fact, Lothar was the name they gave to their Moog theremin.\nThe Beach Boys' 1966 single \"Good Vibrations\"\u2014though it does not contain a theremin\u2014is the most frequently cited example of the instrument in pop music. The song features a similar-sounding instrument invented by Paul Tanner called an Electro-Theremin. Upon release, the single prompted an unexpected revival in theremins and increased the awareness of analog synthesizers. In response to requests by the band, Moog Music began producing its own brand of ribbon-controlled instruments which would mimic the sound of a theremin.\nFrank Zappa also included the theremin on the albums \"Freak Out!\" (1966) and \"We're Only in It for the Money\" (1967).\nJimmy Page of Led Zeppelin used a variation of the theremin (pitch antenna only) during performances of \"Whole Lotta Love\" and \"No Quarter\" throughout the performance history of Led Zeppelin, an extended multi-instrumental solo featuring theremin and bowed guitar in 1977, as well as the soundtrack for \"Death Wish II\", released in 1982.\nBrian Jones of the Rolling Stones also used the instrument on the group's 1967 albums \"Between the Buttons\" and \"Their Satanic Majesties Request\".\nTesla guitarist Frank Hannon used a theremin in the band's song \"Edison's Medicine\" from the 1991 album \"Psychotic Supper\". Hannon is also seen using the instrument in the song's music video at the 2:40 mark.\nThe Lothars are a Boston-area band formed in early 1997 whose CDs have featured as many as four theremins played at once \u2013 a first for pop music.\nAlthough credited with a \"Thereman\" [\"sic\"] on the track \"Mysterons\" from the album \"Dummy\", Portishead used a monophonic synthesizer to achieve theremin-like effects, as confirmed by Adrian Utley, who is credited as playing the instrument; on the songs \"Half Day Closing\", \"Humming\", \"The Rip\", and \"Machine Gun\" he has used a custom-made theremin.\nPage McConnell, keyboardist of the American rock band Phish, plays the theremin on rare occasions. His last notable performance was on 6 August 2017, the final evening of the band's 13-night residency at Madison Square Garden.\nWhen Simon and Garfunkel performed their song \"The Boxer\" during a concert at Madison Square Garden in December 2003, they utilized a theremin. The original recording of the song had featured a steel guitar and a piccolo trumpet in unison in the solo interlude, but for this performance, thereminist Rob Schwimmer played the solo.\nFilm music.\nRussian composer Dmitri Shostakovich was one of the first to incorporate parts for the theremin in orchestral pieces, including a use in his score for the film (, 1931, Leonid Trauberg and Grigori Kozintsev). While the theremin was not widely used in classical music performances, the instrument found great success in many motion pictures, notably \"Spellbound\", \"The Lost Weekend\", \"The Red House\" (all three written by Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa, the composer who pioneered the use of the instrument in Hollywood scores), \"The Spiral Staircase\", \"Rocketship X-M\", \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\", \"The Thing from Another World\", \"Castle in the Air\", and \"The Ten Commandments\". The theremin is played and identified as such in the Jerry Lewis movie \"The Delicate Delinquent\". The theremin is prominent in the score for the 1956 short film \"A Short Vision\", which was aired on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" the same year that it was used by the Hungarian composer M\u00e1ty\u00e1s Seiber. More recent appearances in film scores include \"Monster House\", \"Ed Wood\", \"The Machinist\" and \"The Electrical Life of Louis Wain\" (2021), (last three featuring Lydia Kavina), as well as \"First Man\" (2018).\nA theremin was not used for the soundtrack of \"Forbidden Planet\", for which Bebe and Louis Barron built disposable oscillator circuits and a ring modulator to create the electronic tonalities used in the film.\nLos Angeles\u2013based thereminist Charles Richard Lester is featured on the soundtrack of \"Monster House\" and has performed the US premiere of Gavriil Popov's 1932 score for \"Komsomol \u2013 Patron of Electrification\" with the Los Angeles Philharmonic and Esa-Pekka Salonen in 2007.\nIn Lenny Abrahamson's 2014 film, \"Frank\", Clara, the character played by Maggie Gyllenhaal, plays the theremin in a band named Soronprfbs.\nTheatre and performing arts.\nCharlie Rosen, orchestrator of the Broadway musical \"Be More Chill\", credits the show as being the first on Broadway to have a theremin in its band.\n\"The First Theremin Concert for Extraterrestrials\".\n\"The First Theremin Concert for Extraterrestrials\" was the world's first musical METI broadcast dispatched from the Evpatoria deep-space communications complex in Crimea, and was sent seven years before NASA's Across the Universe message. Seven different melodies were transmitted from audio-cassette recordings of the theremin being played by Lydia Kavina, Yana Aksenova, and Anton Kerchenko, all from the Moscow Theremin Center. These seven melodies were:\nThey were played in succession six times over the span of three days from August to September 2001 during the transmission of Teen Age Message, an interstellar radio message.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "30724", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30724", "title": "The University of Texas at Austin", "text": ""}
{"id": "30725", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30725", "title": "Thin client", "text": "Non-powerful computer optimized for remote server access\nIn computer networking, a thin client (sometimes called a slim client or lean client) is a simple, low-performance computer that has been optimized for remote desktop connections to a server-based computing environment. In some cases, they are also referred to as \"network computers\" or, in their simplest form, \"zero clients\".\nThe server performs most of the workload, including launching software applications, processing computations, and handling data storage. This contrasts with a rich client or a traditional personal computer \u2014 the former is designed for a client\u2013server model but retains significant local processing power, while the latter performs most of its functions locally.\nThin clients typically operate as part of a larger computing infrastructure \u2014 often involving a server farm or cloud-based system \u2014 where many clients share centralized resources. The server-side infrastructure may use application virtualization, hosted shared desktop (HSD), or desktop virtualization (VDI). This model forms a centralized cloud computing environment hosted in one or more data centers.\nKey advantages of centralization include:\nThin client hardware typically supports common peripherals, such as keyboards, mice, computer monitors, audio jacks, and open USB ports (e.g., for printers, flash drives, webcams). Some models include legacy serial ports or parallel ports to support specialized equipment such as receipt printers or time-clocks.\nThin client software commonly includes:\nCharacteristics.\nArchitecture.\nIn using cloud-based architecture, the server takes on the processing load of several client sessions, acting as a host for each endpoint device. The client software is narrowly purposed and lightweight; therefore, only the host server or server farm needs to be secured, rather than securing software installed on every endpoint device (although thin clients may still require basic security and strong authentication to prevent unauthorized access). One of the combined benefits of using cloud architecture with thin client desktops is that critical IT assets are centralized for better utilization of resources. Unused memory, bussing lanes, and processor cores within an individual user session, for example, can be leveraged for other active user sessions.\nThe simplicity of thin client hardware and software results in a very low total cost of ownership, but some of these initial savings can be offset by the need for a more robust cloud infrastructure required on the server side.\nAn alternative to traditional server deployment which spreads out infrastructure costs over time is a cloud-based subscription model known as desktop as a service, which allows IT organizations to outsource the cloud infrastructure to a third party.\nSimplicity.\nThin client computing is known to simplify the desktop endpoints by reducing the client-side software footprint. With a lightweight, read-only operating system (OS), client-side setup and administration is greatly reduced. Cloud access is the primary role of a thin client which eliminates the need for a large suite of local user applications, data storage, and utilities. This architecture shifts most of the software execution burden from the endpoint to the data center. User assets are centralized for greater visibility. Data recovery and desktop repurposing tasks are also centralized for faster service and greater scalability.\nHardware.\nWhile the server must be robust enough to handle several client sessions at once, thin client hardware requirements are minimal compared to that of a traditional PC laptop or desktop. Most thin clients have low-energy processors, flash storage, memory, and no moving parts. This reduces the cost, power consumption (heat, noise and vibrations), making them affordable to own and easy to replace or deploy. Numerous thin clients also use Raspberry Pis. Since thin clients consist of fewer hardware components than a traditional desktop PC, they can operate in more hostile environments. And because they typically don't store critical data locally, risk of theft is minimized because there is little or no user data to be compromised.\nGraphics.\nModern thin clients have come a long way to meet the demands of today's graphical computing needs. New generations of low energy chipset and central processing unit (CPU) combinations improve processing power and graphical capabilities. To minimize latency of high resolution video sent across the network, some host software stacks leverage multimedia redirection (MMR) techniques to offload video rendering to the desktop device. Video codecs are often embedded on the thin client to support these various multimedia formats. Other host software stacks makes use of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) in order to accelerate fast changing pixel updates required by modern video content. Thin clients typically support local software agents capable of accepting and decoding UDP.\nSome of the more graphically intense use cases remain a challenge for thin clients. These use cases might include applications like photo editors, 3D drawing programs, and animation tools. This can be addressed at the host server using dedicated GPU cards, allocation of vGPUs (virtual GPU), workstation cards, and hardware acceleration cards. These solutions allow IT administrators to provide power-user performance where it is needed to a relatively generic endpoint device such as a thin client.\nLimitations.\nTo achieve such simplicity, thin clients sometimes lag behind desktop PCs in terms of extensibility. For example, if a local software utility or set of device drivers are needed in order to support a locally attached peripheral device (e.g. printer, scanner, biometric security device), the thin client operating system may lack the resources needed to fully integrate the required dependencies (although dependencies can sometimes be added if they can be identified). Modern thin clients address this limitation via port mapping or USB redirection software. However, these methods cannot address all scenarios. Therefore, it is good practice to perform validation tests of locally attached peripherals in advance to ensure compatibility. Further, in large distributed desktop environments, printers are often networked, negating the need for device drivers on every desktop.\nWhile running local productivity applications goes beyond the normal scope of a thin client, it is sometimes needed in rare use cases. License restrictions that apply to thin clients can sometimes prevent them from supporting these applications. Local storage constraints may also limit the space required to install large applications or application suites.\nIt is also important to acknowledge that network bandwidth and performance is more critical in any type of cloud-based computing model. IT organizations must ensure that their network can accommodate the number of users that they need to serve. If demand for bandwidth exceeds network limits, it could result in a major loss of end user productivity.\nA similar risk exists inside the data center. Servers must be sized correctly in order to deliver adequate performance to end users. In a cloud-based computing model, the servers can also represent a single point of failure risk. If a server fails, end users lose access to all of the resources supported by that server. This risk can be mitigated by building redundancies, fail-over processes, backups, and load balancing utilities into the system. Redundancy provides reliable host availability but it can add cost to smaller user populations that lack scale.\nProviders.\nPopular providers of thin clients include Chip PC Technologies, Dell (acquired Wyse Technology in 2012), HP, ClearCube, https://, IGEL Technology, LG, NComputing, Stratodesk, Samsung Electronics, ThinClient Direct, and ZeeTim.\nHistory.\nThin clients have their roots in multi-user systems, traditionally mainframes accessed by some sort of computer terminal. As computer graphics matured, these terminals transitioned from providing a command-line interface to a full graphical user interface, as is common on modern advanced thin clients. The prototypical multi-user environment along these lines, Unix, began to support fully graphical X terminals, i.e., devices running display server software, from about 1984. X terminals remained relatively popular even after the arrival of other thin clients in the mid-late 1990s. Modern Unix derivatives like BSD and Linux continue the tradition of the multi-user, remote display/input session. Typically, X software is not made available on non-X-based thin clients, although no technical reason for this exclusion would prevent it.\nWindows NT became capable of multi-user operations primarily through the efforts of Citrix Systems, which repackaged Windows NT 3.51 as the multi-user operating system WinFrame in 1995, launched in coordination with Wyse Technology's Winterm thin client. Microsoft licensed this technology back from Citrix and implemented it into Windows NT 4.0 Terminal Server Edition, under a project codenamed \"Hydra\". Windows NT then became the basis of Windows 2000 and Windows XP. As of 2011[ [update]], Microsoft Windows systems support graphical terminals via the Remote Desktop Services component. The Wyse Winterm was the first Windows-display-focused thin client (AKA Windows Terminal) to access this environment.\nThe term \"thin client\" was coined in 1993 by Tim Negris, VP of Server Marketing at Oracle Corporation, while working with company founder Larry Ellison on the launch of Oracle 7. At the time, Oracle wished to differentiate their server-oriented software from Microsoft's desktop-oriented products. Ellison subsequently popularized Negris' buzzword with frequent use in his speeches and interviews about Oracle products. Ellison would go on to be a founding board member of thin client maker Network Computer, Inc (NCI), later renamed Liberate.\nThe term stuck for several reasons. The earlier term \"graphical terminal\" had been chosen to distinguish such terminals from text-based terminals, and thus put the emphasis heavily on \"graphics\"\u00a0\u2013 which became obsolete as a distinguishing characteristic in the 1990s as text-only physical terminals themselves became obsolete, and text-only computer systems (a few of which existed in the 1980s) were no longer manufactured. The term \"thin client\" also conveys better what was then viewed as the fundamental difference: thin clients can be designed with less expensive hardware, because they have reduced computational workloads.\nBy the 2010s, thin clients were not the only desktop devices for general purpose computing that were \"thin\"\u00a0\u2013 in the sense of having a small form factor and being relatively inexpensive. The nettop form factor for desktop PCs was introduced, and nettops could run full feature Windows or Linux; tablets, tablet-laptop hybrids had also entered the market. However, while there was now little size difference, thin clients retained some key advantages over these competitors, such as not needing a local drive. However, \"thin client\" can be a misnomer for slim form-factor computers using flash memory such as compactflash, SD card, or permanent flash memory as a hard disk substitute. In 2013, a Citrix employee experimented with a Raspberry Pi as a thin client. Since then, several manufacturers have introduced their version of Raspberry Pi thin clients.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30727", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30727", "title": "Toroidal networks and hypercubes", "text": ""}
{"id": "30728", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30728", "title": "Tree and hypertree networks", "text": ""}
{"id": "30731", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30731", "title": "Teleological argument", "text": "Argument for the existence of God\nThe teleological argument (from ) also known as physico-theological argument, argument from design, or intelligent design argument, is a rational argument for the existence of God or, more generally, that complex functionality in the natural world, which looks designed, is evidence of an intelligent creator. \nThe earliest recorded versions of this argument are associated with Socrates in ancient Greece, although it has been argued that he was taking up an older argument. Later, Plato and Aristotle developed complex approaches to the proposal that the cosmos has an intelligent cause, but it was the Stoics during the Roman era who, under their influence, \"developed the battery of creationist arguments broadly known under the label 'The Argument from Design'\".\nSince the Roman era, various versions of the teleological argument have been associated with the Abrahamic religions. In the Middle Ages, Islamic theologians such as Al-Ghazali used the argument, although it was rejected as unnecessary by Quranic literalists, and as unconvincing by many Islamic philosophers. Later, the teleological argument was accepted by Saint Thomas Aquinas, and included as the fifth of his \"Five Ways\" of proving the existence of God. In early modern England, clergymen such as William Turner and John Ray were well-known proponents. In the early 18th century, William Derham published his \"Physico-Theology\", which gave his \"demonstration of the being and attributes of God from his works of creation\". Later, William Paley, in his 1802 \"Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity\" published a prominent presentation of the design argument with his version of the watchmaker analogy and the first use of the phrase \"argument from design\".\nFrom its beginning, there have been numerous criticisms of the different versions of the teleological argument. Some have been written as responses to criticisms of non-teleological natural science which are associated with it. Especially important were the general logical arguments presented by David Hume in his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\", published in 1779, and the explanation of biological complexity given in Charles Darwin's \"Origin of Species\", published in 1859. Since the 1960s, Paley's arguments have been influential in the development of a creation science movement which used phrases such as \"design by an intelligent designer\", and after 1987 this was rebranded as \"intelligent design\", promoted by the intelligent design movement which refers to an intelligent designer. Both movements have used the teleological argument to argue against the modern scientific understanding of evolution, and to claim that supernatural explanations should be given equal validity in the public school science curriculum.\nStarting already in classical Greece, two approaches to the teleological argument developed, distinguished by their understanding of whether the natural order was literally created or not. The non-creationist approach starts most clearly with Aristotle, although many thinkers, such as the Neoplatonists, believed it was already intended by Plato. This approach is not creationist in a simple sense, because while it agrees that a cosmic intelligence is responsible for the natural order, it rejects the proposal that this requires a \"creator\" to physically make and maintain this order. The Neoplatonists did not find the teleological argument convincing, and in this they were followed by medieval philosophers such as Al-Farabi and Avicenna. Later, Averroes and Thomas Aquinas considered the argument acceptable, but not necessarily the best argument.\nWhile the concept of an intelligence behind the natural order is ancient, a rational argument that concludes that we can know that the natural world has a designer, or a creating intelligence which has human-like purposes, appears to have begun with classical philosophy. Religious thinkers in Judaism, Hinduism, Confucianism, Islam and Christianity also developed versions of the teleological argument. Later, variants on the argument from design were produced in Western philosophy and by Christian fundamentalism.\nContemporary defenders of the teleological argument are mainly Christians, for example Richard Swinburne and John Lennox.\nClassical philosophy.\nSocrates and the pre-Socratics.\nThe argument from intelligent design appears to have begun with Socrates, although the concept of a cosmic intelligence is older and David Sedley has argued that Socrates was developing an older idea, citing Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, born about 500 BC, as a possible earlier proponent. The proposal that the order of nature showed evidence of having its own human-like \"intelligence\" goes back to the origins of Greek natural philosophy and science, and its attention to the orderliness of nature, often with special reference to the revolving of the heavens. Anaxagoras is the first person who is definitely known to have explained such a concept using the word \"nous\" (which is the original Greek term that leads to modern English \"intelligence\" via its Latin and French translations). Aristotle reports an earlier philosopher from Clazomenae named Hermotimus who had taken a similar position. Amongst Pre-Socratic philosophers before Anaxagoras, other philosophers had proposed a similar intelligent ordering principle causing life and the rotation of the heavens. For example Empedocles, like Hesiod much earlier, described cosmic order and living things as caused by a cosmic version of love, and Pythagoras and Heraclitus attributed the cosmos with \"reason\" (\"logos\"). In his \"Philebus\" 28c Plato has Socrates speak of this as a tradition, saying that \"all philosophers agree\u2014whereby they really exalt themselves\u2014that mind (\"nous\") is king of heaven and earth. Perhaps they are right.\" and later states that the ensuing discussion \"confirms the utterances of those who declared of old that mind (\"nous\") always rules the universe\".\nXenophon's report in his \"Memorabilia\" might be the earliest clear account of an argument that there is evidence in nature of intelligent design. The word traditionally translated and discussed as \"design\" is \"gn\u014dm\u0113\" and Socrates is reported by Xenophon to have pressed doubting young men to look at things in the market, and consider whether they could tell which things showed evidence of \"gn\u014dm\u0113\", and which seemed more to be by blind chance, and then to compare this to nature and consider whether it could be by blind chance. In Plato's \"Phaedo\", Socrates is made to say just before dying that his discovery of Anaxagoras' concept of a cosmic \"nous\" as the cause of the order of things, was an important turning point for him. But he also expressed disagreement with Anaxagoras' understanding of the implications of his own doctrine, because of Anaxagoras' materialist understanding of causation. Socrates complained that Anaxagoras restricted the work of the cosmic \"nous\" to the beginning, as if it were uninterested and all events since then just happened because of causes like air and water. Socrates, on the other hand, apparently insisted that the demiurge must be \"loving\", particularly concerning humanity. (In this desire to go beyond Anaxagoras and make the cosmic \"nous\" a more active manager, Socrates was apparently preceded by Diogenes of Apollonia.); ; and\nPlato and Aristotle.\nPlato's \"Timaeus\" is presented as a description of someone who is explaining a \"likely story\" in the form of a myth, and so throughout history commentators have disagreed about which elements of the myth can be seen as the position of Plato. Sedley (2007) nevertheless calls it \"the creationist manifesto\" and points out that although some of Plato's followers denied that he intended it, in classical times writers such as Aristotle, Epicurus, the Stoics, and Galen all understood Plato as proposing the world originated in an \"intelligent creative act\". Plato has a character explain the concept of a \"demiurge\" with supreme wisdom and intelligence as the creator of the cosmos in his work.\nPlato's teleological perspective is also built upon the analysis of \"a priori\" order and structure in the world that he had already presented in \"The Republic\". The story does not propose creation \"ex nihilo\"; rather, the demiurge made order from the chaos of the cosmos, imitating the eternal Forms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Plato's world of eternal and unchanging Forms, imperfectly represented in matter by a divine Artisan, contrasts sharply with the various mechanistic Weltanschauungen, of which atomism was, by the 4th century at least, the most prominent ... This debate was to persist throughout the ancient world. Atomistic mechanism got a shot in the arm from Epicurus ... while the Stoics adopted a divine teleology ... The choice seems simple: either show how a structured, regular world could arise out of undirected processes, or inject intelligence into the system.\u2014\u200a\nPlato's student and friend Aristotle (c. 384 \u2013 322 BC), continued the Socratic tradition of criticising natural scientists such as Democritus who sought (as in modern science) to explain everything in terms of matter and chance motion. He was very influential in the future development of classical creationism, but was not a straightforward \"creationist\" because he required no creation interventions in nature, meaning he \"insulated god from any requirement to intervene in nature, either as creator or as administrator\". Instead of direct intervention by a creator it is \"scarcely an exaggeration to say that for Aristotle the entire functioning of the natural world, as also the heavens, is ultimately to be understood as a shared striving towards godlike actuality\". And whereas the myth in the \"Timaeus\" suggests that all living things are based on one single paradigm, not one for each species, and even tells a story of \"devolution\" whereby other living things devolved from humans, it was Aristotle who presented the influential idea that each type of normal living thing must be based on a fixed paradigm or form for that species.\nAristotle felt that biology was a particularly important example of a field where materialist natural science ignored information which was needed in order to understand living things well. For example birds use wings for the purpose of flight. Therefore the most complete explanation in regard to the natural, as well as the artificial, is for the most part teleological. In fact, proposals that species had changed by chance survival of the fittest, similar to what is now called \"natural selection\", were already known to Aristotle, and he rejected these with the same logic. He conceded that monstrosities (new forms of life) could come about by chance, but he disagreed with those who ascribed all nature purely to chance because he believed science can only provide a general account of that which is normal, \"always, or for the most part\". The distinction between what is normal, or by nature, and what is \"accidental\", or not by nature, is important in Aristotle's understanding of nature. As pointed out by Sedley, \"Aristotle is happy to say (\"Physics\" II 8, 199a33-b4) without the slightest fear of blasphemy, crafts make occasional mistakes; therefore, by analogy, so can nature.\" According to Aristotle the changes which happen by nature are caused by their \"formal causes\", and for example in the case of a bird's wings there is also a final cause which is the purpose of flying. He explicitly compared this to human technology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If then what comes from art is for the sake of something, it is clear that what come from nature is too ... This is clear most of all in the other animals, which do nothing by art, inquiry, or deliberation; for which reason some people are completely at a loss whether it is by intelligence or in some other way that spiders, ants, and such things work. ... It is absurd to think that a thing does not happen for the sake of something if we do not see what sets it in motion deliberating. ... This is most clear when someone practices medicine himself on himself; for nature is like that.\u2014\u200a\nThe question of how to understand Aristotle's conception of nature having a purpose and direction something like human activity is controversial in the details. Martha Nussbaum for example has argued that in his biology this approach was practical and meant to show nature only being analogous to human art, explanations of an organ being greatly informed by knowledge of its essential function. Nevertheless, Nussbaum's position is not universally accepted. In any case, Aristotle was not understood this way by his followers in the Middle Ages, who saw him as consistent with monotheistic religion and a teleological understanding of all nature. Consistent with the medieval interpretation, in his \"Metaphysics\" and other works Aristotle clearly argued a case for there being one highest god or \"prime mover\" which was the ultimate cause, though specifically not the material cause, of the eternal forms or natures which cause the natural order, including all living things. He clearly refers to this entity having an intellect that humans somehow share in, which helps humans see the true natures or forms of things without relying purely on sense perception of physical things, including living species. This understanding of nature, and Aristotle's arguments against materialist understandings of nature, were very influential in the Middle Ages in Europe. The idea of fixed species remained dominant in biology until Darwin, and a focus upon biology is still common today in teleological criticisms of modern science.\nRoman era.\nIt was the Stoics who \"developed the battery of creationist arguments broadly known under the label 'The Argument from Design'\". Cicero (c. 106 \u2013 c. 43 BC) reported the teleological argument of the Stoics in \"De Natura Deorum\" (\"On the Nature of the Gods\") Book II, which includes an early version of the watchmaker analogy, which was later developed by William Paley. He has one of the characters in the dialogue say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When you see a sundial or a water-clock, you see that it tells the time by design and not by chance. How then can you imagine that the universe as a whole is devoid of purpose and intelligence, when it embraces everything, including these artifacts themselves and their artificers?\u2014\u200a\nAnother very important classical supporter of the teleological argument was Galen, whose compendious works were one of the major sources of medical knowledge until modern times, both in Europe and the medieval Islamic world. He was not a Stoic, but like them he looked back to the Socratics and was constantly engaged in arguing against atomists such as the Epicureans. Unlike Aristotle (who was however a major influence upon him), and unlike the Neoplatonists, he believed there was really evidence for something literally like the \"demiurge\" found in Plato's \"Timaeus\", which worked physical upon nature. In works such as his \"On the Usefulness of Parts\" he explained evidence for it in the complexity of animal construction. His work shows \"early signs of contact and contrast between the pagan and the Judaeo-Christian tradition of creation\", criticizing the account found in the Bible. \"Moses, he suggests, would have contented himself with saying that God ordered the eyelashes not to grow and that they obeyed. In contrast to this, the Platonic tradition's Demiurge is above all else a technician.\" Surprisingly, neither Aristotle nor Plato, but Xenophon are considered by Galen, as the best writer on this subject. Galen shared with Xenophon a scepticism of the value of books about most speculative philosophy, except for inquiries such as whether there is \"something in the world superior in power and wisdom to man\". This he saw as having an everyday importance, a usefulness for living well. He also asserted that Xenophon was the author who reported the real position of Socrates, including his aloofness from many types of speculative science and philosophy.\nGalen's connection of the teleological argument to discussions about the complexity of living things, and his insistence that this is possible for a practical scientist, foreshadows some aspects of modern uses of the teleological argument.\nMedieval philosophy and theology.\nLate classical Christian writers.\nAs an appeal to general revelation, Paul the Apostle (AD 5\u201367), argues in Romans 1:18\u201320, that because it has been made plain to all from what has been created in the world, it is obvious that there is a God.\nMarcus Minucius Felix (c. late 2nd to 3rd century), an Early Christian writer, argued for the existence of God based on the analogy of an ordered house in his \"The Orders of Minucius Felix\": \"Supposing you went into a house and found everything neat, orderly and well-kept, surely you would assume it had a master, and one much better than the good things, his belongings; so in this house of the universe, when throughout heaven and earth you see the marks of foresight, order and law, may you not assume that the lord and author of the universe is fairer than the stars themselves or than any portions of the entire world ?\"\nAugustine of Hippo (AD 354\u2013430) in The City of God mentioned the idea that the world's \"well-ordered changes and movements\", and \"the fair appearance of all visible things\" was evidence for the world being created, and \"that it could not have been created save by God\".\nIslamic philosophy.\nEarly Islamic philosophy played an important role in developing the philosophical understandings of God among Jewish and Christian thinkers in the Middle Ages, but concerning the teleological argument one of the lasting effects of this tradition came from its discussions of the difficulties which this type of proof has. Various forms of the argument from design have been used by Islamic theologians and philosophers from the time of the early Mutakallimun theologians in the 9th century, although it is rejected by fundamentalist or literalist schools, for whom the mention of God in the Qu'ran should be sufficient evidence. The argument from design was also seen as an unconvincing sophism by the early Islamic philosopher Al-Farabi, who instead took the \"emanationist\" approach of the Neoplatonists such as Plotinus, whereby nature is rationally ordered, but God is not like a craftsman who literally manages the world. Later, Avicenna was also convinced of this, and proposed instead a cosmological argument for the existence of God.\nThe argument was however later accepted by both the Aristotelian philosopher Averroes (Ibn Rushd) and his great anti-philosophy opponent Al-Ghazali. Averroes' term for the argument was \"Dal\u012bl al-\u02c1in\u0101ya\", which can be translated as \"argument from providence\". Both of them however accepted the argument \"because\" they believed it is explicitly mentioned in the Quran. Despite this, like Aristotle, the Neoplatonists, and Al-Farabi, Averroes proposed that order and continual motion in the world is caused by God's intellect. Whether Averroes was an \"emanationist\" like his predecessors has been a subject of disagreement and uncertainty. But it is generally agreed that what he adapted from those traditions, agreed with them about the fact that God does not create in the same way as a craftsman.\nIn fact then, Averroes treated the teleological argument as one of two \"religious\" arguments for the existence of God. The principal demonstrative proof is, according to Averroes, Aristotle's proof from motion in the universe that there must be a first mover which causes everything else to move. Averroes' position that the most logically valid proof should be physical rather than metaphysical (because then metaphysics would be proving itself) was in conscious opposition to the position of Avicenna. Later Jewish and Christian philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas were aware of this debate, and generally took a position closer to Avicenna.\nJewish philosophy.\nAn example of the teleological argument in Jewish philosophy appears when the medieval Aristotelian philosopher Maimonides cites the passage in Isaiah 40:26, where the \"Holy One\" says: \"Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number:\" However, Barry Holtz calls this \"a crude form of the argument from design\", and that this \"is only one possible way of reading the text\". He asserts that \"Generally, in the biblical texts the existence of God is taken for granted.\"\nMaimonides also recalled that Abraham (in the midrash, or explanatory text, of Genesis Rabbah 39:1) recognized the existence of \"one transcendent deity from the fact that the world around him exhibits an order and design\". The midrash makes an analogy between the obviousness that a building has an owner, and that the world is looked after by God. Abraham says \"Is it conceivable that the world is without a guide?\" Because of these examples, the 19th century philosopher Nachman Krochmal called the argument from design \"a cardinal principle of the Jewish faith\".\nThe American orthodox rabbi, Aryeh Kaplan, retells a legend about the 2nd century AD Rabbi Meir. When told by a philosopher that he did not believe that the world was created by God, the rabbi produced a beautiful poem that he claimed had come into being when a cat accidentally knocked over a pot of ink, \"spilling ink all over the document. This poem was the result.\" The philosopher exclaims that would be impossible: \"There must be an author. There must be a scribe.\" The rabbi concludes, \"How could the universe ... come into being by itself? There must be an Author. There must be a Creator.\"\nThomas Aquinas.\nThomas Aquinas (1225\u20131274), whose writings became widely accepted within Catholic western Europe, was heavily influenced by Aristotle, Averroes, and other Islamic and Jewish philosophers. He presented a teleological argument in his \"Summa Theologica\". In the work, Aquinas presented five ways in which he attempted to prove the existence of God: the \"quinque viae\". These arguments feature only \"a posteriori\" arguments, rather than literal reading of holy texts. He sums up his teleological argument as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The fifth way is taken from the governance of the world. We see that things which lack knowledge, such as natural bodies, act for an end, and this is evident from their acting always, or nearly always, in the same way, so as to obtain the best result. Hence it is plain that they achieve their end, not fortuitously, but designedly. Now whatever lacks knowledge cannot move towards an end, unless it be directed by some being endowed with knowledge and intelligence; as the arrow is directed by the archer. Therefore, some intelligent being exists by whom all natural things are directed to their end; and this being we call God.\u2014\u200a\nAquinas notes that the existence of final causes, by which a cause is directed toward an effect, can only be explained by an appeal to intelligence. However, as natural bodies aside from humans do not possess intelligence, there must, he reasons, exist a being that directs final causes at every moment. That being is what we call God.\nModernity.\nNewton and Leibniz.\nIsaac Newton affirmed his belief in the truth of the argument when, in 1713, he wrote these words in an appendix to the second edition of his \"Principia\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This most elegant system of the sun, planets, and comets could not have arisen without the design and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being.\nThis view, that \"God is known from his works\", was supported and popularized by Newton's friends Richard Bentley, Samuel Clarke and William Whiston in the Boyle lectures, which Newton supervised. Newton wrote to Bentley, just before Bentley delivered the first lecture, that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;when I wrote my treatise about our Systeme I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the beliefe [\"sic\"] of a Deity, and nothing can rejoice me more than to find it useful for that purpose.\nThe German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz disagreed with Newton's view of design in the teleological argument. In the Leibniz\u2013Clarke correspondence, Samuel Clarke argued Newton's case that God constantly intervenes in the world to keep His design adjusted, while Leibniz thought that the universe was created in such a way that God would not need to intervene at all. As quoted by Ayval Leshem, Leibniz wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;According to [Newton's] doctrine, God Almighty wants [i.e. needs] to wind up his watch from time to time; otherwise it would cease to move. He had not it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion\nLeibniz considered the argument from design to have \"only moral certainty\" unless it was supported by his own idea of pre-established harmony expounded in his Monadology. Bertrand Russell wrote that \"The proof from the pre-established harmony is a particular form of the so-called physico-theological proof, otherwise known as the argument from design.\" According to Leibniz, the universe is completely made from individual substances known as monads, programmed to act in a predetermined way. Russell wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Leibniz's form, the argument states that the harmony of all the monads can only have arisen from a common cause. That they should all exactly synchronize, can only be explained by a Creator who pre-determined their synchronism.\nBritish empiricists.\nThe 17th-century Dutch writers Lessius and Grotius argued that the intricate structure of the world, like that of a house, was unlikely to have arisen by chance. The empiricist John Locke, writing in the late 17th century, developed the Aristotelian idea that, excluding geometry, all science must attain its knowledge \"a posteriori\"\u2014through sensual experience. In response to Locke, Anglican Irish Bishop George Berkeley advanced a form of idealism in which things only continue to exist when they are perceived. When humans do not perceive objects, they continue to exist because God is perceiving them. Therefore, in order for objects to remain in existence, God must exist omnipresently.\nDavid Hume, in the mid-18th century, referred to the teleological argument in his \"A Treatise of Human Nature\". Here, he appears to give his support to the argument from design. John Wright notes that \"Indeed, he claims that the whole thrust of his analysis of causality in the Treatise supports the Design argument\", and that, according to Hume, \"we are obliged 'to infer an infinitely perfect Architect.'\"\nHowever, later he was more critical of the argument in his \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\". This was presented as a dialogue between Hume and \"a friend who loves sceptical paradoxes\", where the friend gives a version of the argument by saying of its proponents, they \"paint in the most magnificent colours the order, beauty, and wise arrangement of the universe; and then ask if such a glorious display of intelligence could come from a random coming together of atoms, or if chance could produce something that the greatest genius can never sufficiently admire\".\nHume also presented arguments both for and against the teleological argument in his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\". The character Cleanthes, summarizing the teleological argument, likens the universe to a man-made machine, and concludes by the principle of similar effects and similar causes that it must have a designing intelligence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Look round the world: contemplate the whole and every part of it: You will find it to be nothing but one great-machine, subdivided into an infinite number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions to a degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain. All these various machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each other with an accuracy, which ravishes into admiration all men who have ever contemplated them. The curious adapting of means to ends, throughout all nature, resembles exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions of human contrivance; of human design, thought, wisdom, and intelligence. Since therefore the effects resemble each other, we are led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble; and that the Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man; though possessed of much larger faculties, proportioned to the grandeur of the work which he has executed. By this argument \"a posteriori,\" and by this argument alone, do we prove at once the existence of a Deity, and his similarity to human mind and intelligence.\nOn the other hand, Hume's sceptic, Philo, is not satisfied with the argument from design. He attempts a number of refutations, including one that arguably foreshadows Darwin's theory, and makes the point that if God resembles a human designer, then assuming divine characteristics such as omnipotence and omniscience is not justified. He goes on to joke that far from being the perfect creation of a perfect designer, this universe may be \"only the first rude essay of some infant deity... the object of derision to his superiors\".\nDerham's natural theology.\nStarting in 1696 with his \"Artificial Clockmaker\", William Derham published a stream of teleological books. The best known of these are \"Physico-Theology\" (1713); \"Astro-Theology\" (1714); and \"Christo-Theology\" (1730). \"Physico-Theology\", for example, was explicitly subtitled \"A demonstration of the being and attributes of God from his works of creation\". A natural theologian, Derham listed scientific observations of the many variations in nature, and proposed that these proved \"the unreasonableness of infidelity\". At the end of the section on Gravity for instance, he writes: \"What else can be concluded, but that all was made with manifest Design, and that all the whole Structure is the Work of some intelligent Being; some Artist, of Power and Skill equivalent to such a Work?\" Also, of the \"sense of sound\" he writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For who but an intelligent Being, what less than an omnipotent and infinitely wise God could contrive, and make such a fine Body, such a Medium, so susceptible of every Impression, that the Sense of Hearing hath occasion for, to empower all Animals to express their Sense and Meaning to others.\nDerham concludes: \"For it is a Sign a Man is a wilful, perverse Atheist, that will impute so glorious a Work, as the Creation is, to any Thing, yea, a mere Nothing (as Chance is) rather than to God. Weber (2000) writes that Derham's \"Physico-Theology\" \"directly influenced\" William Paley's later work.\nThe power, and yet the limitations, of this kind of reasoning is illustrated in microcosm by the history of La Fontaine's fable of The Acorn and the Pumpkin, which first appeared in France in 1679. The light-hearted anecdote of how a doubting peasant is finally convinced of the wisdom behind creation arguably undermines this approach. However, beginning with Anne Finch's conversion of the story into a polemic against atheism, it has been taken up by a succession of moral writers as presenting a valid argument for the proposition that \"The wisdom of God is displayed in creation.\"\nWatchmaker analogy.\nThe watchmaker analogy, framing the teleological argument with reference to a timepiece, dates at least back to the Stoics, who were reported by Cicero in his \"De Natura Deorum\" (II.88), using such an argument against Epicureans, whom, they taunt, would \"think more highly of the achievement of Archimedes in making a model of the revolutions of the firmament than of that of nature in creating them, although the perfection of the original shows a craftsmanship many times as great as does the counterfeit\". It was also used by Robert Hooke and Voltaire, the latter of whom remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nWilliam Paley presented his version of the watchmaker analogy at the start of his \"Natural Theology\" (1802).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[S]uppose I found a watch upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the watch happened to be in that place, I should hardly think...that, for anything I knew, the watch might have always been there. Yet why should not this answer serve for the watch as well as for [a] stone [that happened to be lying on the ground]?... For this reason, and for no other; namely, that, if the different parts had been differently shaped from what they are, if a different size from what they are, or placed after any other manner, or in any order than that in which they are placed, either no motion at all would have been carried on in the machine, or none which would have answered the use that is now served by it.\nAccording to Alister McGrath, Paley argued that \"The same complexity and utility evident in the design and functioning of a watch can also be discerned in the natural world. Each feature of a biological organism, like that of a watch, showed evidence of being designed in such a way as to adapt the organism to survival within its environment. Complexity and utility are observed; the conclusion that they were designed and constructed by God, Paley holds, is as natural as it is correct.\"\nNatural theology strongly influenced British science, with the expectation as expressed by Adam Sedgwick in 1831 that truths revealed by science could not conflict with the moral truths of religion. These natural philosophers saw God as the first cause, and sought secondary causes to explain design in nature: the leading figure Sir John Herschel wrote in 1836 that by analogy with other intermediate causes \"the origination of fresh species, could it ever come under our cognizance, would be found to be a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process\".\nAs a theology student, Charles Darwin found Paley's arguments compelling. However, he later developed his theory of evolution in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", which offers an alternate explanation of biological order. In his autobiography, Darwin wrote that \"The old argument of design in nature, as given by Paley, which formerly seemed to me so conclusive, fails, now that the law of natural selection has been discovered\". Darwin struggled with the problem of evil and of suffering in nature, but remained inclined to believe that nature depended upon \"designed laws\" and commended Asa Gray's statement about \"Darwin's great service to Natural Science in bringing back to it Teleology: so that, instead of Morphology versus Teleology, we shall have Morphology wedded to Teleology.\"\nDarwin owned he was \"bewildered\" on the subject, but was \"inclined to look at everything as resulting from designed laws, with the details, whether good or bad, left to the working out of what we may call chance:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But I own that I cannot see, as plainly as others do, &amp; as I shd wish to do, evidence of design &amp; beneficence on all sides of us. There seems to me too much misery in the world. I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent &amp; omnipotent God would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae with the express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of caterpillars, or that a cat should play with mice. Not believing this, I see no necessity in the belief that the eye was expressly designed.\nRecent proponents.\nProbabilistic arguments.\nIn 1928 and 1930, F. R. Tennant published his \"Philosophical Theology\", which was a \"bold endeavour to combine scientific and theological thinking\". He proposed a version of the teleological argument based on the accumulation of the probabilities of each individual biological adaptation. \"Tennant concedes that naturalistic accounts such as evolutionary theory may explain each of the individual adaptations he cites, but he insists that in this case the whole exceeds the sum of its parts: naturalism can explain each adaptation but not their totality.\" The \"Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" notes that \"Critics have insisted on focusing on the cogency of each piece of theistic evidence \u2013 reminding us that, in the end, ten leaky buckets hold no more water than one.\" Also, \"Some critics, such as John Hick and D.H. Mellor, have objected to Tennant's particular use of probability theory and have challenged the relevance of any kind of probabilistic reasoning to theistic belief.\"\nRichard Swinburne's \"contributions to philosophical theology have sought to apply more sophisticated versions of probability theory to the question of God's existence, a methodological improvement on Tennant's work but squarely in the same spirit\". He uses Bayesian probability \"taking account not only of the order and functioning of nature but also of the 'fit' between human intelligence and the universe, whereby one can understand its workings, as well as human aesthetic, moral, and religious experience\". Swinburne writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he existence of order in the world confirms the existence of God if and only if the existence of this order in the world is more probable if there is a God than if there is not. ... the probability of order of the right kind is very much greater if there is a God, and so that the existence of such order adds greatly to the probability that there is a God.\nSwinburne acknowledges that his argument by itself may not give a reason to believe in the existence of God, but in combination with other arguments such as cosmological arguments and evidence from mystical experience, he thinks it can.\nWhile discussing Hume's arguments, Alvin Plantinga offered a probability version of the teleological argument in his book \"God and Other Minds\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFollowing Plantinga, Georges Dicker produced a slightly different version in his book about George Berkeley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" has the following criticism of such arguments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It can of course be said that any form in which the universe might be is statistically enormously improbable as it is only one of a virtual infinity of possible forms. But its actual form is no more improbable, in this sense, than innumerable others. It is only the fact that humans are part of it that makes it seem so special, requiring a transcendent explanation.\nFine-tuned universe.\nA modern variation of the teleological argument is built upon the concept of the fine-tuned universe: According to the website \"Biologos\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Fine-tuning refers to the surprising precision of nature's physical constants, and the beginning state of the Universe. To explain the present state of the universe, even the best scientific theories require that the physical constants of nature and the beginning state of the Universe have extremely precise values.\nAlso, the fine-tuning of the Universe is the apparent delicate balance of conditions necessary for human life. In this view, speculation about a vast range of possible conditions in which life cannot exist is used to explore the probability of conditions in which life can and does exist. For example, it can be argued that if the force of the Big Bang explosion had been different by 1/10 to the sixtieth power or the strong interaction force was only 5% different, life would be impossible. Noted physicist Stephen Hawking estimates that \"if the rate of the universe's expansion one second after the Big Bang had been smaller by even one part in a hundred thousand million million, the universe would have re-collapsed into a hot fireball due to gravitational attraction\". In terms of a teleological argument, the intuition in relation to a fine-tuned universe would be that God must have been responsible, if achieving such perfect conditions is so improbable. However, in regard to fine-tuning, Kenneth Einar Himma writes: \"The mere fact that it is enormously improbable that an event occurred... by itself, gives us no reason to think that it occurred by design ... As intuitively tempting as it may be...\" Himma attributes the \"Argument from Suspicious Improbabilities\", a formalization of \"the fine-tuning intuition\" to George N. Schlesinger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To understand Schlesinger's argument, consider your reaction to two different events. If John wins a 1-in-1,000,000,000 lottery game, you would not immediately be tempted to think that John (or someone acting on his behalf) cheated. If, however, John won three consecutive 1-in-1,000 lotteries, you would immediately be tempted to think that John (or someone acting on his behalf) cheated. Schlesinger believes that the intuitive reaction to these two scenarios is epistemically justified. The structure of the latter event is such that it... justifies a belief that intelligent design is the cause... Despite the fact that the probability of winning three consecutive 1-in-1,000 games is exactly the same as the probability of winning one 1-in-1,000,000,000 game, the former event... warrants an inference of intelligent design.\nHimma considers Schlesinger's argument to be subject to the same vulnerabilities he noted in other versions of the design argument:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While Schlesinger is undoubtedly correct in thinking that we are justified in suspecting design in the case [of winning] three consecutive lotteries, it is because\u2014and only because\u2014we know two related empirical facts about such events. First, we already know that there exist intelligent agents who have the right motivations and causal abilities to deliberately bring about such events. Second, we know from past experience with such events that they are usually explained by the deliberate agency of one or more of these agents. Without at least one of these two pieces of information, we are not obviously justified in seeing design in such cases ... [T]he problem for the fine-tuning argument is that we lack both of the pieces that are needed to justify an inference of design. First, the very point of the argument is to establish the fact that there exists an intelligent agency that has the right causal abilities and motivations to bring the existence of a universe capable of sustaining life. Second, and more obviously, we do not have any past experience with the genesis of worlds and are hence not in a position to know whether the existence of fine-tuned universes are usually explained by the deliberate agency of some intelligent agency. Because we lack this essential background information, we are not justified in inferring that there exists an intelligent Deity who deliberately created a universe capable of sustaining life.\nAntony Flew, who spent most of his life as an atheist, converted to deism late in life, and postulated \"an intelligent being as involved in some way in the design of conditions that would allow life to arise and evolve\". He concluded that the fine-tuning of the universe was too precise to be the result of chance, so accepted the existence of God. He said that his commitment to \"go where the evidence leads\" meant that he ended up accepting the existence of God. Flew proposed the view, held earlier by Fred Hoyle, that the universe is too young for life to have developed purely by chance and that, therefore, an intelligent being must exist which was involved in designing the conditions required for life to evolve.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Would you not say to yourself, \"Some super-calculating intellect must have designed the properties of the carbon atom, otherwise the chance of my finding such an atom through the blind forces of nature would be utterly minuscule.\" Of course you would ... A common sense interpretation of the facts suggests that a superintellect has monkeyed with physics, as well as with chemistry and biology, and that there are no blind forces worth speaking about in nature. The numbers one calculates from the facts seem to me so overwhelming as to put this conclusion almost beyond question.\u2014\u200a\nRobin Collins argues that the universe is fine-tuned for scientific discoverability, and that this fine-tuning cannot be explained by the multiverse hypothesis. According to Collins, the universe's laws, fundamental parameters, and initial conditions must be just right for the universe to be as discoverable as ours. According to Collins, examples of fine-tuning for discoverability include:\nCreation science and intelligent design.\nA version of the argument from design is central to both creation science and intelligent design, but unlike Paley's openness to deistic design through God-given laws, proponents seek scientific confirmation of repeated miraculous interventions in the history of life, and argue that their theistic science should be taught in science classrooms.\nThe teaching of evolution was effectively barred from United States public school curricula by the outcome of the 1925 Scopes Trial, but in the 1960s the National Defense Education Act led to the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study reintroducing the teaching of evolution. In response, there was a resurgence of creationism, now presented as \"creation science\", based on biblical literalism but with Bible quotes optional. (\"Explicit references to the Bible were optional: Morris's 1974 book \"Scientific Creationism\" came in two versions, one with Bible quotes, and one without.\")\nA 1989 survey found that virtually all literature promoting creation science presented the design argument, with John D. Morris saying \"any living thing gives such strong evidence for design by an intelligent designer that only a willful ignorance of the data (II Peter 3:5) could lead one to assign such intricacy to chance\". Such publications introduced concepts central to intelligent design, including \"irreducible complexity\" (a variant of the watchmaker analogy) and \"specified complexity\" (closely resembling a fine-tuning argument). The United States Supreme Court ruling on \"Edwards v. Aguillard\" barred the teaching of \"Creation Science\" in public schools because it breached the separation of church and state, and a group of creationists rebranded Creation Science as \"intelligent design\" which was presented as a scientific theory rather than as a religious argument.\nScientists disagreed with the assertion that intelligent design is scientific, and its introduction into the science curriculum of a Pennsylvania school district led to the 2005 \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\" trial, which ruled that the \"intelligent design\" arguments are essentially religious in nature and not science. The court took evidence from theologian John F. Haught, and ruled that \"ID is not a new scientific argument, but is rather an old religious argument for the existence of God. He traced this argument back to at least Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, who framed the argument as a syllogism: Wherever complex design exists, there must have been a designer; nature is complex; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer.\" \"This argument for the existence of God was advanced early in the 19th century by Reverend Paley\": \"The only apparent difference between the argument made by Paley and the argument for ID, as expressed by defense expert witnesses Behe and Minnich, is that ID's 'official position' does not acknowledge that the designer is God.\"\nProponents of the intelligent design movement such as Cornelius G. Hunter, have asserted that the methodological naturalism upon which science is based is religious in nature. They commonly refer to it as 'scientific materialism' or as 'methodological materialism' and conflate it with 'metaphysical naturalism'. They use this assertion to support their claim that modern science is atheistic, and contrast it with their preferred approach of a revived natural philosophy which welcomes supernatural explanations for natural phenomena and supports theistic science. This ignores the distinction between science and religion, established in Ancient Greece, in which science can not use supernatural explanations.\nIntelligent design advocate and biochemist Michael Behe proposed a development of Paley's watch analogy in which he argued in favour of intelligent design. Unlike Paley, Behe only attempts to prove the existence of an intelligent designer, rather than the God of classical theism. Behe uses the analogy of a mousetrap to propose irreducible complexity: he argues that if a mousetrap loses just one of its parts, it can no longer function as a mousetrap. He argues that irreducible complexity in an object guarantees the presence of intelligent design. Behe claims that there are instances of irreducible complexity in the natural world and that parts of the world must have been designed. This negative argument against step by step evolution ignores longstanding evidence that evolution proceeds through changes of function from preceding systems. The specific examples Behe proposes have been shown to have simpler homologues which could act as precursors with different functions. His arguments have been rebutted, both in general and in specific cases by numerous scientific papers. In response, Behe and others, \"ironically, given the absence of any detail in their own explanation, complain that the proffered explanations lack sufficient detail to be empirically tested\".\nUnreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.\nWilliam Lane Craig has proposed a nominalist argument influenced by the philosophy of mathematics. This argument revolves around the fact that, by using mathematical concepts, we can discover much about the natural world. For example, Craig writes, Peter Higgs, and any similar scientist, \"can sit down at his desk and, by pouring [\"sic\"] over mathematical equations, predict the existence of a fundamental particle which, thirty years later, after investing millions of dollars and thousands of man-hours, experimentalists are finally able to detect.\" He names mathematics the 'language of nature', and refutes two possible explanations for this. Firstly, he suggests, the idea that they are abstract entities brings about the question of their application. Secondly, he responds to the problem of whether they are merely useful fictions by suggesting that this asks why these fictions are so useful. Citing Eugene Wigner as an influence on his thought, he summarizes his argument as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Third way\" proposal.\nUniversity of Chicago geneticist James A. Shapiro, writing in the \"Boston Review\", states that advancements in genetics and molecular biology, and \"the growing realization that cells have molecular computing networks which process information about internal operations and about the external environment to make decisions controlling growth, movement, and differentiation\", have implications for the teleological argument. Shapiro states that these \"natural genetic engineering\" systems, can produce radical reorganizations of the \"genetic apparatus within a single cell generation\". Shapiro suggests what he calls a 'Third Way'; a non-creationist, non-Darwinian type of evolution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What significance does an emerging interface between biology and information science hold for thinking about evolution? It opens up the possibility of addressing scientifically rather than ideologically the central issue so hotly contested by fundamentalists on both sides of the Creationist-Darwinist debate: Is there any guiding intelligence at work in the origin of species displaying exquisite adaptations ...\nIn his book, \"\", Shapiro refers to this concept of \"natural genetic engineering\", which he says, has proved troublesome, because many scientists feel that it supports the intelligent design argument. He suggests that \"function-oriented capacities [can] be attributed to cells\", even though this is \"the kind of teleological thinking that scientists have been taught to avoid at all costs\".\nInteracting whole.\nThe metaphysical theologian Norris Clarke shared an argument to his fellow professors at Fordham University that was popularised by Peter Kreeft in his \"Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God\" (1994). The argument states that as components are ordered universally in relation to one another, and are defined by these connections (for example, every two hydrogen atoms are ordered to form a compound with one oxygen atom.) Therefore, none of the parts are self-sufficient, and cannot be explained individually. However, the whole cannot be explained either because it is composed of separate beings and is not a whole. From here, three conclusions can be found: firstly, as the system cannot in any way explain itself, it requires an efficient cause. Secondly, it must be an intelligent mind because the unity transcends every part, and thus must have been conceived as an idea, because, by definition, only an idea can hold together elements without destroying or fusing their distinctness. An idea cannot exist without a creator, so there must be an intelligent mind. Thirdly, the creative mind must be transcendent, because if it were not, it would rely upon the system of space and time, despite having created it. Such an idea is absurd. As a conclusion, therefore, the universe relies upon a transcendent creative mind.\nCriticism.\nClassical.\nThe original development of the argument from design was in reaction to atomistic, explicitly non-teleological understandings of nature. Socrates, as reported by Plato and Xenophon, was reacting to such natural philosophers. While less has survived from the debates of the Hellenistic and Roman eras, it is clear from sources such as Cicero and Lucretius, that debate continued for generations, and several of the striking metaphors used still today, such as the unseen watchmaker, and the infinite monkey theorem, have their roots in this period. While the Stoics became the most well-known proponents of the argument from design, the atomistic counter arguments were refined most famously by the Epicureans. On the one hand, they criticized the supposed evidence for intelligent design, and the logic of the Stoics. On the defensive side, they were faced with the challenge of explaining how un-directed chance can cause something which appears to be a rational order. Much of this defence revolved around arguments such as the infinite monkey metaphor. Democritus had already apparently used such arguments at the time of Socrates, saying that there will be infinite planets, and only some having an order like the planet we know. But the Epicureans refined this argument, by proposing that the actual number of types of atoms in nature is small, not infinite, making it less coincidental that after a long period of time, certain orderly outcomes will result.\nThese were not the only positions held in classical times. A more complex position also continued to be held by some schools, such as the Neoplatonists, who, like Plato and Aristotle, insisted that Nature did indeed have a rational order, but were concerned about how to describe the way in which this rational order is caused. According to Plotinus for example, Plato's metaphor of a craftsman should be seen only as a metaphor, and Plato should be understood as agreeing with Aristotle that the rational order in nature works through a form of causation unlike everyday causation. In fact, according to this proposal each thing already has its own nature, fitting into a rational order, whereby the thing itself is \"in need of, and directed towards, what is higher or better\".\nDavid Hume.\nLouis Loeb writes that David Hume, in his \"Enquiry\", \"insists that inductive inference cannot justify belief in extended objects\". Loeb also quotes Hume as writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is only when two species of objects are found to be constantly conjoined, that we can infer the one from the other. ... If experience and observation and analogy be, indeed, the only guides which we can reasonably follow in inference of this nature; both the effect and cause must bear a similarity and resemblance to other effects and causes...which we have found, in many instances, to be conjoined with another. ... [The proponents of the argument] always suppose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and unparalleled.\nLoeb notes that \"we observe neither God nor other universes, and hence no conjunction involving them. There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God, as unobserved causes.\"\nHume also presented a criticism of the argument in his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\". The character \"Philo\", a religious sceptic, voices Hume's criticisms of the argument. He argues that the design argument is built upon a faulty analogy as, unlike with man-made objects, we have not witnessed the design of a universe, so do not know whether the universe was the result of design. Moreover, the size of the universe makes the analogy problematic: although our experience of the universe is of order, there may be chaos in other parts of the universe. Philo argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A very small part of this great system, during a very short time, is very imperfectly discovered to us; and do we thence pronounce decisively concerning the origin of the whole?\u2014\u200a\nPhilo also proposes that the order in nature may be due to nature alone. If nature contains a principle of order within it, the need for a designer is removed. Philo argues that even if the universe is indeed designed, it is unreasonable to justify the conclusion that the designer must be an omnipotent, omniscient, benevolent God \u2013 the God of classical theism. It is impossible, he argues, to infer the perfect nature of a creator from the nature of its creation. Philo argues that the designer may have been defective or otherwise imperfect, suggesting that the universe may have been a poor first attempt at design. Hume also pointed out that the argument does not necessarily lead to the existence of one God: \u201cwhy may not several deities combine in contriving and framing the world?\u201d (p.\u00a0108).\nWesley C. Salmon developed Hume's insights, arguing that all things in the universe which exhibit order are, to our knowledge, created by material, imperfect, finite beings or forces. He also argued that there are no known instances of an immaterial, perfect, infinite being creating anything. Using the probability calculus of Bayes' theorem, Salmon concludes that it is very improbable that the universe was created by the type of intelligent being theists argue for.\nNancy Cartwright accuses Salmon of begging the question. One piece of evidence he uses in his probabilistic argument \u2013 that atoms and molecules are not caused by design \u2013 is equivalent to the conclusion he draws, that the universe is probably not caused by design. The atoms and molecules are what the universe is made up of and whose origins are at issue. Therefore, they cannot be used as evidence against the theistic conclusion.\nIntelligence may not be God.\nReferring to it as the physico-theological proof, Immanuel Kant discussed the teleological argument in his \"Critique of Pure Reason\". Even though he referred to it as \"the oldest, clearest and most appropriate to human reason\", he nevertheless rejected it, heading section VI with the words, \"On the impossibility of a physico-theological proof.\" In accepting some of Hume's criticisms, Kant wrote that the argument \"proves at most intelligence only in the arrangement of the 'matter' of the universe, and hence the existence not of a 'Supreme Being', but of an 'Architect'\". Using the argument to try to prove the existence of God required \"a concealed appeal to the Ontological argument\".\nIn his \"Trait\u00e9 de m\u00e9taphysique\" Voltaire argued that, even if the argument from design could prove the existence of a powerful intelligent designer, it would not prove that this designer is God.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... from this sole argument I cannot conclude anything further than that it is probable that an intelligent and superior being has skillfully prepared and fashioned the matter. I cannot conclude from that alone that this being has made matter out of nothing and that he is infinite in every sense.\u2014\u200a\nArgument from improbability.\nRichard Dawkins is harshly critical of intelligent design in his book \"The God Delusion.\" In this book, he contends that an appeal to intelligent design can provide no explanation for biology because it not only begs the question of the designer's own origin but raises additional questions: an intelligent designer must itself be far more complex and difficult to explain than anything it is capable of designing. He believes the chances of life arising on a planet like the Earth are many orders of magnitude less probable than most people would think, but the anthropic principle effectively counters skepticism with regard to improbability. For example Astronomer Fred Hoyle suggested that potential for life on Earth was no more probable than a Boeing 747 being assembled by a hurricane from the scrapyard. Dawkins argues that a one-time event is indeed subject to improbability but once under way, natural selection itself is nothing like random chance. Furthermore, he refers to his counter argument to the argument from improbability by that same name:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The argument from improbability is the big one. In the traditional guise of the argument from design, it is easily today's most popular argument offered in favour of the existence of God and it is seen, by an amazingly large number of theists, as completely and utterly convincing. It is indeed a very strong and, I suspect, unanswerable argument\u2014but in precisely the opposite direction from the theist's intention. The argument from improbability, properly deployed, comes close to proving that God does \"not\" exist. My name for the statistical demonstration that God almost certainly does not exist is the Ultimate Boeing 747 gambit.\nThe creationist misappropriation of the argument from improbability always takes the same general form, and it doesn't make any difference ... [if called] 'intelligent design' (ID). Some observed phenomenon\u2014often a living creature or one of its more complex organs, but it could be anything from a molecule up to the universe itself\u2014is correctly extolled as statistically improbable. Sometimes the language of information theory is used: the Darwinian is challenged to explain the source all the information in living matter, in the technical sense of information content as a measure of improbability or 'surprise value'... However statistically improbable the entity you seek to explain by invoking a designer, the designer himself has got to be at least as improbable. God is the Ultimate Boeing 747.\n... The whole argument turns on the familiar question 'Who made God?' ... A designer God cannot be used to explain organized complexity because any God capable of designing anything would have to be complex enough to demand the same kind of explanation in his own right. God presents an infinite regress from which he cannot help us to escape. This argument... demonstrates that God, though not technically disprovable, is very very improbable indeed.\u2014\u200a\nDawkins considered the argument from improbability to be \"much more powerful\" than the teleological argument, or argument from design, although he sometimes implies the terms are used interchangeably. He paraphrases St. Thomas' teleological argument as follows: \"Things in the world, especially living things, look as though they have been designed. Nothing that we know looks designed unless it is designed. Therefore there must have been a designer, and we call him God.\"\nPhilosopher Edward Feser contends that Dawkins fundamentally misunderstands the teleological argument, particularly Aquinas' version, and refutes a straw man.\nPerception of purpose in biology.\nThe philosopher of biology Michael Ruse has argued that Darwin treated the structure of organisms as if they had a purpose: \"the organism-as-if-it-were-designed-by God picture was absolutely central to Darwin's thinking in 1862, as it always had been\". He refers to this as \"the metaphor of design ... Organisms give the appearance of being designed, and thanks to Charles Darwin's discovery of natural selection we know why this is true.\" In his review of Ruse's book, R.J. Richards writes, \"Biologists quite routinely refer to the design of organisms and their traits, but properly speaking it's \"apparent\" design to which they refer \u2013 an 'as if' design.\" Robert Foley refers to this as \"the illusion of purpose, design, and progress\". He adds, \"there is no purpose in a fundamentally causative manner in evolution but that the processes of selection and adaptation give the illusion of purpose through the utter functionality and designed nature of the biological world\".\nRichard Dawkins suggests that while biology can at first seem to be purposeful and ordered, upon closer inspection its true function becomes questionable. Dawkins rejects the claim that biology serves any designed function, claiming rather that biology only mimics such purpose. In his book \"The Blind Watchmaker\", Dawkins states that animals are the most complex things in the known universe: \"Biology is the study of complicated things that give the appearance of having been designed for a purpose.\" He argues that natural selection should suffice as an explanation of biological complexity without recourse to divine providence.\nHowever, theologian Alister McGrath has pointed out that the fine-tuning of carbon is even responsible for nature's ability to tune itself to any degree.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The entire biological] evolutionary process depends upon the unusual chemistry of carbon, which allows it to bond to itself, as well as other elements, creating highly complex molecules that are stable over prevailing terrestrial temperatures, and are capable of conveying genetic information (especially DNA). ... Whereas it might be argued that nature creates its own fine-tuning, this can only be done if the primordial constituents of the universe are such that an evolutionary process can be initiated. The unique chemistry of carbon is the ultimate foundation of the capacity of nature to tune itself.\nProponents of intelligent design creationism, such as William A. Dembski question the philosophical assumptions made by critics with regard to what a designer would or would not do. Dembski claims that such arguments are not merely beyond the purview of science: often they are tacitly or overtly theological while failing to provide a serious analysis of the hypothetical objective's relative merit. Some critics, such as Stephen Jay Gould suggest that any purported 'cosmic' designer would only produce optimal designs, while there are numerous biological criticisms to demonstrate that such an ideal is manifestly untenable. Against these ideas, Dembski characterizes both Dawkins' and Gould's argument as a rhetorical straw man. He suggests a principle of constrained optimization more realistically describes the best any designer could hope to achieve:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not knowing the objectives of the designer, Gould was in no position to say whether the designer proposed a faulty compromise among those objectives\u2026 In criticizing design, biologists tend to place a premium on functionalities of individual organisms and see design as optimal to the degree that those individual functionalities are maximized. But higher-order designs of entire ecosystems might require lower-order designs of individual organisms to fall short of maximal function.\u2014\u200a\nFideism and rejection of natural theology.\nSome theologians oppose the usage of human reason and science in attaining knowledge of God altogether, asserting the primacy of faith in this endeavour.\nAlleged argument from analogy.\nThe design claim can be challenged as an argument from analogy. Supporters of design suggest that natural objects and man-made objects have many similar properties, and man-made objects have a designer. Therefore, it is probable that natural objects must be designed as well. However, proponents must demonstrate that all the available evidence has been taken into account. Eric Rust argues that, when speaking of familiar objects such as watches, \"we have a basis to make an inference from such an object to its designer\". However, the \"universe is a unique and isolated case\" and we have nothing to compare it with, so \"we have no basis for making an inference such as we can with individual objects. ... We have no basis for applying to the whole universe what may hold of constituent elements in the universe.\"\nOther criticisms.\nGeorge H. Smith, in his book ', points out what he considers to be a flaw in the argument from design:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now consider the idea that nature itself is the product of design. How could this be demonstrated? Nature ... provides the basis of comparison by which we distinguish between designed objects and natural objects. We are able to infer the presence of design only to the extent that the characteristics of an object differ from natural characteristics. Therefore, to claim that nature as a whole was designed is to destroy the basis by which we differentiate between artifacts and natural objects.\nThe teleological argument assumes that one can infer the existence of intelligent design merely by examination, and because life is reminiscent of something a human might design, it too must have been designed. However, considering \"snowflakes and crystals of certain salts\", \"[i]n no case do we find intelligence\". \"There are other ways that order and design can come about\" such as by \"purely physical forces.\"\nMost professional biologists support the modern evolutionary synthesis, not merely as an alternative explanation for the complexity of life but a better explanation with more supporting evidence. Living organisms obey the same physical laws as inanimate objects. Over very long periods of time self-replicating structures arose and later formed DNA.\nIn response to such objections, Andrew Loke of Hong Kong Baptist University argues that these can be avoided by formulating the argument deductively as an argument by exclusion concerning the possible explanations for the highly ordered laws of nature rather than as an argument based on analogy, and that the objection from evolution is invalid because evolution requires the highly ordered laws of nature to be already in place.\nSimilar discussions in other civilizations.\nHinduism.\nNyaya, the Hindu school of logic, had a version of the argument from design. P.G. Patil writes that, in this view, it is not the complexity of the world from which one can infer the existence of a creator, but the fact that \"the world is made up of parts\". In this context, it is the Supreme Soul, Ishvara, who created all the world.\nThe argument is in five parts:\nHowever, other Hindu schools, such as Samkhya, deny that the existence of God can ever be proved, because such a creator can never be perceived. Krishna Mohan Banerjee, in his \"Dialogues on the Hindu Philosophy\", has the Samkhya speaker saying, \"the existence of God cannot be established because there is no proof. ... nor can it be proved by Inference, because you cannot exhibit an analogous instance.\"\nBuddhist criticism of Hindu Nyaya logic.\nBuddhism denies the existence of a creator god, and rejects the Nyaya syllogism for the teleological argument as being \"logically flawed\". Buddhists argue that \"the 'creation' of the world cannot be shown to be analogous to the creation of a human artifact, such as a pot\".\nConfucianism.\nThe 18th century German philosopher Christian Wolff once thought that Confucius was a godless man, and that \"the ancient Chinese had no natural religion, since they did not know the creator of the world\". However, later, Wolff changed his mind to some extent. \"On Wolff's reading, Confucius's religious perspective is thus more or less the weak deistic one of Hume's Cleanthes.\"\nTaoism.\nThe Taoist writings of the 6th-century-BC philosopher Laozi (also known as Lao Tzu) have similarities with modern naturalist science. B. Schwartz notes that, in Taoism, \"The processes of nature are not guided by a teleological consciousness ... the tao [dao] is not consciously providential.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30732", "revid": "820470674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30732", "title": "Truth tables", "text": ""}
{"id": "30733", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30733", "title": "Tram", "text": "Street-running rail transit\nA tram (also known as a streetcar or trolley in Canada and the United States, or a Tramcar) is an urban rail transit type in which vehicles, whether individual railcars or multiple-unit trains, run on tramway tracks on urban public streets; some include segments on segregated right-of-way. Trams are a variant of light rail and are included within this broader category. However, they differ from it in their frequent integration into urban streets, lower traffic signal priority, coexistence with other vehicles, and lower capacity. Their units are capable of forming motor coaches or motorcars, which allows for the operation of longer trains.\nTrams are usually lighter and shorter than main line and rapid transit trains. Most trams use electrical power, usually fed by a pantograph sliding on an overhead line; older systems may use a trolley pole or a bow collector. In some cases, a contact shoe on a third rail is used. If necessary, they may have dual power systems\u2014electricity in city streets and diesel in more rural environments. Occasionally, trams also carry freight. Tramlines or tram networks operated as public transport are called \"tramways\", or simply \"trams\" or \"streetcars\", including systems separated from other traffic. Some trams, known as tram-trains, may have segments that run on mainline railway tracks, similar to interurban systems. The differences between these modes of rail transport are often indistinct, and systems may combine multiple features.\nOne of the advantages over earlier forms of transit was the low rolling resistance of metal wheels on steel rails, allowing the trams to haul a greater load for a given effort. Another factor which contributed to the rise of trams was the high total cost of ownership of horses. Electric trams largely replaced animal power in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Improvements in other vehicles such as buses led to decline of trams in early to mid 20th century. However, trams have seen resurgence since the 1980s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe English terms \"tram\" and \"tramway\" are derived from the Scots word , referring respectively to a type of truck (goods wagon or freight railroad car) used in coal mines and the tracks on which they ran. The word \"tram\" probably derived from Middle Flemish (\"beam, handle of a barrow, bar, rung\"). The identical word with the meaning \"crossbeam\" is also used in the French language. Etymologists believe that the word \"tram\" refers to the wooden beams the railway tracks were initially made of before the railroad pioneers switched to the much more wear-resistant tracks made of iron and, later, steel. The word \"tram-car\" is attested from 1873.\nAlternatives.\nAlthough the terms \"tram\" and \"tramway\" have been adopted by many languages, they are not used universally in English; North Americans prefer \"streetcar\", \"trolley\", or \"trolleycar\". The term \"streetcar\" is first recorded in 1840, and originally referred to horsecars.\nThe terms \"streetcar\" and \"trolley\" are often used interchangeably in the United States, with \"trolley\" being the preferred term in the eastern US and \"streetcar\" in the western US. \"Streetcar\" is preferred in English Canada, while \"tramway\" is preferred in Quebec. In parts of the United States, internally powered buses made to resemble a streetcar are often referred to as \"trolleys\". To avoid further confusion with trolley buses, the American Public Transportation Association (APTA) refers to them as \"trolley-replica buses\". In the United States, the term \"tram\" has sometimes been used for rubber-tired trackless trains, which are unrelated to other kinds of trams.\nA widely held belief holds the word trolley to derive from the \"troller\" (said to derive from the words \"traveler\" and \"roller\"), a four-wheeled device that was dragged along dual overhead wires by a cable that connected the troller to the top of the car and collected electrical power from the overhead wires; this portmanteau derivation is, however, most likely folk etymology. \"Trolley\" and variants refer to the verb \"troll\", meaning \"roll\" and probably derived from Old French, and cognate uses of the word were well established for handcarts and horse drayage, as well as for nautical uses.\nThe alternative North American term 'trolley' may strictly speaking be considered incorrect, as the term can also be applied to cable cars, or conduit cars that instead draw power from an underground supply. Conventional diesel tourist buses decorated to look like streetcars are sometimes called \"trolleys\" in the US (tourist trolley). Furthering confusion, the term \"tram\" has instead been applied to open-sided, low-speed segmented vehicles on rubber tires generally used to ferry tourists short distances, for example on the Universal Studios backlot tour and, in many countries, as tourist transport to major destinations. The term may also apply to an aerial ropeway, e.g. the Roosevelt Island Tramway.\nTrolleybus.\nAlthough the use of the term \"trolley\" for tram was not adopted in Europe, the term was later associated with the \"trolleybus\", a rubber-tired vehicle running on hard pavement, which draws its power from pairs of overhead wires. These electric buses, which use twin trolley poles, are also called \"trackless trolleys\" (particularly in the northeastern US), or sometimes simply \"trolleys\" (in the UK, as well as the Pacific Northwest, including Seattle, and Vancouver).\nHistory.\nCreation.\nThe history of passenger trams, streetcars and trolley systems, began in the early nineteenth century. It can be divided into several distinct periods defined by the principal means of power used. Precursors to the tramway included the wooden or stone wagonways that were used in central Europe to transport mine carts with unflanged wheels since the 1500s, and the paved limestone trackways designed by the Romans for heavy horse and ox-drawn transportation. By the 1700s, paved plateways with cast iron rails were introduced in England for transporting coal, stone or iron ore from the mines to the urban factories and docks.\nHorse-drawn.\nThe world's first passenger train or tram was the Swansea and Mumbles Railway, in Wales, UK. The British Parliament passed the Mumbles Railway Act in 1804, and horse-drawn service started in 1807. The service closed in 1827, but was restarted in 1860, again using horses. It was worked by steam from 1877, and then, from 1929, by very large (106-seat) electric tramcars, until closure in 1960. The Swansea and Mumbles Railway was something of a one-off however, and no street tramway appeared in Britain until 1860 when one was built in Birkenhead by the American George Francis Train.\nStreet railways developed in America before Europe, due to the poor paving of the streets in American cities which made them unsuitable for horsebuses, which were then common on the well-paved streets of European cities. Running the horsecars on rails allowed for a much smoother ride. There are records of a street railway running in Baltimore as early as 1828, however the first authenticated streetcar in America, was the New York and Harlem Railroad developed by the Irish coach builder John Stephenson, in New York City which began service in the year 1832. The New York and Harlem Railroad's Fourth Avenue Line ran along the Bowery and Fourth Avenue in New York City. It was followed in 1835 by the New Orleans and Carrollton Railroad in New Orleans, Louisiana, which still operates as the St. Charles Streetcar Line. Other American cities did not follow until the 1850s, after which the \"animal railway\" became an increasingly common feature in the larger towns.\nThe first permanent tram line in continental Europe was opened in Paris in 1855 by Alphonse Loubat who had previously worked on American streetcar lines. The tram was developed in numerous cities of Europe (some of the most extensive systems were found in Berlin, Budapest, Birmingham, Saint Petersburg, Lisbon, London, Manchester, Paris, Kyiv).\nThe first tram in South America opened in 1858 in Santiago, Chile. The first trams in Australia opened in 1860 in Sydney. Africa's first tram service started in Alexandria on 8 January 1863. The first trams in Asia opened in 1869 in Batavia (Jakarta), Netherlands East Indies (Indonesia).\nLimitations of horsecars included the fact that any given animal could only work so many hours on a given day, had to be housed, groomed, fed and cared for day in and day out, and produced prodigious amounts of manure, which the streetcar company was charged with storing and then disposing. Since a typical horse pulled a streetcar for about a dozen miles a day and worked for four or five hours, many systems needed ten or more horses in stable for each horsecar. In 1905 the British newspaper \"Newcastle Daily Chronicle\" reported that, \"A large number of London's discarded horse tramcars have been sent to Lincolnshire where they are used as sleeping rooms for potato pickers\".\nHorses continued to be used for light shunting well into the 20th century, and many large metropolitan lines lasted into the early 20th century. New York City had a regular horsecar service on the Bleecker Street Line until its closure in 1917. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, had its Sarah Street line drawn by horses until 1923. The last regular mule-drawn cars in the US ran in Sulphur Rock, Arkansas, until 1926 and were commemorated by a U.S. postage stamp issued in 1983. The last mule tram service in Mexico City ended in 1932, and a mule tram in Celaya, Mexico, survived until 1954. The last horse-drawn tram to be withdrawn from public service in the UK took passengers from Fintona railway station to Fintona Junction one mile away on the main Omagh to Enniskillen railway in Northern Ireland. The tram made its last journey on 30 September 1957 when the Omagh to Enniskillen line closed. The \"van\" is preserved at the Ulster Transport Museum.\nHorse-drawn trams still operate on the 1876-built Douglas Bay Horse Tramway on the Isle of Man, and at the 1894-built horse tram at Victor Harbor in South Australia. New horse-drawn systems have been established at the Hokkaido Museum in Japan and also in Disneyland. A horse-tram route in Polish gmina Mrozy, first built in 1902, was reopened in 2012.\nSteam.\nThe first mechanical trams were powered by steam. Generally, there were two types of steam tram. The first and most common had a small steam locomotive at the head of a line of one or more carriages, similar to a small train. Systems with such steam trams included Christchurch, New Zealand; Sydney, Australia; other city systems in New South Wales; Munich, Germany (from August 1883 on), British India (from 1885) and the Dublin &amp; Blessington Steam Tramway (from 1888) in Ireland. Steam tramways also were used on the suburban tramway lines around Milan and Padua; the last \"Gamba de Legn\" (\"Peg-Leg\") tramway ran on the Milan-Magenta-Castano Primo route in late 1957.\nThe other style of steam tram had the steam engine in the body of the tram, referred to as a tram engine (UK) or steam dummy (US). The most notable system to adopt such trams was in Paris. French-designed steam trams also operated in Rockhampton, in the Australian state of Queensland between 1909 and 1939. Stockholm, Sweden, had a steam tram line at the island of S\u00f6dermalm between 1887 and 1901.\nTram engines usually had modifications to make them suitable for street running in residential areas. The wheels, and other moving parts of the machinery, were usually enclosed for safety reasons and to make the engines quieter. Measures were often taken to prevent the engines from emitting visible smoke or steam. Usually the engines used coke rather than coal as fuel to avoid emitting smoke; condensers or superheating were used to avoid emitting visible steam. A major drawback of this style of tram was the limited space for the engine, so that these trams were usually underpowered. Steam trams faded out around the 1890s to 1900s, being replaced by electric trams.\nCable-hauled.\nAnother motive system for trams was the cable car, which was pulled along a fixed track by a moving steel cable, the cable usually running in a slot below the street level. The power to move the cable was normally provided at a \"powerhouse\" site a distance away from the actual vehicle. The London and Blackwall Railway, which opened for passengers in east London, England, in 1840 used such a system.\nThe first practical cable car line was tested in San Francisco, in 1873. Part of its success is attributed to the development of an effective and reliable cable grip mechanism, to grab and release the moving cable without damage. The second city to operate cable trams was Dunedin, from 1881 to 1957.\nThe most extensive cable system in the US was built in Chicago in stages between 1859 and 1892. New York City developed multiple cable car lines, that operated from 1883 to 1909. Los Angeles also had several cable car lines, including the Second Street Cable Railroad, which operated from 1885 to 1889, and the Temple Street Cable Railway, which operated from 1886 to 1898.\nFrom 1885 to 1940, the city of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia operated one of the largest cable systems in the world, at its peak running 592 trams on of track. There were also two isolated cable lines in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; the North Sydney line from 1886 to 1900, and the King Street line from 1892 to 1905.\nIn Dresden, Germany, in 1901 an elevated suspended cable car following the \"Eugen Langen one-railed floating tram system\" started operating. Cable cars operated on Highgate Hill in North London and Kennington to Brixton Hill in South London. They also worked around \"Upper Douglas\" in the Isle of Man from 1897 to 1929 (cable car 72/73 is the sole survivor of the fleet).\nIn Italy, in Trieste, the Trieste\u2013Opicina tramway was opened in 1902, with the steepest section of the route being negotiated with the help of a funicular and its cables.\nCable cars suffered from high infrastructure costs, since an expensive system of cables, pulleys, stationary engines and lengthy underground vault structures beneath the rails had to be provided. They also required physical strength and skill to operate, and alert operators to avoid obstructions and other cable cars. The cable had to be disconnected (\"dropped\") at designated locations to allow the cars to coast by inertia, for example when crossing another cable line. The cable then had to be \"picked up\" to resume progress, the whole operation requiring precise timing to avoid damage to the cable and the grip mechanism. Breaks and frays in the cable, which occurred frequently, required the complete cessation of services over a cable route while the cable was repaired. Due to overall wear, the entire length of cable (typically several kilometres) had to be replaced on a regular schedule. After the development of reliable electrically powered trams, the costly high-maintenance cable car systems were rapidly replaced in most locations.\nCable cars remained especially effective in hilly cities, since their nondriven wheels did not lose traction as they climbed or descended a steep hill. The moving cable pulled the car up the hill at a steady pace, unlike a low-powered steam or horse-drawn car. Cable cars do have wheel brakes and track brakes, but the cable also helps restrain the car to going downhill at a constant speed. Performance in steep terrain partially explains the survival of cable cars in San Francisco.\nThe San Francisco cable cars, though significantly reduced in number, continue to provide regular transportation service, in addition to being a well-known tourist attraction. A single cable line also survives in Wellington (rebuilt in 1979 as a funicular but still called the \"Wellington Cable Car\"). Another system, with two separate cable lines and a shared power station in the middle, operates from the Welsh town of Llandudno up to the top of the Great Orme hill in North Wales, UK.\nInternal combustion.\nHastings and some other tramways, for example Stockholms Sp\u00e5rv\u00e4gar in Sweden and some lines in Karachi, used petrol trams. Galveston Island Trolley in Texas operated diesel trams due to the city's hurricane-prone location, which would have resulted in frequent damage to an electrical supply system. Although Portland, Victoria promotes its tourist tram as being a cable car it actually operates using a diesel engine. The tram, which runs on a circular route around the town of Portland, uses dummies and salons formerly used on the Melbourne cable tramway system and since restored.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries a number of systems in various parts of the world employed trams powered by gas, naphtha gas or coal gas in particular. Gas trams are known to have operated between Alphington and Clifton Hill in the northern suburbs of Melbourne, Australia (1886\u20131888); in Berlin and Dresden, Germany; in Estonia (1921\u20131951); between Hirschberg and Hermsdorf, Germany, from 1897 (now Jelenia G\u00f3ra, Cieplice, and Sobiesz\u00f3w in Poland); and in the UK at Lytham St Annes, Trafford Park, Manchester (1897\u20131908) and Neath, Wales (1896\u20131920).\nComparatively little has been published about gas trams. However, research on the subject was carried out for an article in the October 2011 edition of \"The Times\", the historical journal of the Australian Association of Timetable Collectors, later renamed the Australian Timetable Association.\nElectric.\nThe world's first electric tram line operated in Sestroretsk near Saint Petersburg invented and tested by inventor Fyodor Pirotsky in 1875. Later, using a similar technology, Pirotsky put into service the first public electric tramway in St. Petersburg, which operated only during September 1880.\nThe second demonstration tramway was presented by Siemens &amp; Halske at the 1879 Berlin Industrial Exposition.\nThe first public electric tramway used for permanent service was the Gross-Lichterfelde tramway in Lichterfelde near Berlin in Germany, which opened in 1881. It was built by Werner von Siemens who contacted Pirotsky. This was the world's first commercially successful electric tram. It drew current from the rails at first, with overhead wire being installed in 1883.\nIn Britain, Volk's Electric Railway was opened in 1883 in Brighton. This two kilometer line along the seafront, re-gauged to in 1884, remains in service as the oldest operating electric tramway in the world. Also in 1883, M\u00f6dling and Hinterbr\u00fchl Tram was opened near Vienna in Austria. It was the first tram in the world in regular service that was run with electricity served by an overhead line with pantograph current collectors. The Blackpool Tramway was opened in Blackpool, UK on 29 September 1885 using conduit collection along Blackpool Promenade. This system is still in operation in modernised form.\nThe earliest tram system in Canada was built by John Joseph Wright, brother of the famous mining entrepreneur Whitaker Wright, in Toronto in 1883, introducing electric trams in 1892. In the US, multiple experimental electric trams were exhibited at the 1884 World Cotton Centennial World's Fair in New Orleans, Louisiana, but they were not deemed good enough to replace the Lamm fireless engines then propelling the St. Charles Streetcar Line in that city. The first commercial installation of an electric streetcar in the United States was built in 1884 in Cleveland, Ohio, and operated for a period of one year by the East Cleveland Street Railway Company. The first city-wide electric streetcar system was implemented in 1886 in Montgomery, Alabama, by the Capital City Street Railway Company, and ran for 50 years.\nIn 1888, the Richmond Union Passenger Railway began to operate trams in Richmond, Virginia, that Frank J. Sprague had built. Sprague later developed multiple unit control, first demonstrated in Chicago in 1897, allowing multiple cars to be coupled together and operated by a single motorman. This gave rise to the modern subway train. Following the improvement of an overhead \"trolley\" system on streetcars for collecting electricity from overhead wires by Sprague, electric tram systems were rapidly adopted across the world.\nEarlier electric trains proved difficult or unreliable and experienced limited success until the second half of the 1880s, when new types of current collectors were developed. Siemens' line, for example, provided power through a live rail and a return rail, like a model train, limiting the voltage that could be used, and delivering electric shocks to people and animals crossing the tracks. Siemens later designed his own version of overhead current collection, called the bow collector. One of the first systems to use it was in Thorold, Ontario, opened in 1887, and it was considered quite successful. While this line proved quite versatile as one of the earliest fully functional electric streetcar installations, it required horse-drawn support while climbing the Niagara Escarpment and for two months of the winter when hydroelectricity was not available. It continued in service in its original form into the 1950s.\nSidney Howe Short designed and produced the first electric motor that operated a streetcar without gears. The motor had its armature direct-connected to the streetcar's axle for the driving force. Short pioneered \"use of a conduit system of concealed feed\" thereby eliminating the necessity of overhead wire and a trolley pole for street cars and railways. While at the University of Denver he conducted experiments which established that multiple unit powered cars were a better way to operate trains and trolleys.\nElectric tramways spread to many European cities in the 1890s, such as:\nSarajevo built a citywide system of electric trams in 1895. Budapest established its tramway system in 1887, and its ring line has grown to be the busiest tram line in Europe, with a tram running once per minute at rush hour. Bucharest and Belgrade ran a regular service from 1894. Ljubljana introduced its tram system in 1901\u00a0\u2013 it closed in 1958. Oslo had the first tramway in Scandinavia, starting operation on 2 March 1894.\nThe first electric tramway in Australia was a Sprague system demonstrated at the 1888 Melbourne Centennial Exhibition in Melbourne; afterwards, this was installed as a commercial venture operating between the outer Melbourne suburb of Box Hill and the then tourist-oriented country town Doncaster from 1889 to 1896. Electric systems were also built in Adelaide, Ballarat, Bendigo, Brisbane, Fremantle, Geelong, Hobart, Kalgoorlie, Launceston, Leonora, Newcastle, Perth, and Sydney.\nBy the 1970s, the only full tramway system remaining in Australia was the Melbourne tram system. However, there were also a few single lines remaining elsewhere: the Glenelg tram line, connecting Adelaide to the beachside suburb of Glenelg, and tourist trams in the Victorian Goldfields cities of Bendigo and Ballarat. In recent years the Melbourne system, generally recognised as the largest urban tram network in the world, has been considerably modernised and expanded. The Adelaide line has been extended to the Entertainment Centre, and work is progressing on further extensions. Sydney re-introduced trams (or light rail) on 31 August 1997. A completely new system, known as , was introduced on the Gold Coast, Queensland, on 20 July 2014. The Newcastle Light Rail opened in February 2019, while the Canberra light rail opened on 20 April 2019. This is the first time that there have been trams in Canberra, even though Walter Burley Griffin's 1914\u20131920 plans for the capital then in the planning stage did propose a Canberra tram system.\nIn Japan, the Kyoto Electric railroad was the first tram system, starting operation in 1895. By 1932, the network had grown to 82 railway companies in 65 cities, with a total network length of . By the 1960s the tram had generally died out in Japan.\nTwo rare but significant alternatives were conduit current collection, which was widely used in London, Washington, D.C., and New York City, and the surface contact collection method, used in Wolverhampton (the Lorain system), Torquay and Hastings in the UK (the Dolter stud system), and in Bordeaux, France (the ground-level power supply system). \nThe convenience and economy of electricity resulted in its rapid adoption once the technical problems of production and transmission of electricity were solved. Electric trams largely replaced animal power and other forms of motive power including cable and steam, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nThere was one particular hazard associated with trams powered from a trolley pole off an overhead line on the early electrified systems. Since the tram relies on contact with the rails for the current return path, a problem arises if the tram is derailed or (more usually) if it halts on a section of track that has been heavily sanded by a previous tram, and the tram loses electrical contact with the rails. In this event, the underframe of the tram, by virtue of a circuit path through ancillary loads (such as interior lighting), is live at the full supply voltage, typically 600 volts DC. In British terminology, such a tram was said to be 'grounded'\u2014not to be confused with the US English use of the term, which means the exact opposite. Any person stepping off the tram and completing the earth return circuit with their body could receive a serious electric shock. If \"grounded\", the driver was required to jump off the tram (avoiding simultaneous contact with the tram and the ground) and pull down the trolley pole, before allowing passengers off the tram. Unless derailed, the tram could usually be recovered by running water down the running rails from a point higher than the tram, the water providing a conducting bridge between the tram and the rails. With improved technology, this ceased to be a problem.\nIn the 2000s, several companies introduced catenary-free designs: Alstom's Citadis line uses a third rail, Bombardier's PRIMOVE LRV is charged by contactless induction plates embedded in the trackway and CAF URBOS tram uses ultracaps technology\nBattery.\nAs early as 1834, Thomas Davenport, a Vermont blacksmith, had invented a battery-powered electric motor which he later patented. The following year he used it to operate a small model electric car on a short section of track four feet in diameter.\nAttempts to use batteries as a source of electricity were made from the 1880s and 1890s, with unsuccessful trials conducted in among other places Bendigo and Adelaide in Australia, and for about 14 years as The Hague \"accutram\" of HTM in the Netherlands. The first trams in Bendigo, Australia, in 1892, were battery-powered, but within as little as three months they were replaced with horse-drawn trams. In New York City some minor lines also used storage batteries. Then, more recently during the 1950s, a longer battery-operated tramway line ran from Milan to Bergamo. In China there is a Nanjing battery Tram line and has been running since 2014. In 2019, the West Midlands Metro in Birmingham, England adopted battery-powered trams on sections through the city centre close to Grade I listed Birmingham Town Hall.\nCompressed air.\nParis and Berne (Switzerland) operated trams that were powered by compressed air using the Mekarski system.\nTrials on street tramways in Britain, including by the North Metropolitan Tramway Company between Kings Cross and Holloway, London (1883), achieved acceptable results but were found not to be economic because of the combined coal consumption of the stationary compressor and the onboard steam boiler.\nHybrid system.\nThe Trieste\u2013Opicina tramway in Trieste operates a hybrid funicular tramway system. Conventional electric trams are operated in street running and on reserved track for most of their route. However, on one steep segment of track, they are assisted by cable tractors, which push the trams uphill and act as brakes for the downhill run. For safety, the cable tractors are always deployed on the downhill side of the tram vehicle.\nSimilar systems were used elsewhere in the past, notably on the Queen Anne Counterbalance in Seattle and the Darling Street wharf line in Sydney.\nModern development.\nIn the mid-20th century many tram systems were disbanded, replaced by buses, trolleybuses, automobiles or rapid transit. The General Motors streetcar conspiracy was a case study of the decline of trams in the United States. In the 21st century, trams have been re-introduced in cities where they had been closed down for decades (such as Tramlink in London), or kept in heritage use (such as Sp\u00e5rv\u00e4g City in Stockholm). Most trams made since the 1990s (such as the Bombardier Flexity series and Alstom Citadis) are articulated low-floor trams with features such as regenerative braking.\nIn March 2015, China South Rail Corporation (CSR) demonstrated the world's first hydrogen fuel cell vehicle tramcar at an assembly facility in Qingdao. The chief engineer of the CSR subsidiary CSR Sifang Co Ltd., Liang Jianying, said that the company is studying how to reduce the running costs of the tram.\nIn July 2024, 38 hydrogen fuel cell trams manufactured by Hyundai Rotem were selected to operate on Daejeon Metro Line 2. The supply contract has already been signed, and delivery is scheduled to begin in 2026. The line is expected to enter service in 2028. It means hydrogen trams will run on a 38.8 km route.\nDesign.\nTrams have been used for two main purposes: for carrying passengers and for carrying cargo. There are several types of passenger tram:\nOperation.\nThere are two main types of tramways, the classic tramway built in the early 20th century with the tram system operating in mixed traffic, and the later type which is most often associated with the tram system having its own right of way. Tram systems that have their own right of way are often called light rail but this does depends on the region. Though these two systems differ in their operation, their equipment is similar.\nHeadway.\nA typical headway for a tram or light rail line is 5 minutes during peak hours to 15 minutes off-peak. The optimal headway for bus, tram and metro is 3 to 6 minutes. The lowest recorded interval is 1.5 minutes for the Hong Kong tramway. In the case where coupled articulated tram vehicles have a headway of 2 minutes, the capacity is about 10,000 passenger per hour per direction.\nControls.\nTrams were traditionally operated with separate levers for applying power and brakes. More modern vehicles use a locomotive-style controller which incorporate a dead man's switch. The success of the PCC streetcar had also seen trams use automobile-style foot controls allowing hands-free operation, particularly when the driver was responsible for fare collection.\nPower supply.\nElectric trams use various devices to collect power from overhead lines. The most common device is the pantograph, while some older systems use trolley poles or bow collectors. Ground-level power supply has become a more recent innovation. Another technology uses supercapacitors; when an insulator at a track switch cuts off power from the tram for a short distance along the line, the tram can use energy stored in a large capacitor to drive the tram past the gap in the power feed.\nThe old tram systems in London, Manhattan (New York City), and Washington, D.C., used live rails, like those on third-rail electrified railways, but in a conduit underneath the road, from which they drew power through a plough. It was called conduit current collection. Washington's was the last of these to close, in 1962. No commercial tramway uses this system anymore. More recently, an equivalent to these systems has been developed which allows for the safe installation of a third rail on city streets, known as surface current collection or ground-level power supply; the main example of this is the new tramway in Bordeaux.\nGround-level power supply.\nA ground-level power supply system, also called surface current collection or (APS), is an updated version of the original stud type system. APS uses a third rail placed between the running rails, divided electrically into eight-metre powered segments with three-metre neutral sections between. Each tram has two power collection skates, next to which are antennas that send radio signals to energize the power rail segments as the tram passes over them.\nOlder systems required mechanical switching systems which were susceptible to environmental problems. At any one time no more than two consecutive segments under the tram should be live. Wireless and solid state switching eliminate mechanical problems.\nAlstom developed the system primarily to avoid intrusive power supply cables in the sensitive area of the old city of old Bordeaux.\nRoutes.\nRoute patterns vary greatly among the world's tram systems, leading to different network topologies. \nThe resulting route patterns are very different. Some have a rational structure, covering their catchment area as efficiently as possible, with new suburbs being planned with tramlines integral to their layout \u2013 such is the case in Amsterdam. Bordeaux and Montpellier have built comprehensive networks, based on radial routes with numerous interconnections, within the last two decades. Some systems serve only parts of their cities, with Berlin being the prime example, as trams survived the city's political division only in the Eastern part. Other systems have ended up with a rather random route map, for instance when some previous operating companies have ceased operation (as with the \"tramways vicinaux/buurtspoorwegen\" in Brussels) or where isolated outlying lines have been preserved (as on the eastern fringe of Berlin). In Rome, the remnant of the system comprises three isolated radial routes, not connecting in the ancient city centre, but linked by a ring route. Some apparently anomalous lines continue in operation where a new line would not on rational grounds be built, because it is much more costly to build a new line than to continue operating an existing one.\nIn some places, the opportunity is taken when roads are being repaved to lay tramlines (though without erecting overhead cables) even though no service is immediately planned: such is the case in Leipzigerstra\u00dfe in Berlin, the Haarlemmer Houttuinen in Amsterdam, and Botermarkt in Ghent.\nCross-border routes.\nTram systems operate across national borders in Basel (from Switzerland into France and Germany), Geneva (from Switzerland into France) and Strasbourg (from France into Germany).\nIn 2012, plans were made to connect the Polish town of S\u0142ubice to the tram network of Frankfurt an der Oder. These plans were cancelled when voters in Frankfurt voted down funding for the project and replaced the tram line with a bus. Another cross-border tramway that was planned linking Hasselt (Belgium) with Maastricht (Netherlands) was cancelled in June 2022.\nTrack.\nTramway track can have different rail profiles to accommodate the various operating environments of the vehicle. They may be embedded into concrete for street-running operation, or use standard ballasted track with railroad ties on high-speed sections. A more ecological solution is to embed tracks into grass turf, an approach known as green track.\nTramway tracks use a grooved rail with a groove designed for tramway or railway track in pavement or grassed surfaces, also called grassed track or track in a lawn. The rail has the railhead on one side and the guard on the other. The guard provides accommodation for the flange. The guard carries no weight, but may act as a checkrail. Grooved rail was invented in 1852 by Alphonse Loubat, a French inventor who developed improvements in tram and rail equipment, and helped develop tram lines in New York City and Paris. The invention of grooved rail enabled tramways to be laid without causing a nuisance to other road users, except unsuspecting cyclists, who could get their wheels caught in the groove. The grooves may become filled with gravel and dirt (particularly if infrequently used or after a period of idleness) and need clearing from time to time, this being done by a \"scrubber\" tram. Failure to clear the grooves can lead to a bumpy ride for the passengers, damage to either wheel or rail and possibly derailing.\nIn narrow situations double-track tram lines sometimes reduce to single track, or, to avoid switches, have the tracks interlaced.\nSwitches.\nOn many tram systems where tracks diverge, the driver chooses the route, usually either by flicking a switch on the dashboard or by use of the power pedal \u2013 generally if power is applied the tram goes straight on, whereas if no power is applied the tram turns. Some systems use automatic point-setting systems, where the route for each journey is downloaded from a central computer, and an onboard computer actuates each point as it comes to it via an induction loop. Such is the case at Manchester Metrolink. If the powered system breaks down, most points may be operated manually, by inserting a metal lever ('point iron') into the point machine.\nTrack gauge.\nHistorically, the track gauge has had considerable variations, with narrow gauge common in many early systems. However, most light rail systems are now standard gauge. An important advantage of standard gauge is that standard railway maintenance equipment can be used on it, rather than custom-built machinery. Using standard gauge also allows light rail vehicles to be delivered and relocated conveniently using freight railways and locomotives.\nAnother factor favoring standard gauge is that low-floor vehicles are becoming popular, and there is generally insufficient space for wheelchairs to move between the wheels in a narrow gauge layout. Standard gauge also enables \u2013 at least in theory \u2013 a larger choice of manufacturers and thus lower procurement costs for new vehicles. However, other factors such as electrification or loading gauge for which there is more variation may require costly custom built units regardless.\nTram stop.\nTram stops may be similar to bus stops in design and use, particularly in street-running sections, where in some cases other vehicles are legally required to stop clear of the tram doors. Some stops may have railway platforms, particularly in private right-of-way sections and where trams are boarded at standard railway platform height, as opposed to using steps at the doorway or low-floor trams.\nManufacturing.\nMany independent companies started making trams in the 19th and early 20th century. In the last several decades most of them have merged with or into larger ones. The biggest changes in the period after 2010 were the mergers of AnsaldoBreda into Hitachi Rail in 2015 and Bombardier into Alstom in 2020.\nApproximately 5,000 new trams are manufactured each year.\nAs of February 2017, 4,478 new trams were on order from their makers, with a further 1,092 options being open:\nBy region.\nTrams are in a period of growth, with about 400 tram systems operating around the world, several new systems being opened each year, and many being gradually extended. Some of these systems date from the late 19th or early 20th centuries. In the past 20 years their numbers have been augmented by modern tramway or light rail systems in cities that had abandoned this form of transport. There have also been some new tram systems in cities that never previously had them.\n\"Tramways with trams\" (British English) or \"street railways with streetcars\" (North American English) were common throughout the industrialised world in the late 19th and early 20th centuries but they had disappeared from most British, Canadian, French and US cities by the mid-20th century. After World War II most Australian cities also began to replace their trams with buses, but Melbourne defied the trend, opening new tram lines even in the mid-1950s. By the 1970s Melbourne was the only Australian city with a major tram network.\nBy contrast, trams in parts of continental Europe continued to be used by many cities, although there were declines in some countries, including the Netherlands.\nSince 1980 trams have returned to favour in many places, partly because their tendency to dominate the roadway, formerly seen as a disadvantage, is considered to be a merit since it raises the visibility of public transport (encouraging car users to change their mode of travel), and enables streets to be reconfigured to give more space to pedestrians, making cites more pleasant places to live. New systems have been built in the United States, United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, France, Australia and many other countries.\nIn Milan, Italy, the old \"Ventotto\" trams are considered a \"symbol\" of the city. The same can be said of trams in Melbourne in general, but particularly the iconic W class. The Toronto streetcar system had similarly become an iconic symbol of the city, operating the largest network in the Americas as well as the only large-scale tram system in Canada (not including light rail systems, or heritage lines).\nMajor tram and light rail systems.\nExisting systems.\nThe largest tram (classic tram, streetcar, \"stra\u00dfenbahn\") and fast tram (light rail, stadtbahn) networks in the world by route length as of 2016 are:\nOther large transit networks that operate streetcar and light rail systems include:\nHistorical.\nHistorically, the Paris Tram System was, at its peak, the world's largest system, with of track in 1925 (according to other sources, ca. of route length in 1930). However it was completely closed in 1938. The next largest system appears to have been , in Buenos Aires before 19 February 1963. The third largest was Chicago, with over of track, but it was all converted to trolleybus and bus services by 21 June 1958. Before its decline, the BVG in Berlin operated a very large network with of route. Before its system was converted to trolleybus (and later bus) services in the 1930s (last tramway closed 6 July 1952), the first-generation London network had of route in 1931. In 1958 trams in Rio de Jainero were employed on () of track. The final line, the Santa Teresa route was closed in 1968. During a period in the 1980s, the world's largest tram system was in Leningrad (St. Petersburg) with , USSR, and was included as such in the Guinness World Records; however Saint Petersburg's tram system has declined in size since the fall of the Soviet Union. Vienna in 1960 had , before the expansion of bus services and the opening of a subway (1976). Substituting subway services for tram routes continues. was in Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul in 1947: There streetcars ended 31 October 1953 in Minneapolis and 19 June 1954 in St. Paul. The Sydney tram network, before it was closed on 25 February 1961, had of route, and was thus the largest in Australia. Since 1961, the Melbourne system (recognised as the world's largest) has assumed Sydney's title as the largest network in Australia.\nTram modelling.\nModel trams are popular in HO scale (1:87) and O scale (1:48 in the US and generally 1:43,5 and 1:45 in Europe and Asia). They are typically powered and will accept plastic figures inside. Common manufacturers are Roco and Lima, with many custom models being made as well. The German firm H\u00f6dl and the Austrian Halling specialise in 1:87 scale.\nIn the US, Bachmann Industries is a mass supplier of HO streetcars and kits. Bowser Manufacturing has produced white metal models for over 50 years. There are many boutique vendors offering limited run epoxy and wood models. At the high end are highly detailed brass models which are usually imported from Japan or Korea and can cost in excess of $500. Many of these run on gauge track, which is correct for the representation of (standard gauge) in HO scale as in US and Japan, but incorrect in 4\u00a0mm (1:76.2) scale, as it represents . This scale/gauge hybrid is called OO scale.\nO scale trams are also very popular among tram modellers because the increased size allows for more detail and easier crafting of overhead wiring. In the US these models are usually purchased in epoxy or wood kits and some as brass models. The Saint Petersburg Tram Company produces highly detailed polyurethane non-powered O Scale models from around the world which can easily be powered by trucks from vendors like Q-Car.\nSee also.\nTram models.\nSee \nTrams by region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTram lists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Part One, Latin America\" (). 1980. Exeter, UK: Quail Map Company.\n\"Part Two, Asia+USSR\" / Africa / Australia (). 1987. London: Rapid Transit Publications.\n\"Part Three, Europe\" (). 1993. London: Rapid Transit Publications.\n\"Part Four, North America\" (). 1998. London: Rapid Transit Publications."}
{"id": "30736", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30736", "title": "The Book of the Law", "text": "Central sacred text of Thelema\nLiber AL vel Legis (), commonly known as The Book of the Law, is the central sacred text of Thelema. The book is often referred to simply as Liber AL, \"Liber Legis\" or just \"AL\", though technically the latter two refer only to the manuscript.\nAleister Crowley wrote the \"Liber AL vel Legis\" in 1904, saying that the book was dictated to him by a beyond-human being, Aiwass, who he later referred to as his own Holy Guardian Angel. Following positive reception of the Book, Crowley proclaimed the arrival of a new stage in the spiritual evolution of humanity, to be known as the \"\u00c6on of Horus\". The primary precept of this new aeon is the charge, \"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.\"\nThe book contains three chapters, each of which Crowley said had been dictated and written down in one hour, beginning at noon, on 8 April, 9 April, and 10 April in Cairo, Egypt, in the year 1904. The three chapters of the book are attributed to the deities Nuit, Hadit, and Ra-Hoor-Khuit. Rose Edith Kelly, Crowley's wife, corrected two phrases in the manuscript.\nCrowley later wrote that \"Certain very serious questions have arisen with regard to the method by which this Book was obtained. I do not refer to those doubts\u2014real or pretended\u2014which hostility engenders, for all such are dispelled by study of the text; no forger could have prepared so complex a set of numerical and literal puzzles[...]\" Biographer Lawrence Sutin quotes private diaries that fit this story and writes that \"If ever Crowley uttered the truth of his relation to the \"Book\",\" his public account accurately describes what he remembered on this point.\nStructure and title.\nThe technical title of the book is \"Liber AL vel Legis, sub figura CCXX, as delivered by XCIII=418 to DCLXVI\", although this title never occurs in the Book itself, which refers to itself as \"the Book of the Law\" and \"the threefold Book of Law\" (chapters 1:35, 3:75). CCXX is 220 in Roman figures, representing The Tree of Life (10 numbers times 22 paths), and is the number of verses of the Book in typescript. XCIII is 93, the enumeration of both \"The word of the law\" Thelema and Aiwass. DCLXVI is 666, the number of Crowley as Great Beast both as Adept and Magus. This is a way of saying that the book was delivered by Aiwass (whose number is both 93 and 418) to Crowley, who is The Beast 666.\nThe facsimile manuscript of the Book is not, however, numbered 220, but XXXI (31) as the first chapter's verses are unnumbered in the original manuscript: that is, no verse numbers were dictated to Crowley for chapter one. Both editions were titled by Crowley AL, pronounced \"El\", value 31, so therefore Liber 31 is the manuscript of \"The Book of the Law\" called AL (not be confused with Liber 31 by C. S. Jones (Frater Achad), which is an exegesis of some of the qabalistic symbolism of the \"Book\"), whereas Liber 220 is the edited (strictly according to the editing instructions dictated as part of the text of the Book itself), printed form of the text.\nThe original title of the book was \"Liber L vel Legis\". Crowley retitled it \"Liber AL vel Legis\" in 1921, when he also gave the handwritten manuscript its own title.\nCreation.\nSummons.\nAccording to Crowley, the story began on 16 March 1904, when he tried to \"shew the Sylphs\" by use of the Bornless Ritual to his wife, Rose Edith Kelly, while spending the night in the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid of Giza. Although she could see nothing, she did seem to enter into a light trance and repeatedly said, \"They're waiting for you!\" Since Rose had no interest in magic or mysticism, she took little interest. However, on the 18th, after he invoked Thoth (the god of knowledge), she mentioned Horus by name as the one waiting for him. Crowley, still skeptical, asked her numerous questions about Horus, which she answered accurately supposedly without having any prior study of the subject.\nCrowley also gives a different chronology, in which an invocation of Horus preceded the questioning. Lawrence Sutin says this ritual described Horus in detail, and could have given Rose the answers to her husband's questions.\nAs part of his 'test' for Rose, Crowley wrote that they visited the Bulaq Museum where Crowley asked her to point out an image of Horus. Much to Crowley's initial amusement, she passed by several common images of the god, and went upstairs. From across the room Rose identified Horus on the stele of Ankh-ef-en-Khonsu, then housed under inventory number 666 (since moved to the Egyptian Museum of Cairo, number A 9422). The stela would subsequently be known to Thelemites (adherents of Thelema) as the \"Stele of Revealing\".\nOn 20 March, Crowley invoked Horus, \"with great success\". Between 23 March and 8 April, Crowley had the hieroglyphs on the stele translated. Also, Rose revealed that her \"informant\" was not Horus himself, but his messenger, Aiwass.\nFinally, on 7 April, Rose gave Crowley his instructions\u2014for three days he was to enter the \"temple\" and write down what he heard between noon and 1:00\u00a0P.M.\nSpeakers.\nAlthough the messenger of \"Liber AL\" was Aiwass, each chapter is presented as an expression of one of three god-forms: Nuit, Hadit, and Ra-Hoor-Khuit.\nThe first chapter is spoken by Nuit, the Egyptian goddess of the night sky, called the Queen of Space. Crowley calls her the \"Lady of the Starry Heaven, who is also Matter in its deepest metaphysical sense, who is the infinite in whom all we live and move and have our being.\"\nThe second chapter is spoken by Hadit, who refers to himself as the \"complement of Nu, my bride.\" As such, he is the infinitely condensed point, the center of her infinite circumference. Crowley says of him, \"He is eternal energy, the Infinite Motion of Things, the central core of all being. The manifested Universe comes from the marriage of Nuit and Hadit; without this could no thing be. This eternal, this perpetual marriage-feast is then the nature of things themselves; and therefore, everything that exists is a \"crystallisation of divine ecstasy\", and \"He sees the expansion and the development of the soul through joy.\"\nThe third chapter is spoken by Ra-Hoor-Khuit, \"a god of War and of Vengeance\", also identified as Hoor-paar-kraat, the Crowned and Conquering Child.\nCrowley sums up the speakers of the three chapters thus, \"we have Nuit, Space, Hadit, the point of view; these experience congress, and so produce Heru-Ra-Ha, who combines the ideas of Ra-Hoor-Khuit and Hoor-paar-kraat.\"\nThe book also introduces:\nWriting.\nCrowley said he wrote \"The Book of the Law\" on 8, 9 and 10 April 1904, between the hours of noon and 1:00 pm, in the flat where he and his new wife were staying for their honeymoon, which he described as being near the Boulak Museum in a fashionable European quarter of Cairo, let by the firm Congdon &amp; Co. The apartment was on the ground floor, and the \"temple\" was the drawing room.\nCrowley described the encounter in detail in \"The Equinox of the Gods\", saying that as he sat at his desk in Cairo, the voice of Aiwass came from over his left shoulder in the furthest corner of the room. This voice is described as passionate and hurried, and was \"of deep timbre, musical and expressive, its tones solemn, voluptuous, tender, fierce or aught else as suited the moods of the message. Not bass\u2014perhaps a rich tenor or baritone.\" Further, the voice was devoid of \"native or foreign accent\".\nCrowley also got a \"strong impression\" of the speaker's general appearance. Aiwass had a body composed of \"fine matter\", which had a gauze-like transparency. Further, he \"seemed to be a tall, dark man in his thirties, well-knit, active and strong, with the face of a savage king, and eyes veiled lest their gaze should destroy what they saw. The dress was not Arab; it suggested Assyria or Persia, but very vaguely.\nDespite initially writing that it was an \"excellent example of automatic writing\", Crowley later insisted that it was not just automatic writing (though the writing included aspects of this, since when Crowley tried to stop writing he was compelled to continue. The writing also recorded Crowley's own thoughts). Rather he said that the experience was exactly like an actual voice speaking to him. This resulted in him disclaiming authorship of the work in the usual sense:\nNote, moreover, with what greedy vanity I claim authorship even of all the other A\u2234A\u2234 Books in Class A, though I wrote them inspired beyond all I know to be I. Yet in these Books did Aleister Crowley, the master of English both in prose and in verse, partake insofar as he was That. Compare those Books with The Book of the Law! The style [of the former] is simple and sublime; the imagery is gorgeous and faultless; the rhythm is subtle and intoxicating; the theme is interpreted in faultless symphony. There are no errors of grammar, no infelicities of phrase. Each Book is perfect in its kind.\nI, daring to snatch credit for these [...] dared nowise to lay claim to have touched The Book of the Law, not with my littlest finger-tip.\nCrowley himself was initially opposed to the book and its message. Shortly after making a few copies for evaluation by close friends, the manuscript was misplaced and forgotten about. It would be several years before it was found, and the first official publication occurred in 1909.\nOriginal manuscript.\nA facsimile of the original handwritten manuscript was published in \"The Equinox\", Volume I, Number VII, in 1912. In 1921, Crowley gave the manuscript its own title, \"AL (Liber Legis), The Book of the Law, sub figura XXXI\", to distinguish it from the typeset version. It is now sometimes referred to as simply \"Liber XXXI\".\nThe original manuscript was sent on Crowley's death to Karl Germer, the executor of his will and head of Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.). On Germer's death no trace of it could be found in his papers. There matters rested until 1984, when Tom Whitmore, the new owner of a house in Berkeley, California, began searching through the junk left in the basement by the previous owner. Among the used mattresses, lumber, and outdated high school textbooks were two boxes of assorted papers and newspaper clippings dealing with Germer's affairs, the charter of the O.T.O. and an envelope containing the manuscript of \"The Book of the Law\". Whitmore donated the papers to the O.T.O.\nChanges to the manuscript.\nThe final version of \"Liber Legis\" includes text that did not appear in the original writing, including many small changes to spelling. In several cases, stanzas from the Stele of Revealing were inserted within the text.\nThe Comment.\nBased on several passages, including: \"My scribe Ankh-af-na-khonsu, the priest of the princes, shall not in one letter change this book; but lest there be folly, he shall comment thereupon by the wisdom of Ra-Hoor-Khuit\" (AL I:36), Crowley felt compelled to interpret \"AL\" in writing. He wrote two large sets of commentaries where he attempted to decipher each line.\nIn 1912, he prepared \"AL\" and his current comments on it for publication in \"The Equinox, I(7)\". However, he was not satisfied with this initial attempt. He recalls in his confessions () that he thought the existing commentary was \"shamefully meagre and incomplete.\" He later explains, \"I had stupidly supposed this Comment to be a scholarly exposition of the Book, an elucidation of its obscurities and a demonstration of its praeterhuman origin. I understand at last that this idea is nonsense. The Comment must be an interpretation of the Book intelligible to the simplest minds, and as practical as the Ten Commandments.\" Moreover, this Comment should be arrived at \"inspirationally\", as the Book itself had been.\nYears later in 1925 while in Tunis, Tunisia, Crowley received his inspiration. He published his second commentary, often called simply \"The Comment\", in the Tunis edition of \"AL\", of which only 11 copies were printed, and signed it as Ankh-f-n-khonsu (lit. \"He Lives in Khonsu\"\u2014a historical priest who lived in Thebes in the 26th dynasty, associated with the Stele of Revealing). Crowley later tasked his friend and fellow O.T.O. member Louis Wilkinson with preparing an edited version of Crowley's commentaries which was published some time after Crowley's death as \"The Law is for All\".\nThelemic interpretations.\nThanks in large part to \"The Comment\", the interpretation of the often cryptic text of \"Liber AL vel Legis\" is generally considered by Thelemites to be a matter for the individual reader. Crowley devoted much of his life to writing about \"Liber AL\", seeking to decipher its mysteries and provide insights into its meanings.\nCrowley emphasized that one of the main precepts of the book is the emancipation of mankind from all limitations. He viewed \"The Book of the Law\" as not just introducing a new religion, but also a new cosmology, philosophy, and ethics. According to Crowley, the word Thelema, as uttered by Aiwass, signified a complete departure from the formula of the Dying God, proposing instead a system that integrates the discoveries of science, from physics to psychology, into a coherent and consistent framework.\nVia Hermetic Qabalah.\nCrowley employed Hermetic Qabalah, particularly its numerological method of gematria, to interpret the obscurities of \"Liber AL vel Legis\". He explained that the text contains numerous instances of double entendre, paronomasia in one language or another, numerical-literal puzzles, and even connections of letters across various lines. Crowley detailed these interpretations in the Qabalistic section of his Commentary.\nIn \"Magick Without Tears\", Crowley elaborated on his insights, stating that the \"Author of the Book\" (Aiwass) demonstrated profound knowledge of Qabalah. Initially, Crowley was assured that Aiwass knew at least as much Qabalah as he did. Over time, further study convinced him that Aiwass possessed a much higher level of Qabalistic knowledge, leading Crowley to regard Aiwass as the supreme Qabalist of all time.\nIn one of the \"Holy Books of Thelema\" (1907), called \"Liber Trigrammaton, sub figura XXVII -- Being the Book of the Mutations of the Tao with the Yin and the Yang\", Crowley correlated the 26 Roman script letters to trigrams composed of a solid line for the Yang, a broken line for the Yin, and a point for the Tao. In doing so, Crowley felt that he had fulfilled the book's injunction to \"obtain the order &amp; value of the English Alphabet\", as noted in his 'Old Comment' to \"The Book of the Law\". However, he also wrote that \"The attribution in \"Liber Trigrammaton\" is good theoretically; but no Qabalah of merit has risen therefrom.\"\nVia prophecy.\nCrowley later considered the events of his life and the apparent fulfillment of certain 'predictions' in \"Liber AL vel Legis\" as further proof of its divine origin. He noted that Aiwass had foreseen and provided solutions to difficulties that Crowley only discovered years later, and sometimes even events that he had no part in bringing about.\nOne significant event was Charles Stansfeld Jones claiming the grade of Magister Templi, which Crowley interpreted as the birth of his 'Magical Son'. Crowley believed that Jones' subsequent discovery of the critical value of 31 was foretold in the book (II:76, III:47) and provided him with further insight into his qabalistic understanding and interpretation of the text. Upon receiving notification of this discovery, Crowley expressed his realization that Jones' key had unlocked deeper meanings within \"Liber AL vel Legis\", noting that the text had unfolded like a flower and solved various enigmatic passages.\nVia English Qaballa.\nEnglish Qaballa (EQ) is an English-based Hermetic Qabalah supported by a system of arithmancy that interprets the letters of the English alphabet via an assigned set of values, discovered by James Lees in 1976. It is the result of an intent to understand, interpret, and elaborate on the mysteries of Aleister Crowley's received text, \"Liber AL vel Legis, the Book of the Law\". According to Jake Stratton-Kent, \"the English Qaballa is a qabalah and not a system of numerology. A qabalah is specifically related to three factors: one, a language; two, a 'holy' text or texts; three, mathematical laws at work in these two.\"\nThe \"order &amp; value\" discovered by James Lees lays the letters out on the grid superimposed on the page of manuscript of \"Liber AL\" on which this verse (III:47) appears (sheet 16 of Chapter III). Also appearing on this page are a diagonal line and a circled cross. \"The Book of the Law\" states that the book should only be printed with Crowley's hand-written version included, suggesting that there are mysteries in the \"chance shape of the letters and their position to one another\" of Crowley's handwriting. Whichever top-left to bottom-right diagonal is read the magickal order of the letters is obtained.\nScholarly analyses.\nIsrael Regardie, former secretary to Crowley, offers a psychological interpretation of \"The Book of the Law\" in \"The Eye in the Triangle\". Regardie suggests that the book can be understood as an expression of Crowley's complex psychological landscape, including his struggles with identity and spirituality. He explores the symbolic and archetypal dimensions of the text, providing insights into its deeper meanings and its significance in Crowley's magical philosophy. Regardie suggests that current psychological theory supports the idea that individuals possess various forms of knowledge and power of which they are unaware, aligning with both Freudian and Jungian theories.\nMarco Pasi, in \"Aleister Crowley and the Temptation of Politics\", delves into the philosophical underpinnings of \"The Book of the Law\". Pasi highlights the connections between the text and Nietzschean thought, particularly the concept of the \u00dcbermensch. He discusses how Crowley's work reflects a radical individualism and a break from traditional religious and moral systems. Pasi places \"The Book of the Law\" within the broader context of early 20th-century intellectual and cultural movements.\nRichard Kaczynski, a biographer and historian of Aleister Crowley, provides an in-depth analysis of \"The Book of the Law\" in his work, \"Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley\". Kaczynski explores the historical and psychological contexts in which the book was received, discussing how Crowley's environment, personal experiences, and extensive knowledge of esoteric traditions influenced the content and structure of the book. His analysis includes a detailed examination of the book's themes, symbols, and its role in Crowley's overall magical system.\nLawrence Sutin, in his biography \"Do What Thou Wilt: A Life of Aleister Crowley\", presents a critical perspective on \"The Book of the Law\". Sutin argues that the text reflects Crowley's subconscious mind rather than a divine revelation, pointing out the possibility that Crowley's extensive knowledge of esoteric traditions and his personal aspirations heavily influenced the content of the book. Sutin provides a balanced view, acknowledging the text's impact while questioning its purported supernatural origins.\n\"The Book of the Law\" is considered the cornerstone of Thelemic practice, influencing subsequent Thelemic texts and rituals. Its precepts form the basis for Thelemic ethical and spiritual guidance. Wouter J. Hanegraaff, in \"Western Esotericism: A Guide for the Perplexed\", discusses how the book has impacted modern esoteric movements, noting that it has inspired various interpretations and adaptations in occult literature and practices, highlighting its lasting influence on contemporary spirituality.\nSkeptical views.\nIn \"The Eye in the Triangle\", Regardie questions the significance of Rose's ability to answer Crowley's questions about Horus and the Qabala. Given that Rose had been married to Crowley for eight months at the time, Regardie proposed that Crowley may have used Rose as a 'sounding board' for many of his ideas, meaning she might not have been as ignorant of magick and mysticism as Crowley made out. In his introduction to his edition of \"The Law is for All\", Regardie remarked that it ultimately did not matter whether \"The Book of the Law\" was dictated by a preterhuman intelligence named Aiwass or emerged from the creative depths of Aleister Crowley. He emphasized that Crowley became a mouthpiece for the Zeitgeist, accurately expressing the intrinsic nature of his time.\nCharles R. Cammell, in his book \"Aleister Crowley: The Man, the Mage, the Poet\", also believed that \"The Book of the Law\" was an expression of Crowley's personality. Cammell described the book's maxims as cold, cruel, and relentless, reflecting Crowley's own Daemonic personality. He noted that the manner of the book's reception made it a document of curious interest, partially emanating from Crowley's unconscious mind.\nScholar Joshua Gunn argued that the stylistic similarities between \"The Book of the Law\" and Crowley's poetic writings were too pronounced for it to be anything other than Crowley's work. Gunn pointed out that despite Crowley's belief in the superhuman inspiration of the book, its clich\u00e9d imagery, overwrought style, and elaborate phonetic displays mirrored Crowley's other poetic works, suggesting it was not the product of something supernatural.\nEditions.\n\"The Book of the Law\" was first published in 1909 as part of \u0398\u0395\u039b\u0397\u039c\u0391, a collection of the holy books of Thelema. \u0398\u0395\u039b\u0397\u039c\u0391 was privately published in London by the A\u2234A\u2234 as a three volume set, with \"The Book of the Law\" appearing in Volume III. It was next published in 1913 as part of \"The Equinox\", Volume I, Number X. In both of these early editions it is titled \"Liber L vel Legis\". Subsequent published editions include:\n\"Liber AL\" is also published in several other books, including:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30737", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30737", "title": "Thelemite", "text": ""}
{"id": "30738", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30738", "title": "Thomas E. Burnett Jr.", "text": ""}
{"id": "30739", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30739", "title": "Telephone switch", "text": ""}
{"id": "30740", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30740", "title": "Classical unities", "text": "16\u201319th-century prescriptive theory of dramatic tragedy\nThe classical unities, Aristotelian unities, or three unities represent a prescriptive theory of dramatic tragedy that was introduced in Italy in the 16th century and was influential for three centuries. The three unities are:\nHistory.\nItaly.\nIn 1514, author and critic Gian Giorgio Trissino (1478\u20131550) introduced the concept of the unities in his blank-verse tragedy, \"Sofonisba\". Trissino claimed he was following Aristotle. However, Trissino had no access to Aristotle's most significant work on the tragic form, \"Poetics\". Trissino expanded with his own ideas on what he was able to glean from Aristotle's book, \"Rhetoric\". In \"Rhetoric\" Aristotle considers the dramatic elements of action and time, while focusing on audience reception. Poor translations at the time resulted in some misreadings by Trissino.\nTrissino's play \"Sofonisba\" followed classical Greek style by adhering to the unities, by omitting the usual act division, and even introducing a chorus. The many Italian playwrights that came after Trissino in the 16th century, also wrote in accordance to the unities. However, according to \"The Cambridge Guide to Theatre\", the imitation of classical forms and modes had a deadening effect on Italian drama, which became \"rhetorical and inert\". None of the 16th century tragedies that were influenced by the rediscovery of ancient literature have survived except as historic examples. One of the best is Pietro Aretino's \"Orazia\" (1546), which nevertheless is found to be stiff, distant and lacking in feeling.\nIn 1570 the unities were codified and given a new definition by Lodovico Castelvetro (c.\u20091505\u20131571) in his influential translation and interpretation of Aristotle's \"Poetics\", \"Poetica d'Aristotele vulgarizzata e sposta\" (\"The Poetics of Aristotle translated in the Vulgar Language and commented on\"). Though Castelvetro's translations are considered crude and inaccurate, and though he at times altered Aristotle's meanings to make his own points, his translations were influential and inspired the vast number of scholarly debates and discussions that followed all through Europe.\nFrance.\nOne hundred and twenty years after \"Sofonisba\" introduced the theory to Italy, it then introduced the concept once again, this time in France with a translation by Jean Mairet. Voltaire said that the \"Sophonisba\" of Mairet had \"a merit which was then entirely new in France, \u2014 that of being in accordance with the rules of the theatre. The three unities of action, time, and place are there strictly observed, and the author was regarded as the father of the French stage.\" The new rules caught on very quickly in France. Dramatist Pierre Corneille became an ardent supporter of them, and in his plays from \"Le Cid\" (1636) to \"Sur\u00e9na\" (1674) he attempted to keep within the limits of time and place. In 1655 he published his \"Trois Discours\", which includes his arguments for the unities. Corneille's principles drew the support of Racine and Voltaire, and for French playwrights they became hard rules, and a heresy to disobey them. Voltaire said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All nations begin to regard as barbarous those times when even the greatest geniuses, such as Lope de Vega and Shakespeare, were ignorant of this system, and they even confess the obligation they are under to us for having rescued them from this barbarism. . . . The fact that Corneille, Racine, Moli\u00e8re, Addison, Congreve, and Maffei have all observed the laws of the stage, that ought to be enough to restrain any one who should entertain the idea of violating them.\nHowever, in France opposition soon began to grow in the form of the Romantic movement, that wanted freedom from the strictures of the classical unities. It turned into a fierce literary conflict. The opposition included Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, and others. Victor Hugo, in the preface to his play, \"Cromwell\", criticizes the unities, saying in part,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Distinguished contemporaries, foreigners and Frenchmen, have already attacked, both in theory and in practice, that fundamental law of the pseudo-Aristotelian code. Indeed, the combat was not likely to be a long one. At the first blow it cracked, so worm-eaten was that timber of the old scholastic hovel!\nHugo ridicules the unities of place and time, but not the unity of action, which he considers \"true and well founded\". The conflict came to a climax with the production of Victor Hugo's play \"Hernani\" at the Theatre Francais, on 21 February 1830. It was reported that the two sides, the \"Classicists\" and \"Romanticists\", both full of passion, met as on a field of battle. There was a lot of clamor in the theatre at each performance, even some fist fights. The newer Romantic movement carried the day, and French playwrights no longer had to confine their plays to one location, and have all of the action packed into one day.\nEngland.\nThe Classical Unities seem to have had less impact in England. It had adherents in Ben Jonson and John Dryden. Examples of plays that followed the theory include: Thomas Otway's \"Venice Preserv'd\" (1682), Joseph Addison's \"Cato,\" and Samuel Johnson's \"Irene\" (1749). Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\" (1610) takes place almost entirely on an island, during the course of four hours, and with one major action\u2014that of Prospero reclaiming his role as the Duke of Milan. It is suggested that Prospero's way of regularly checking the time of day during the play might be satirizing the concept of the unities. In \"An Apology for Poetry\" (1595), Philip Sidney advocates for the unities, and complains that English plays are ignoring them. In Shakespeare's \"The Winter's Tale\" the chorus notes that the story makes a jump of 16 years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJohn Dryden discusses the unity of time in this passage criticizing Shakespeare's history plays:\n... they are rather so many Chronicles of Kings, or the business many times of thirty or forty years, crampt into a representation of two hours and a half, which is not to imitate or paint Nature, but rather to draw her in miniature, to take her in little; to look upon her through the wrong end of a Perspective, and receive her Images not onely much less, but infinitely more imperfect then the life: this instead of making a Play delightful, renders it ridiculous.\nSamuel Johnson in the preface to his edition of Shakespeare in 1773 rejects the previous dogma of the classical unities and argues that drama should be faithful to life:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The unities of time and place are not essential to a just drama, and that though they may sometimes conduce to pleasure, they are always to be sacrificed to the nobler beauties of variety and instruction; and that a play written with nice observation of the critical rules is to be contemplated as an elaborate curiosity, as the product of superfluous and ostentatious art, by which is shown rather what is possible than what is necessary.\nAfter Johnson's critique interest seemed to turn away from the theory.\nJohn Pitcher, in the Arden Shakespeare Third Series edition of \"The Winter's Tale\" (2010), suggests that Shakespeare was familiar with the unities due to an English translation of \"Poetics\" that became popular around 1608.\nExcerpts of Aristotle's \"Poetics\".\nAristotle's \"Poetics\" may not have been available to Trissino when he formulated the unities, and the term \"Aristotelian unities\" is considered a misnomer, but in spite of this, Aristotle's name became attached to the theory from the beginning. As translations became available, theorists have looked to the \"Poetics\" retrospectively for support of the concept. In these passages from the \"Poetics\", Aristotle considers action:\nTragedy, then is a process of imitating an action which has serious implications, is complete, and possesses magnitude. ...A poetic imitation, then, ought to be unified in the same way as a single imitation in any other mimetic field, by having a single object: since the plot is an imitation of an action, the latter ought to be both unified and complete, and the component events ought to be so firmly compacted that if any one of them is shifted to another place, or removed, the whole is loosened up and dislocated; for an element whose addition or subtraction makes no perceptible extra difference is not really a part of the whole.\nAristotle considers length of time in a distinction between the epic and tragedy:\nWell then, epic poetry followed in the wake of tragedy up to the point of being a (1) good-sized (2) imitation (3) in verse (4) of people who are to be taken seriously; but in its having its verse unmixed with any other and being narrative in character, there they differ. Further, so far as its length is concerned tragedy tries as hard as it can to exist during a single daylight period, or to vary but little, while the epic is not limited in its time and so differs in that respect."}
{"id": "30741", "revid": "47689075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30741", "title": "Tl\u00e1loc", "text": "Deity in Aztec religion; a god of rain and thunder, fertility, and water\nTl\u00e1loc ( ) is the god of rain in Aztec religion. He was also a deity of earthly fertility and water, and worshipped as a giver of life and sustenance; many rituals and sacrifices predicated upon these aspects were held in his name. He was feared\u2014albeit not as a malicious figure\u2014for his power over hail, thunder, lightning, and rain. He is also associated with caves, springs, and mountains, most specifically the sacred mountain where he was believed to reside. Cerro Tl\u00e1loc is very important in understanding how rituals surrounding this deity played out. Tl\u00e1loc appears to be one of the oldest and most universal figures of worship in ancient Mexico.\nThere are many different representations of Tl\u00e1loc, and there are many different offerings given to him. Tl\u00e1loc is often represented through iconography of butterflies, jaguars, and serpents. The Mexican marigold, \"Tagetes lucida\", known to the Nahua as cempohualxochitl, was another important symbol of the god, and was burned as a ritual incense in native religious ceremonies. Representations of Tl\u00e1loc are distinguished by the presence of fangs, whether that be three or four of the same size, or just two, paired with the traditional bifurcated tongue. Often, but not always, Tl\u00e1loc will also be carrying some sort of vessel that contains water.\nAlthough the name Tl\u00e1loc is specifically Nahuatl, worship of a storm god, associated with mountaintop shrines and with life-giving rain, is as at least as old as Teotihuacan. It was likely adopted from the Maya god Chaac, perhaps ultimately derived from an earlier Olmec precursor. Tl\u00e1loc was mainly worshiped at Teotihuacan, while his big rituals were held on Cerro Tl\u00e1loc. An underground Tl\u00e1loc shrine has been found at Teotihuacan which shows many offerings left for this deity.\nDeity iconography.\nIn Aztec iconography, many different sculptures, and pieces of work have been mislabeled or mistaken as Tl\u00e1loc. For a while, anything that was abstract and on the scarier side was labelled as Tl\u00e1loc. However, in reality, Tl\u00e1loc's two main identifiers are fangs, along with ringed eyes. Furthermore, his lips are a very defining feature \u2013 they are shaped like a mustache. He is most often coupled with lightning, maize, and water in visual representations and artwork. Other forms of Tl\u00e1loc include a variety of elements or symbols: jaguar, serpent, owl, water lily, bifurcated tongue, quetzal, butterfly, shell, spider, eye-of-the-reptile symbol, cross Venus / symbol. The number of different symbols associated with Tl\u00e1loc stem from past, widespread confusion on the deity's appearance, along with the old, widespread worship of this deity.\nOfferings dedicated to Tl\u00e1loc in Tenochtitlan were known to include several jaguar skulls and even a complete jaguar skeleton. The Mexica held Jaguars to a very high standard, associated with the underworld, Jaguars were considered the ultimate sacrificial animal due to their value, which the Mexica decided was high.\nTl\u00e1loc's impersonators often wore the distinctive mask and heron-feather headdress, usually carrying a cornstalk or a symbolic lightning bolt wand; another symbol was a ritual water jar. Along with this, Tl\u00e1loc is manifested in the form of boulders at shrine-sites, and in the Valley of Mexico the primary shrine of this deity was located atop Cerro Tl\u00e1loc. Cerro Tl\u00e1loc was where human sacrifice was held, in the name of the water deity.\nIn Coatlinchan, a colossal statue weighing 168 tons was found that was thought to represent Tl\u00e1loc. However, one scholar believes that the statue may not have been Tl\u00e1loc at all but his sister or some other female deity. This is a classic confusion as nobody could seem to figure out what was Tl\u00e1loc, and what was not. This statue was relocated to the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City in 1964.\nWhile pre-Hispanic cultures are thought to have become extinct once the Spanish had completed the colonization of Mexico, aspects of pre-Hispanic cultures continue to influence Mexican culture. Accordingly, Tl\u00e1loc has continued to be represented in Mexican culture even after the Spanish were thought to have completed evangelizing in Mexico. In fact, even as the Spanish were beginning to proselytize in Mexico, religious syncretism was occurring. Analyses of evangelization plays put on by the Spanish, in order to convert the indigenous peoples to Christianity, suggests that the Spanish might have unknowingly created connections between Christianity and indigenous religious figures, such as Tl\u00e1loc. Indigenous Mexicans viewing these plays might have made connections between the sacrifice Abraham was willing to make of Isaac, to the sacrifices that were made to Tl\u00e1loc and other deities. These connections may have allowed indigenous peoples to retain ideas about sacrifice even as they were being forcibly converted to Christianity. Early syncretism between indigenous religions and Christianity, also included more direct connections to Tl\u00e1loc. Some churches built during the sixteenth century, such as the Santiago Tlatelolco church had stones depicting Tl\u00e1loc within the interior of the church. Even as the Roman Catholic Church sought to eradicate indigenous religious traditions, depiction of Tl\u00e1loc still remained within worship spaces, suggesting that Tl\u00e1loc would still have been worshipped after Spanish colonization. It is clear that Tl\u00e1loc would have continued to have played a role in Mexican cultures immediately after colonization.\nDespite the fact that it has been half a millennium since the conquest of Mexico, Tl\u00e1loc still plays a role in shaping Mexican culture. At Coatlinchan, a giant statue of Tl\u00e1loc continues to play a key role in shaping local culture, even after the statue was relocated to Mexico City. In Coatlinchan, people still celebrate the statue of Tl\u00e1loc, so much so that some local residents still seek to worship him, while the local municipality has also erected a reproduction of the original statue. This makes sense as Tl\u00e1loc is one of the most renowned deities, who has to this day many believers and followers. Many residents of Coatlinchan, relate to the statue of Tl\u00e1loc in the way that they might associate themselves with a patron saint, linking their identity as a resident of the town with the image of Tl\u00e1loc. While Tl\u00e1loc plays an especially important role in the lives of the people of Coatlinchan, the god also plays an important role in shaping the Mexican identity. Images of Tl\u00e1loc are found throughout Mexico from Tijuana to the Yucat\u00e1n, and images of the statue of Tl\u00e1loc found at Coatlinchan are deployed as a symbol of the Mexican nation. Tl\u00e1loc and other pre-Hispanic features are critical to creating a common Mexican identity that unites people throughout Mexico. Due to the fact that many scholars believe that Tl\u00e1loc also has Mayan roots, this widespread appreciation is common in Mesoamerica. Accordingly, people throughout Mexico, and especially in Coatlinchan, refer to Tl\u00e1loc in very anthropomorphized ways, referring to Tl\u00e1loc as a person, as the Mexica did with many deities. Furthermore, people continue to observe superstitions about Tl\u00e1loc. Despite centuries of colonial erasure, Tl\u00e1loc continues to be represented in American culture.\nMesoamerican representations.\nEvidence suggests that Tl\u00e1loc was represented in many other Mesoamerican cultures and religions. Tl\u00e1loc is thought to be one of the most commonly worshipped deities at Teotihuacan and it is specifically here, in Teotihuacan, that representations of Tl\u00e1loc often show him having jaguar teeth and features. This differs from the Maya version of Tl\u00e1loc, as the Maya representation depicts no specific relation to jaguars. The inhabitants of Teotihuacan thought of thunder as the rumblings of the jaguar and associated thunder with Tl\u00e1loc as well. It is likely that this god was given these associations because he is also known as \"the provider\" among the Aztecs.\nA chacmool excavated from the Maya site of Chich\u00e9n Itz\u00e1 in the Yucat\u00e1n by Augustus Le Plongeon possesses imagery associated with Tl\u00e1loc. This chacmool is similar to others found at the Templo Mayor in Tenochtitl\u00e1n. The chacmool found at Chich\u00e9n Itz\u00e1 appears to have been used for sacrificial purposes, as the chacmool is shaped like a captive who has been bound. Likewise, two of the chacmools that have been found at Templo Mayor make clear reference to Tl\u00e1loc. The first chacmool portrays Tl\u00e1loc three times. Once on the vessel for collecting the blood and heart of sacrificed victims, once on the underpart of the chacmool with aquatic motifs related to Tl\u00e1loc, and the actual figure of the chacmool itself is of Tl\u00e1loc as the figure portrays the iconic goggle eyes and large fangs. The other chacmool was found at the Tl\u00e1loc half of the double pyramid-temple complex and clearly represents Tl\u00e1loc for the same reasons. In addition to the chacmools, human corpses were found in close proximity to the Tl\u00e1locan half of Templo Mayor, which were likely war captives.\nThese archaeological findings could explain why the Maya tended to associate their version of Tl\u00e1loc, Chaac, with the bloodiness of war and sacrifice, because they adopted it from the Aztecs, who used Maya captives for sacrifice to Tl\u00e1loc. Furthermore, Tl\u00e1loc can be seen in many examples of Maya war imagery and war-time decoration, such as appearing on \u201cshields, masks, and headdresses of warriors.\u201d This evidence affirms the Maya triple connection between war-time, sacrifice, and the rain deity as they likely adopted the rain deity from the Aztecs, but blurred the line between sacrifice and captive capture, and religion.\nTl\u00e1loc was also associated with the earth, and it is believed this is also a reason why sacrifices may have been made to him. Sacrifices to Tl\u00e1loc were not solely a Maya phenomenon, and it is known that the Aztecs also made sacrifices to Tl\u00e1loc. Just as the Maya had also worshipped their own version of Tl\u00e1loc, so did the Mixtec people of Oaxaca, who were known to worship a rain god that is extremely similar to other manifestations of Tl\u00e1loc.\nHistorical cosmology.\nIn Aztec cosmology, the four corners of the universe are marked by \"the four Tl\u00e1locs\" ( ) which both hold up the sky and function as the frame for the passing of time. Tl\u00e1loc was the patron of the Calendar day \"Maz\u0101tl.\" In Aztec mythology, Tl\u00e1loc was the lord of the third sun which was destroyed by fire.\nOn page 28 of the Codex Borgia, the Five Tlaloque are pictured watering maize fields. Each Tl\u00e1loc is pictured watering the maize with differing types of rains, of which only one was beneficial. The rain that was beneficial to the land was burnished with jade crystals and likely represented the type of rain that would make a bountiful harvest. The other forms of rain were depicted as destroyers of crops, \u201cfiery rain, fungus rain, wind rain, and flint blade rain\u201d. This depiction shows the power that Tl\u00e1loc had over the Central American crop supply. Also, the high ratio of damaging rains to beneficial rains likely symbolizes the ratio of the likelihood that crops are destroyed to them being nourished. This would explain why so much effort and resources were put forth by the Central Americans in order to appease the gods.\nAdditionally, Tl\u00e1loc is thought to be one of the patron deities of the trecena of 1 Quiahuitl (along with Chicomecoatl). Trecenas are the thirteen-day periods into which the 260-day calendar is divided. The first day of each trecena dictates the augury, or omen, and the patron deity or deities associated with the trecena.\nIn Aztec mythic cosmography, Tl\u00e1loc ruled the fourth layer of the upper world, or heavens, which is called Tl\u00e1locan (\"place of Tl\u00e1loc\") in several Aztec codices, such as the Vaticanus A and Florentine codices. Described as a place of unending springtime and a paradise of green plants, Tl\u00e1locan was the destination in the afterlife for those who died violently from phenomena associated with water, such as by lightning, drowning, and water-borne diseases. These violent deaths also included leprosy, venereal disease, sores, dropsy, scabies, gout, and child sacrifices.\nThe Nahua believed that Huitzilopochtli could provide them with fair weather for their crops and they placed an image of Tl\u00e1loc, who was the rain-god, near him so that if necessary, the war god could compel the rain maker to exert his powers.\nEtymology.\nTl\u00e1loc was also associated with the world of the dead and with the earth. His name is thought to be derived from the Nahuatl word \"tl\u0101lli\" \"earth\", and its meaning has been interpreted as \"path beneath the earth,\" \"long cave,\" \"he who is made of earth\", as well as \"he who is the embodiment of the earth\". J. Richard Andrews interprets it as \"one that lies on the land,\" identifying Tl\u00e1loc as a cloud resting on the mountaintops. Other names of Tl\u00e1loc were Tlamacazqui (\"Giver\") and Xoxouhqui (\"Green One\"); and (among the contemporary Nahua of Veracruz), Chaneco.\nChild sacrifice and rituals.\nIn the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan, one of the two shrines on top of the Great Temple was dedicated to Tl\u00e1loc. The high priest who was in charge of the Tl\u00e1loc shrine was called \"Quetzalcoatl Tl\u00e1loc Tlamacazqui.\" It was the northernmost side of this temple that was dedicated to Tl\u00e1loc, the god of rain and agricultural fertility. In this area, a bowl was kept in which sacrificial hearts were placed on certain occasions, as offerings to the rain gods. Although the Great Temple had its northern section dedicated to Tl\u00e1loc, the most important site of worship of the rain god was on the peak of Cerro Tl\u00e1loc, a mountain on the eastern rim of the Valley of Mexico. Here the Aztec ruler would come and conduct important ceremonies annually. Additionally, throughout the year, pilgrims came to the mountain and offered precious stones and figures at the shrine. Many of the offerings found here also related to water and the sea.\nThe Tl\u00e1locan-bound dead were not cremated as was customary, but instead they were buried in the earth with seeds planted in their faces and blue paint covering their foreheads. Their bodies were dressed in paper and accompanied by a digging stick for planting put in their hands.\nThe second shrine on top of the main pyramid at Tenochtitlan was dedicated to Tl\u00e1loc. Both his shrine, and Huitzilopochtli's next to it, faced west. Sacrifices and rites took place in these temples. The Aztecs believed Tl\u00e1loc resided in mountain caves, thus his shrine in Tenochtitlan's pyramid was called \"mountain abode.\" Many rich offerings were regularly placed before it, especially those linked to water, such as shells, jade, and sand. Cerro Tl\u00e1loc was situated directly east of the pyramid, which is very in-line with classic Aztec architecture. The Mexica did and designed everything with cosmological direction. It was forty-four miles away, with a long road connecting the two places of worship. On Cerro Tl\u00e1loc, there was a shrine containing stone images of the mountain itself and other neighboring peaks. The shrine was called Tl\u00e1locan, in reference to the paradise. Also, the shrine contained four pitchers containing water. Each pitcher would produce a different fate if used on crops: the first would bring forth a good harvest, the second would cause the harvest to fail and rot, the third would dry the harvest out, and the final one would freeze it. Sacrifices that took place on Cerro Tl\u00e1loc were thought to favor early rains.\nThe Atlcahualo festivals was celebrated from 12 February until 3 March. Dedicated to the Tlaloque, this veintena involved the sacrifice of children on sacred mountaintops, like Cerro Tl\u00e1loc. This form of human sacrifice was not only specific, but necessary in the eyes of the Aztecs. The children were beautifully adorned, dressed in the style of Tl\u00e1loc and the Tlaloque. The children were \"chosen\" by the community, and although this selection came with honor, being selected came with great responsibility. Furthermore, these children were not usually of high social class. The children to be sacrificed were carried to Cerro Tl\u00e1loc on litters strewn with flowers and feathers, while also being surrounded by dancers. Once the children reached the peak, they would have to stay overnight with the priests at the vigil. The priests were not allowed to leave this site, or else they would be considered \"mocauhque\", meaning they who are abandoned. Then, at the shrine, the children's hearts would be pulled out by Aztec priests. If, on the way to the shrine, these children cried, their tears were viewed as positive signs of imminent and abundant rains. Every Atlcahualo festival, seven children were sacrificed in and around Lake Texcoco in the Aztec capital. The children were either slaves or the second-born children of noblepeople, or p\u012bpiltin. If the children did not cry, it meant a bad year for their whole system of living - agriculture. To signify when the rains were about to end, the Aztecs relied on the call from a bird known as the \"cuitlacochin\". This would also signify a switch to soft rain rolling in.\nThe festival of Tozoztontli (24 March \u2013 12 April) similarly involved child sacrifice. During this festival, the children were sacrificed in caves. The flayed skins of sacrificial victims that had been worn by priests for the last twenty days were taken off and placed in these dark caverns.\nThe winter veintena of Atemoztli (9 December \u2013 28 December) was also dedicated to the Tlaloque. This period preceded an important rainy season, so statues were made out of amaranth dough. Their teeth were pumpkin seeds and their eyes, beans. Once these statues were offered copal, fine scents, and other food items, while they were also prayed to and adorned with finery. Afterwards, their doughy chests were opened, their \"hearts\" taken out, before their bodies were cut up and eaten. The ornaments with which they had been adorned were taken and burned in peoples\u2019 patios. On the final day of the \"veintena,\" people celebrated and held banquets.\nTl\u00e1loc was also worshipped during the Huey Tozotli festival, which was celebrated annually. Evidence from the Codex Borbonicus suggests that Huey Tozotli was a commemoration of Centeotl, the god of maize. While Tl\u00e1loc is not normally associated with Huey Tozotli, evidence from the Codex Borbonicus indicates that Tl\u00e1loc was worshipped during this festival. Additional evidence from the Book of Gods and Rites suggest rulers from the Aztec Empire and other states would make a pilgrimage to Cerro Tl\u00e1loc during the Huey Tozotli festival in order to present offerings to Tl\u00e1loc. The Book of Gods and Rites also suggests that a child was sacrificed as a part of this pilgrimage as well, although this could simply be the result of colonial sensationalism on the part of the Spanish authors. It is argued that Tl\u00e1loc was incorporated into celebrations of Huey Tozotli because of his role as the god of rain. Huey Tozotli was a celebration of the maize harvest, and it would make sense that worshippers might want to celebrate Tl\u00e1loc during this festival as his powers of the rain would be critical to having a successful harvest of maize.\nTl\u00e1loc was linked to the regenerative capacity of weather, and, as such, he was worshipped at Cerro Tl\u00e1loc because much of the rain in Central Mexico is formed over range of which Cerro Tl\u00e1loc is a part. Tl\u00e1loc was worshipped on Cerro Tl\u00e1loc during the Etzalcualiztli festival, in which rulers from across Central Mexico performed rituals to Tl\u00e1loc in order to ask for rain, and to celebrate fertility and the change of the seasons. An important part of these pilgrimages to Cerro Tl\u00e1loc during Etzalcualitztli was the sacrifice of both adults and children to Tl\u00e1loc.\nRelated deities.\nArchaeological evidence indicates Tl\u00e1loc was worshipped in Mesoamerica before the Aztecs even settled there in the 13th century AD. He was a prominent god in Teotihuacan at least 800 years before the Aztecs. This has led to Meso-American goggle-eyed rain gods being referred to generically as \"Tl\u00e1loc,\" although in some cases it is unknown what they were called in these cultures, and in other cases we know that he was called by a different name, e.g., the Maya version was known as Chaac and the Zapotec deity as Cocijo.\nChalchiuhtlicue, or \"she of the jade skirt\" in Nahuatl, was the deity connected with the worship of ground water. Therefore, her shrines were by springs, streams, irrigation ditches, or aqueducts, the most important of these shrines being at Pantitlan, in the center of Lake Texcoco. Sometimes described as Tl\u00e1loc's sister, Chalchiuhtlicue was impersonated by ritual performers wearing the green skirt that was associated with Chalchiuhtlicue. Like that of Tl\u00e1loc, her cult was linked to the earth, fertility and nature's regeneration.\nTl\u00e1loc was first married to the goddess of flowers, Xochiquetzal, which literally translates to \"Flower Quetzal.\" Xochiquetzal personifies pleasure, flowers, and young female sexuality. In doing so, she is associated with pregnancies and childbirths and was believed to act as a guardian figure for new mothers. Unlike many other female deities, Xochiquetzal maintains her youthful appearance and is often depicted in opulent attire and gold adornments.\nTl\u00e1loc was the father of Tecciztecatl, possibly with Chalchiuhtlicue. Tl\u00e1loc had an older sister or daughter named Huixtocihuatl. He is also possibly related to the goddess Ayauhteotl.\nCerro Tl\u00e1loc.\nThere is a sanctuary found atop Cerro Tl\u00e1loc, dedicated to the god, Tl\u00e1loc; it is thought that the location of this sanctuary in relation to other temples surrounding it may have been a way for the Aztecs to mark the time of year and keep track of important ceremonial dates. Research has shown that different orientations linked to Cerro Tl\u00e1loc revealed a grouping of dates at the end of April and beginning of May associated with certain astronomical and meteorological events. Archaeological, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic data indicate that these phenomena coincide with the sowing of maize in dry lands associated with agricultural sites. The precinct on the summit of the mountain contains 5 stones which are thought to represent Tl\u00e1loc and his four Tlaloque, who are responsible for providing rain for the land. It also features a structure that housed a statue of Tl\u00e1loc in addition to idols of many different religious regions, such as the other sacred mountains.\nGeographical setting.\nCerro Tl\u00e1loc is the highest peak of the part of the Sierra Nevada called Sierra del Rio Frio that separates the valleys of Mexico and Puebla. It rises over two different ecological zones: alpine meadows and subalpine forests. The rainy season starts in May and lasts until October. The highest annual temperature occurs in April, the onset of the rainy season, and the lowest in December\u2013January. Some 500 years ago weather conditions were slightly more severe, but the best time to climb the mountain was practically the same as today: October through December, and February until the beginning of May. The date of the feast of Huey Tozotli celebrated atop Cerro Tl\u00e1loc coincided with a period of the highest annual temperature, shortly before dangerous thunderstorms might block access to the summit.\nArchaeological evidence.\nThe first detailed account of Cerro Tl\u00e1loc by Jim Rickards in 1929 was followed by visits or descriptions by other scholars. In 1953 Wicke and Horcasitas carried out preliminary archaeological investigations at the site; their conclusions were repeated by Parsons in 1971. Archaeo-astronomical research began in 1984, some of which remains unpublished. In 1989 excavation was undertaken at the site by Solis and Townsend. The current damage that is present at the top of Cerro Tl\u00e1loc is thought to be likely of human destruction, rather than natural forces. There also appears to have been a construction of a modern shrine that was built in the 1970s, which suggests that there was a recent/present attempt to conduct rituals on the mountain top.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30742", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30742", "title": "Tail recursion", "text": ""}
{"id": "30745", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30745", "title": "Titius\u2013Bode law", "text": "Discredited hypothesis about Solar System planets' orbits\nThe Titius\u2013Bode law (sometimes termed simply Bode's law) is a formulaic prediction of spacing between planets in any given planetary system. The formula suggests that, extending outward, each planet should be approximately twice as far from the Sun as the one before. The hypothesis correctly anticipated the orbits of Ceres (in the asteroid belt) and Uranus, but failed as a predictor of Neptune's orbit. It is named after Johann Daniel Titius and Johann Elert Bode.\nLater work by Mary Adela Blagg and D. E. Richardson significantly revised the original formula, and made predictions that were subsequently validated by new discoveries and observations. It is these re-formulations that offer \"the best phenomenological representations of distances with which to investigate the theoretical significance of Titius\u2013Bode type Laws\".\nOriginal formulation.\nThe law relates the semi-major axis formula_1 of each planet's orbit outward from the Sun in units such that the Earth's semi-major axis is equal to 10:formula_2where formula_3 such that, with the exception of the first step, each value is twice the previous value. There is another representation of the formula:formula_4where formula_5 The resulting values can be divided by 10 to convert them into astronomical units (AU), resulting in the expression:formula_6For the far outer planets, beyond Saturn, each planet is predicted to be roughly twice as far from the Sun as the previous object. Whereas the Titius\u2013Bode law predicts Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto at about 10, 20, 39, and 77\u00a0AU, the actual values are closer to 10, 19, 30, 40\u00a0AU.\nThe \"Classical\" (Canonical) form of the Titius-Bode Law is formula_7. This Formula also has a \"Recursive\" form: formula_8, where formula_9\nOrigin and history.\nThe first mention of a series approximating Bode's law is found in a textbook by D. Gregory (1715):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA similar sentence, likely paraphrased from Gregory (1715), appears in a work published by C. Wolff in 1724.\nIn 1764, C. Bonnet wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn his 1766 translation of Bonnet's work, J. D. Titius added two of his own paragraphs to the statement above. The insertions were placed at the bottom of page\u00a07 and at the top of page\u00a08. The new paragraph is not in Bonnet's original French text, nor in translations of the work into Italian and English.\nThere are two parts to Titius's inserted text. The first part explains the succession of planetary distances from the Sun:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take notice of the distances of the planets from one another, and recognize that almost all are separated from one another in a proportion which matches their bodily magnitudes. Divide the distance from the Sun to Saturn into 100 parts; then Mercury is separated by four such parts from the Sun, Venus by 4+3=7 such parts, the Earth by 4+6=10, Mars by 4+12=16. But notice that from Mars to Jupiter there comes a deviation from this so exact progression. From Mars there follows a space of 4+24=28 such parts, but so far no planet was sighted there. But should the Lord Architect have left that space empty? Not at all. Let us therefore assume that this space without doubt belongs to the still undiscovered satellites of Mars, let us also add that perhaps Jupiter still has around itself some smaller ones which have not been sighted yet by any telescope. Next to this for us still unexplored space there rises Jupiter's sphere of influence at 4+48=52 parts; and that of Saturn at 4+96=100 parts.\nIn 1772, J. E. Bode, then aged twenty-five, published an astronomical compendium, in which he included the following footnote, citing Titius (in later editions):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This latter point seems in particular to follow from the astonishing relation which the known six planets observe in their distances from the Sun. Let the distance from the Sun to Saturn be taken as 100, then Mercury is separated by 4 such parts from the Sun. Venus is 4+3=7. The Earth 4+6=10. Mars 4+12=16. Now comes a gap in this so orderly progression. After Mars there follows a space of 4+24=28 parts, in which no planet has yet been seen. Can one believe that the Founder of the universe had left this space empty? Certainly not. From here we come to the distance of Jupiter by 4+48=52 parts, and finally to that of Saturn by 4+96=100 parts.\nThese two statements, for all their peculiar expression, and from the radii used for the orbits, seem to stem from an antique algorithm by a \"cossist\".\nMany precedents were found that predate the seventeenth century. Titius was a disciple of the German philosopher C. F. von\u00a0Wolf (1679\u20131754), and the second part of the text that Titius inserted into Bonnet's work is in a book by von\u00a0Wolf (1723), suggesting that Titius learned the relation from him. Twentieth-century literature about Titius\u2013Bode law attributes authorship to von\u00a0Wolf. A prior version was written by D.\u00a0Gregory (1702), in which the succession of planetary distances 4, 7, 10, 16, 52, and 100 became a geometric progression with ratio 2. This is the nearest Newtonian formula, which was also cited by Benjamin Martin (1747) and Tom\u00e0s Cerd\u00e0 (c. 1760) years before Titius's expanded translation of Bonnet's book into German (1766). Over the next two centuries, subsequent authors continued to present their own modified versions, apparently unaware of prior work.\nTitius and Bode hoped that the law would lead to the discovery of new planets, and indeed the discovery of Uranus and Ceres \u2013 both of whose distances fit well with the law \u2013 contributed to the law's fame. Neptune's distance was very discrepant, however, and indeed Pluto \u2013 no longer considered a planet \u2013 is at a mean distance that roughly corresponds to that the Titius\u2013Bode law predicted for the next planet out from Uranus.\nWhen originally published, the law was approximately satisfied by all the planets then known \u2013 i.e., Mercury through Saturn \u2013 with a gap between the fourth and fifth planets. Vikarius (Johann Friedrich) Wurm (1787) proposed a modified version of the Titius\u2013Bode Law that accounted for the then-known satellites of Jupiter and Saturn, and better predicted the distance for Mercury.\nThe Titius\u2013Bode law was regarded as interesting, but of no great importance until the discovery of Uranus in 1781, which happens to fit into the series nearly exactly. Based on this discovery, Bode urged his contemporaries to search for a fifth planet. Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt, was found at Bode's predicted position in 1801.\nBode's law was widely accepted at that point, until in 1846 Neptune was discovered in a location that does not conform to the law. Simultaneously, due to the large number of asteroids discovered in the belt, Ceres was no longer considered a major planet. In 1898 the astronomer and logician C.\u00a0S. Peirce used Bode's law as an example of fallacious reasoning.\nThe discovery of Pluto in 1930 confounded the issue still further: Although nowhere near its predicted position according to Bode's law, it was very nearly at the position the law had designated for Neptune. The subsequent discovery of the Kuiper belt \u2013 and in particular the object Eris, which is more massive than Pluto, yet does not fit Bode's law \u2013 further discredited the formula.\nData.\nThe Titius\u2013Bode law predicts planets will be present at specific distances in astronomical units, which can be compared to the observed data for the planets and two dwarf planets in the Solar System:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;*1 For large \"k\", each Titius\u2013Bode rule distance is approximately twice the preceding value. Hence, an arbitrary planet may be found within \u221225% to +50% of one of the predicted positions. For small \"k\", the predicted distances do not fully double, so the range of potential deviation is smaller. Note that the semi-major axis is proportional to the 2/3 power of the orbital period. For example, planets in a 2:3 orbital resonance (such as plutinos relative to Neptune) will vary in distance by (2/3)2/3 = \u221223.69% and +31.04% relative to one another.\nBlagg formulation.\nIn 1913, M. A. Blagg, an Oxford astronomer, revisited the law. She analyzed the orbits of the planetary system and those of the satellite systems of the outer gas giants, Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus. She examined the log of the distances, trying to find the best \"average\" difference. Her analysis resulted in a different formula:\nformula_10Note in particular that in Blagg's formula, the law for the Solar System was best represented by a progression in 1.7275, rather than the original value 2 used by Titius, Bode, and others.\nBlagg examined the satellite system of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus, and discovered the same progression ratio 1.7275, in each.\nHowever, the final form of the correction function f was not given in Blagg's 1913 paper, with Blagg noting that the empirical figures given were only for illustration. The empirical form was provided in the form of a graph (the reason that points on the curve are such a close match for empirical data, for objects discovered prior to 1913, is that they \"are\" the empirical data).\nFinding a formula that closely fit the empircal curve turned out to be difficult. Fourier analysis of the shape resulted in the following seven-term approximation:formula_11After further analysis, Blagg gave the following simpler formula; however the price for the simpler form is that it produces a less accurate fit to the empirical data. Blagg gave it in an un-normalized form in her paper, which leaves the relative sizes of A, B, and f\u2009 ambiguous; it is shown here in normalized form (i.e. this version of \u2009f\u2009 is scaled to produce values ranging from 0 to 1, inclusive):formula_12where formula_13 Neither of these formulas for function f are used in the calculations below: The calculations here are based on a graph of function f which was drawn based on observed data.\nHer paper was published in 1913, and was forgotten until 1953, when A. E. Roy came across it while researching another problem. Roy noted that Blagg herself had suggested that her formula could give approximate mean distances of other bodies still undiscovered in 1913. Since then, six bodies in three systems examined by Blagg had been discovered: Pluto, Sinope (Jupiter\u00a0IX), Lysithea (J\u00a0X), Carme (J\u00a0XI), Ananke (J\u00a0XII), and Miranda (Uranus\u00a0V).\nRoy found that all six fitted very closely. This might have been an exaggeration: out of these six bodies, four were sharing positions with objects that were already known in 1913; concerning the two others, there was a ~6% overestimate for Pluto; and later, a 6% underestimate for Miranda became apparent.\nComparison of the Blagg formulation with observation.\nBodies in parentheses were not known in 1913, when Blagg wrote her paper. Some of the calculated distances in the Saturn and Uranus systems are not very accurate. This is because the low values of constant B in the table above make them very sensitive to the exact form of the \nRichardson formulation.\nIn a 1945 \"Popular Astronomy\" magazine article, the science writer D. E. Richardson apparently independently arrived at the same conclusion as Blagg: That the progression ratio is 1.728 rather than 2. His spacing law is in the formformula_14where formula_15 is an oscillatory function with period formula_16, representing distances formula_15 from an off-centered origin to points on an ellipse.\nHistorical inertia.\nNieto, who conducted the first modern comprehensive review of the Titius\u2013Bode Law, noted that \"The psychological hold of the Law on astronomy has been such that people have always tended to regard its original form as the one on which to base theories.\" He was emphatic that \"future theories must rid themselves of the bias of trying to explain a progression ratio of 2\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One thing which needs to be emphasized is that \"the historical bias towards a progression ratio of 2 must be abandoned\". It ought to be clear that the first formulation of Titius (with its asymmetric first term) should be viewed as a \"good first guess\". Certainly, it should \"not\" necessarily be viewed as the \"best guess\" to refer theories to. But in astronomy the weight of history is heavy ... Despite the fact that the number 1.73 is much better, astronomers cling to the original number 2.\nTheoretical explanations.\nNo solid theoretical explanation underlies the Titius\u2013Bode law \u2013 but it is possible that, given a combination of orbital resonance and shortage of degrees of freedom, any stable planetary system has a high probability of satisfying a Titius\u2013Bode-type relationship. Since it may be a mathematical coincidence rather than a \"law of nature\", it is sometimes referred to as a rule instead of \"law\". Astrophysicist Alan Boss states that it is just a coincidence, and the planetary science journal \"Icarus\" no longer accepts papers attempting to provide improved versions of the \"law\".\nOrbital resonance from major orbiting bodies creates regions around the Sun that are free of long-term stable orbits. Results from simulations of planetary formation support the idea that a randomly chosen, stable planetary system will likely satisfy a Titius\u2013Bode law.\nDubrulle and Graner showed that power-law distance rules can be a consequence of collapsing-cloud models of planetary systems possessing two symmetries: rotational invariance (i.e., the cloud and its contents are axially symmetric) and scale invariance (i.e., the cloud and its contents look the same on all scales). The latter is a feature of many phenomena considered to play a role in planetary formation, such as turbulence.\nNatural satellite systems and exoplanetary systems.\nOnly a limited number of systems are available upon which Bode's law can presently be tested; two solar planets have enough large moons that probably formed in a process similar to that which formed the planets: The four large satellites of Jupiter and the biggest inner satellite (i.e., Amalthea) cling to a regular, but non-Titius-Bode, spacing, with the four innermost satellites locked into orbital periods that are each twice that of the next inner satellite. Similarly, the large moons of Uranus have a regular but non-Titius-Bode spacing.\nHowever, according to Martin Harwit\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a slight new phrasing of this law permits us to include not only planetary orbits around the Sun, but also the orbits of moons around their parent planets.\nThe new phrasing is known as \"Dermott's law\".\nOf the recent discoveries of extrasolar planetary systems, few have enough known planets to test whether similar rules apply. An attempt with 55 Cancri suggested the equationformula_18and controversially predicts an undiscovered planet or asteroid field for formula_19 at 2\u00a0AU. Furthermore, the orbital period and semi-major axis of the innermost planet in the 55\u00a0Cancri system have been greatly revised (from 2.817\u00a0days to 0.737\u00a0days and from 0.038\u00a0AU to 0.016\u00a0AU, respectively) since the publication of these studies.\nRecent astronomical research suggests that planetary systems around some other stars may follow Titius-Bode-like laws. applied a generalized Titius-Bode relation to 68\u00a0exoplanet systems that contain four or more planets. They showed that 96% of these exoplanet systems adhere to a generalized Titius-Bode relation to a similar or greater extent than the Solar System does. The locations of potentially undetected exoplanets are predicted in each system.\nSubsequent research detected 5\u00a0candidate planets from the 97\u00a0planets predicted for the 68\u00a0planetary systems. The study showed that the actual number of planets could be larger. The occurrence rates of Mars- and Mercury-sized planets are unknown, so many planets could be missed due to their small size. Other possible reasons that may account for apparent discrepancies include planets that do not transit the star or circumstances in which the predicted space is occupied by circumstellar disks. Despite these types of allowances, the number of planets found with Titius\u2013Bode law predictions was lower than expected.\nIn a 2018 paper, the idea of a hypothetical eighth planet around TRAPPIST-1 named \"TRAPPIST\u20111i\", was proposed by using the Titius\u2013Bode law. TRAPPIST\u20111i had a prediction based exclusively on the Titius\u2013Bode law with an orbital period of 27.53 \u00b1 0.83 days.\nFinally, raw statistics from exoplanetary orbits strongly point to a general fulfillment of Titius-Bode-like laws (with exponential increase of semi-major axes as a function of planetary index) in all the exoplanetary systems; when making a blind histogram of orbital semi-major axes for all the known exoplanets for which this magnitude is known, and comparing it with what should be expected if planets distribute according to Titius-Bode-like laws, a significant degree of agreement (i.e., 78%)\nis obtained.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30746", "revid": "34211139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30746", "title": "Theory", "text": "Supposition or system of ideas intended to explain something\nA theory is in general any hypothesis or set of ideas about something, formed in any number of ways through any sort of reasoning for any sort of reason.\nWhen applied to intellectual or academic situations, it is considered a systematic and rational form of abstract thinking about a phenomenon, or the conclusions derived from such thinking. It involves contemplative and logical reasoning, often supported by processes such as observation, experimentation, and research. Theories can be scientific, falling within the realm of empirical and testable knowledge, or they may belong to non-scientific disciplines, such as philosophy, art, or sociology. In some cases, theories may exist independently of any formal discipline.\nIn modern science, the term \"theory\" refers to scientific theories, a well-confirmed type of explanation of nature, made in a way consistent with the scientific method, and fulfilling the criteria required by modern science. Such theories are described in such a way that scientific tests should be able to provide empirical support for it, or empirical contradiction (\"falsify\") of it. Scientific theories are the most reliable, rigorous, and comprehensive form of scientific knowledge, in contrast to more common uses of the word \"theory\" that imply that something is unproven or speculative (which in formal terms is better characterized by the word \"hypothesis\"). Scientific theories are distinguished from hypotheses, which are individual empirically testable conjectures, and from scientific laws, which are descriptive accounts of the way nature behaves under certain conditions.\nTheories guide the enterprise of finding facts rather than of reaching goals, and are neutral concerning alternatives among values. A theory can be a body of knowledge, which may or may not be associated with particular explanatory models. To theorize is to develop this body of knowledge.\nThe word theory or \"in theory\" is sometimes used outside of science to refer to something which the speaker did not experience or test before. In science, this same concept is referred to as a hypothesis, and the word \"hypothetically\" is used both inside and outside of science. In its usage outside of science, the word \"theory\" is very often contrasted to \"practice\" (from Greek \"\", \u03c0\u03c1\u1fb6\u03be\u03b9\u03c2) a Greek term for \"doing\", which is opposed to theory. A \"classical example\" of the distinction between \"theoretical\" and \"practical\" uses the discipline of medicine: medical theory involves trying to understand the causes and nature of health and sickness, while the practical side of medicine is trying to make people healthy. These two things are related but can be independent, because it is possible to research health and sickness without curing specific patients, and it is possible to cure a patient without knowing how the cure worked.\nAncient usage.\nThe English word \"theory\" derives from a technical term in philosophy in Ancient Greek. As an everyday word, \"theoria\", , meant \"looking at, viewing, beholding\", but in more technical contexts it came to refer to contemplative or speculative understandings of natural things, such as those of natural philosophers, as opposed to more practical ways of knowing things, like that of skilled orators or artisans. English-speakers have used the word \"theory\" since at least the late 16th century. Modern uses of the word \"theory\" derive from the original definition, but have taken on new shades of meaning, still based on the idea of a theory as a thoughtful and rational explanation of the general nature of things.\nAlthough it has more mundane meanings in Greek, the word apparently developed special uses early in the recorded history of the Greek language. In the book \"From Religion to Philosophy\", Francis Cornford suggests that the Orphics used the word \"theoria\" to mean \"passionate sympathetic contemplation\". Pythagoras changed the word to mean \"the passionless contemplation of rational, unchanging truth\" of mathematical knowledge, because he considered this intellectual pursuit the way to reach the highest plane of existence. Pythagoras emphasized subduing emotions and bodily desires to help the intellect function at the higher plane of theory. Thus, it was Pythagoras who gave the word \"theory\" the specific meaning that led to the classical and modern concept of a distinction between theory (as uninvolved, neutral thinking) and practice.\nAristotle's terminology, as already mentioned, contrasts theory with \"praxis\" or practice, and this contrast exists till today. For Aristotle, both practice and theory involve thinking, but the aims are different. Theoretical contemplation considers things humans do not move or change, such as nature, so it has no human aim apart from itself and the knowledge it helps create. On the other hand, \"praxis\" involves thinking, but always with an aim to desired actions, whereby humans cause change or movement themselves for their own ends. Any human movement that involves no conscious choice and thinking could not be an example of \"praxis\" or doing.\nFormality.\nTheories are analytical tools for understanding, explaining, and making predictions about a given subject matter. There are theories in many and varied fields of study, including the arts and sciences. A formal theory is syntactic in nature and is only meaningful when given a semantic component by applying it to some content (e.g., facts and relationships of the actual historical world as it is unfolding). Theories in various fields of study are often expressed in natural language, but can be constructed in such a way that their general form is identical to a theory as it is expressed in the formal language of mathematical logic. Theories may be expressed mathematically, symbolically, or in common language, but are generally expected to follow principles of rational thought or logic. In the social sciences, a new theory must explain the core relationships among units or process steps, exploring a current gap or unresolved debate in a field, extending its explanations into testable hypotheses and practical implications to benefit society.\nTheory is constructed of a set of sentences that are thought to be true statements about the subject under consideration. However, the truth of any one of these statements is always relative to the whole theory. Therefore, the same statement may be true with respect to one theory, and not true with respect to another. This is, in ordinary language, where statements such as \"He is a terrible person\" cannot be judged as true or false without reference to some interpretation of who \"He\" is and for that matter what a \"terrible person\" is under the theory.\nSometimes two theories have exactly the same explanatory power because they make the same predictions. A pair of such theories is called indistinguishable or observationally equivalent, and the choice between them reduces to convenience or philosophical preference.\nThe form of theories is studied formally in mathematical logic, especially in model theory. When theories are studied in mathematics, they are usually expressed in some formal language and their statements are closed under application of certain procedures called rules of inference. A special case of this, an axiomatic theory, consists of axioms (or axiom schemata) and rules of inference. A theorem is a statement that can be derived from those axioms by application of these rules of inference. Theories used in applications are abstractions of observed phenomena and the resulting theorems provide solutions to real-world problems. Obvious examples include arithmetic (abstracting concepts of number), geometry (concepts of space), and probability (concepts of randomness and likelihood).\nG\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem shows that no consistent, recursively enumerable theory (that is, one whose theorems form a recursively enumerable set) in which the concept of natural numbers can be expressed, can include all true statements about them. As a result, some domains of knowledge cannot be formalized, accurately and completely, as mathematical theories. (Here, formalizing accurately and completely means that all true propositions\u2014and only true propositions\u2014are derivable within the mathematical system.) This limitation, however, in no way precludes the construction of mathematical theories that formalize large bodies of scientific knowledge.\nUnderdetermination.\nA theory is \"underdetermined\" (also called \"indeterminacy of data to theory\") if a rival, inconsistent theory is at least as consistent with the evidence. Underdetermination is an epistemological issue about the relation of evidence to conclusions.\nA theory that lacks supporting evidence is generally, more properly, referred to as a hypothesis.\nIntertheoretic reduction and elimination.\nIf a new theory better explains and predicts a phenomenon than an old theory (i.e., it has more explanatory power), we are justified in believing that the newer theory describes reality more correctly. This is called an \"intertheoretic reduction\" because the terms of the old theory can be reduced to the terms of the new one. For instance, our historical understanding about \"sound\", \"light\" and \"heat\" have been reduced to \"wave compressions and rarefactions\", \"electromagnetic waves\", and \"molecular kinetic energy\", respectively. These terms, which are identified with each other, are called \"intertheoretic identities.\" When an old and new theory are parallel in this way, we can conclude that the new one describes the same reality, only more completely.\nWhen a new theory uses new terms that do not reduce to terms of an older theory, but rather replace them because they misrepresent reality, it is called an \"intertheoretic elimination.\" For instance, the obsolete scientific theory that put forward an understanding of heat transfer in terms of the movement of caloric fluid was eliminated when a theory of heat as energy replaced it. Also, the theory that phlogiston is a substance released from burning and rusting material was eliminated with the new understanding of the reactivity of oxygen.\nVersus theorems.\nTheories are distinct from theorems. A \"theorem\" is derived deductively from axioms (basic assumptions) according to a formal system of rules, sometimes as an end in itself and sometimes as a first step toward being tested or applied in a concrete situation; theorems are said to be true in the sense that the conclusions of a theorem are logical consequences of the axioms. \"Theories\" are abstract and conceptual, and are supported or challenged by observations in the world. They are 'rigorously tentative', meaning that they are proposed as true and expected to satisfy careful examination to account for the possibility of faulty inference or incorrect observation. Sometimes theories are incorrect, meaning that an explicit set of observations contradicts some fundamental objection or application of the theory, but more often theories are corrected to conform to new observations, by restricting the class of phenomena the theory applies to or changing the assertions made. An example of the former is the restriction of classical mechanics to phenomena involving macroscopic length scales and particle speeds much lower than the speed of light.\nTheory\u2013practice relationship.\nTheory is often distinguished from practice or praxis. The question of whether theoretical models of work are relevant to work itself is of interest to scholars of professions such as medicine, engineering, law, and management.\nThe gap between theory and practice has been framed as a knowledge transfer where there is a task of translating research knowledge to be application in practice, and ensuring that practitioners are made aware of it. Academics have been criticized for not attempting to transfer the knowledge they produce to practitioners. Another framing supposes that theory and knowledge seek to understand different problems and model the world in different words (using different ontologies and epistemologies). Another framing says that research does not produce theory that is relevant to practice.\nIn the context of management, Van de Van and Johnson propose a form of engaged scholarship where scholars examine problems that occur in practice, in an interdisciplinary fashion, producing results that create both new practical results as well as new theoretical models, but targeting theoretical results shared in an academic fashion. They use a metaphor of \"arbitrage\" of ideas between disciplines, distinguishing it from collaboration.\nScientific.\nIn science, the term \"theory\" refers to \"a well-substantiated explanation of some aspect of the natural world, based on a body of facts that have been repeatedly confirmed through observation and experiment.\" Theories must also meet further requirements, such as the ability to make falsifiable predictions with consistent accuracy across a broad area of scientific inquiry, and production of strong evidence in favor of the theory from multiple independent sources (consilience).\nThe strength of a scientific theory is related to the diversity of phenomena it can explain, which is measured by its ability to make falsifiable predictions with respect to those phenomena. Theories are improved (or replaced by better theories) as more evidence is gathered, so that accuracy in prediction improves over time; this increased accuracy corresponds to an increase in scientific knowledge. Scientists use theories as a foundation to gain further scientific knowledge, as well as to accomplish goals such as inventing technology or curing diseases.\nDefinitions from scientific organizations.\nThe United States National Academy of Sciences defines scientific theories as follows:The formal scientific definition of \"theory\" is quite different from the everyday meaning of the word. It refers to a comprehensive explanation of some aspect of nature that is supported by a vast body of evidence. Many scientific theories are so well established that no new evidence is likely to alter them substantially. For example, no new evidence will demonstrate that the Earth does not orbit around the sun (heliocentric theory), or that living things are not made of cells (cell theory), that matter is not composed of atoms, or that the surface of the Earth is not divided into solid plates that have moved over geological timescales (the theory of plate tectonics) ... One of the most useful properties of scientific theories is that they can be used to make predictions about natural events or phenomena that have not yet been observed.\nFrom the American Association for the Advancement of Science:\nA scientific theory is a well-substantiated explanation of some aspect of the natural world, based on a body of facts that have been repeatedly confirmed through observation and experiment. Such fact-supported theories are not \"guesses\" but reliable accounts of the real world. The theory of biological evolution is more than \"just a theory.\" It is as factual an explanation of the universe as the atomic theory of matter or the germ theory of disease. Our understanding of gravity is still a work in progress. But the phenomenon of gravity, like evolution, is an accepted fact.\nThe term \"theory\" is not appropriate for describing scientific models or untested, but intricate hypotheses.\nPhilosophical views.\nThe logical positivists thought of scientific theories as \"deductive theories\"\u2014that a theory's content is based on some formal system of logic and on basic axioms. In a deductive theory, any sentence which is a logical consequence of one or more of the axioms is also a sentence of that theory. This is called the received view of theories.\nIn the semantic view of theories, which has largely replaced the received view, theories are viewed as scientific models. A model is an abstract and informative representation of reality (a \"model of reality\"), similar to the way that a map is a graphical model that represents the territory of a city or country. In this approach, theories are a specific category of models that fulfill the necessary criteria. (See Theories as models for further discussion.)\nIn physics.\nIn physics the term \"theory\" is generally used for a mathematical framework\u2014derived from a small set of basic postulates (usually symmetries, like equality of locations in space or in time, or identity of electrons, etc.)\u2014which is capable of producing experimental predictions for a given category of physical systems. One good example is classical electromagnetism, which encompasses results derived from gauge symmetry (sometimes called gauge invariance) in a form of a few equations called Maxwell's equations. The specific mathematical aspects of classical electromagnetic theory are termed \"laws of electromagnetism\", reflecting the level of consistent and reproducible evidence that supports them. Within electromagnetic theory generally, there are numerous hypotheses about how electromagnetism applies to specific situations. Many of these hypotheses are already considered adequately tested, with new ones always in the making and perhaps untested.\nRegarding the term \"theoretical\".\nCertain tests may be infeasible or technically difficult. As a result, theories may make predictions that have not been confirmed or proven incorrect. These predictions may be described informally as \"theoretical\". They can be tested later, and if they are incorrect, this may lead to revision, invalidation, or rejection of the theory.\nMathematical.\nIn mathematics, the term \"theory\" is used differently than its use in science \u2013 necessarily so, since mathematics contains no explanations of natural phenomena \"per se\", even though it may help provide insight into natural systems or be inspired by them. In the general sense, a \"mathematical theory\" is a branch of mathematics devoted to some specific topics or methods, such as set theory, number theory, group theory, probability theory, game theory, control theory, perturbation theory, etc., such as might be appropriate for a single textbook.\nIn mathematical logic, a theory has a related but different sense: it is the collection of the theorems that can be deduced from a given set of axioms and a given set of inference rules.\nPhilosophical.\nA theory can be either \"descriptive\" as in science, or \"prescriptive\" (normative) as in philosophy. The latter are those whose subject matter consists not of empirical data, but rather of ideas. At least some of the elementary theorems of a philosophical theory are statements whose truth cannot necessarily be scientifically tested through empirical observation.\nA field of study is sometimes named a \"theory\" because its basis is some initial set of assumptions describing the field's approach to the subject. These assumptions are the elementary theorems of the particular theory, and can be thought of as the axioms of that field. Some commonly known examples include set theory and number theory; however literary theory, critical theory, and music theory are also of the same form.\nMetatheory.\nOne form of philosophical theory is a \"metatheory\" or \"meta-theory\". A metatheory is a theory whose subject matter is some other theory or set of theories. In other words, it is a theory about theories. Statements made in the metatheory about the theory are called metatheorems.\nPolitical.\nA political theory is an ethical theory about the law and government. Often the term \"political theory\" refers to a general view, or specific ethic, political belief or attitude, thought about politics.\nJurisprudential.\nIn social science, jurisprudence is the philosophical theory of law. Contemporary philosophy of law addresses problems internal to law and legal systems, and problems of law as a particular social institution.\nExamples.\nMost of the following are scientific theories. Some are not, but rather encompass a body of knowledge or art, such as Music theory and Visual Arts Theories.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30747", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30747", "title": "TRS-80", "text": "1977 microcomputer by Tandy Corporation\nThe TRS-80 Micro Computer System (TRS-80, colloquially known as the \"Trash-80\", later renamed the TRS-80 Model I to distinguish it from its successors) is a desktop microcomputer developed by American company Tandy Corporation and sold through their Radio Shack stores. Launched in 1977, it is one of the earliest mass-produced and mass-marketed retail home computers. The name is derived from \"Tandy Radio Shack Z80\", referring to its Zilog Z80 8-bit microprocessor. \nThe TRS-80 has a full-stroke QWERTY keyboard, 4 KB DRAM standard memory, small size and desk area, floating-point Level I BASIC language interpreter in ROM, 64-character-per-line video monitor, and had a starting price of US$600 (equivalent to US$ in 2024). A cassette tape drive for program storage was included in the original package. While the software environment was stable, the cassette load/save process combined with keyboard bounce issues and a troublesome Expansion Interface contributed to the Model I's reputation as not well-suited for serious use. Initially (until 1981), it lacked support for lowercase characters which may have hampered business adoption. An extensive line of upgrades and peripherals for the TRS-80 were developed and marketed by Tandy/Radio Shack. The basic system can be expanded with up to 48 KB of RAM, and up to four floppy disk drives and/or hard disk drives. Tandy/Radio Shack provided full-service support including upgrade, repair, and training services in their thousands of stores worldwide.\nBy 1979, the TRS-80 had the largest selection of software in the microcomputer market. Until 1982, the TRS-80 was the bestselling PC line, outselling the Apple II by a factor of five according to one analysis. The broadly compatible TRS-80 Model III was released in the middle of 1980. The Model I was discontinued shortly thereafter, primarily due to stricter US FCC regulations on radio-frequency interference. In April 1983, the Model III was succeeded by the compatible TRS-80 Model 4.\nFollowing the original Model I and its compatible descendants, the TRS-80 name became a generic brand used on other unrelated computer lines sold by Tandy, including the TRS-80 Model II, TRS-80 Model 2000, TRS-80 Model 100, TRS-80 Color Computer, and TRS-80 Pocket Computer.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nIn the mid-1970s, Tandy Corporation's Radio Shack division was a successful American chain of more than 3,000 electronics stores. Among the Tandy employees who purchased a MITS Altair kit computer was buyer Don French, who began designing his own computer and showed it to the vice president of manufacturing John V. Roach, Tandy's former electronic data processing manager. Although the design did not impress Roach, the idea of selling a microcomputer did. When the two men visited National Semiconductor in California in mid-1976, Homebrew Computer Club member Steve Leininger's expertise on the SC/MP microprocessor impressed them. National executives refused to provide Leininger's contact information when French and Roach wanted to hire him as a consultant, but they found Leininger working part-time at Byte Shop. Leininger was unhappy at National, his wife wanted a better job, and Texas did not have a state income tax. Hired for his technical and retail experience, Leininger began working with French in June 1976. The company envisioned a kit, but Leininger persuaded the others that because \"too many people can't solder\", a preassembled computer would be better.\nTandy had 11 million customers that might buy a microcomputer, but it would be much more expensive than the US$ median price of a Radio Shack product, and a great risk for the very conservative company. Executives feared losing money as Sears did with Cartrivision, and many opposed the project; one executive told French, \"Don't waste my time\u2014we can't sell computers.\" As the popularity of CB radio\u2014at one point comprising more than 20% of Radio Shack's sales\u2014declined, however, the company sought new products. In December 1976 French and Leininger received official approval for the project but were told to emphasize cost savings; for example, leaving out lowercase characters saved US$1.50 in components and reduced the retail price by US$. The original US$ retail price required manufacturing cost of US$; the first design had a membrane keyboard and no video monitor. Leininger persuaded Roach and French to include a better keyboard, a monitor, datacassette storage, and other features requiring a higher retail price to provide Tandy's typical profit margin. In February 1977 they showed their prototype, running a simple tax-accounting program, to Charles Tandy, head of Tandy Corporation. The program quickly crashed as the computer's implementation of Tiny BASIC could not handle the US$ figure that Tandy typed in as his salary, and the two men added support for floating-point math to its Level I BASIC to prevent a recurrence. The project was formally approved on 2 February 1977; Tandy revealed that he had already leaked the computer's existence to the press. When first inspecting the prototype, he remarked that even if it did not sell, the project could be worthy if only for the publicity it might generate.\nMITS sold 1,000 Altairs in February 1975 and was selling 10,000 a year. When Charles Tandy asked who would buy the computer, company president Lewis Kornfeld admitted that they did not know if anyone would, but suggested that small businesses and schools might. Knowing that demand was very strong for the US$ Altair\u2014which cost more than $1,000 with a monitor\u2014Leininger suggested that Radio Shack could sell 50,000 computers, but no one else believed him; Kornfeld said \"If I gave one of these to my wife for Christmas, she'd think I was some kind of nut\", and Roach called the figure \"horseshit\", as the company had never sold that many of anything at that price. Roach and Kornfeld suggested 1,000 to 3,000 per year; 3,000 was the quantity the company would have to produce to buy the components in bulk. Roach persuaded Tandy to agree to build 3,500\u2014the number of Radio Shack stores\u2014so that each store could use a computer for inventory purposes if they did not sell. RCA agreed to supply the video monitor\u2014a black-and-white television with the tuner and speakers removed\u2014after others refused because of Tandy's low initial volume of production. Tandy used the black-and-silver colors of the RCA CRT unit's cabinet for the TRS-80 units as well.\nAnnouncement.\nHaving spent less than US$ on development, Radio Shack announced the TRS-80 (Tandy Radio Shack) at a New York City press conference on August 3, 1977. It cost US$ (), or US$ () with a monitor and a Radio Shack tape recorder; the most expensive product Radio Shack previously sold was a US$ stereo. The company hoped that the new computer would help Radio Shack sell higher-priced products, and improve its \"schlocky\" image among customers. Small businesses were the primary target market, followed by educators, then consumers and hobbyists; despite its hobbyist customer base, Radio Shack saw them as \"not the mainstream of the business\" and \"never our large market\".\nAlthough the press conference did not receive much media attention because of a terrorist bombing elsewhere in the city, the computer received much more publicity at Boston University's Personal Computer Fair two days later. A front-page Associated Press article discussed the novelty of a large consumer-electronics company selling a home computer that could \"do a payroll for up to 15 people in a small business, teach children mathematics, store your favorite recipes or keep track of an investment portfolio. It can also play cards.\" Six sacks of mail arrived at Tandy headquarters asking about the computer, over 15,000 people called to purchase a TRS-80\u2014paralyzing the company switchboard\u2014and 250,000 joined the waiting list with a $100 deposit.\nDespite the internal skepticism, Radio Shack aggressively entered the market. The company advertised \"The $599 personal computer\" as \"the most important, useful, exciting, electronic product of our time\". Kornfeld stated when announcing the TRS-80, \"This device is inevitably in the future of everyone in the civilized world\u2014in some way\u2014now and so far as ahead as one can think\", and Tandy's 1977 annual report called the computer \"probably the most important product we've ever built in a company factory\". Unlike competitor Commodore\u2014which had announced the PET several months earlier but had not yet shipped any\u2014Tandy had its own factories (capable of producing 18,000 computers a month) and distribution network, and even small towns had Radio Shack stores. The company announced plans to be selling by Christmas a range of peripherals and software for the TRS-80, began shipping computers by September, opened its first computer-only store in October, and delivered 5,000 computers to customers by December. Still forecasting 3,000 sales a year, Radio Shack sold over 10,000 TRS-80s in its first one and a half months of sales, 55,000 in its first year, and over 200,000 during the product's lifetime; one entered the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History. By mid-1978 the waits of two months or more for delivery were over, and the company could state in advertisements that TRS-80 was \"on demonstration and available \"from stock now\" at every Radio Shack store in this community!\"\nDelivery.\nThe first units, ordered unseen, were delivered in November 1977, and rolled out to the stores the third week of December. The line won popularity with hobbyists, home users, and small businesses. Tandy Corporation's leading position in what \"Byte\" magazine called the \"1977 Trinity\" (Apple Computer, Commodore, and Tandy) had much to do with Tandy's retailing the computer through more than 3,000 of its Radio Shack storefronts in the USA. Tandy claimed it had \"7000 [Radio Shack] stores in 40 countries\".&lt;ref name=\"Tandy/Radio Shack\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The pre-release price for the basic system (CPU/keyboard and video monitor) was US$ and a US$ deposit was required, with a money-back guarantee at time of delivery.\nBy 1978, Tandy/Radio Shack promoted itself as \"The Biggest Name in Little Computers\". By 1979 1,600 employees built computers in six factories. \"Kilobaud Microcomputing\" estimated in 1980 that Tandy was selling three times as many computers as Apple Computer, with both companies ahead of Commodore. By 1981, \"InfoWorld\" described Radio Shack as \"the dominant supplier of small computers\". Hundreds of small companies produced TRS-80 software and accessories, and Adam Osborne described Tandy as \"the number-one microcomputer manufacturer\" despite having \"so few roots in microcomputing\". That year Leininger left his job as director for advanced research; French had left to found a software company, and the company had rejected his attempt for a Tandy Computer Center to sell non-Tandy computers. while the company's computer success helped Roach become Tandy's CEO. Selling computers did not change the company's \"schlocky\" image; the Radio Shack name embarrassed business customers, and Tandy executives disliked the \"Trash-80\" nickname for its products. By 1984, computers accounted for 35% of sales, however, and the company had 500 Tandy Radio Shack Computer Centers.\nModel II and III.\nBy 1979, when Radio Shack launched the business-oriented, and incompatible, TRS-80 Model II, the TRS-80 was officially renamed the TRS-80 Model I to distinguish the two product lines.\nAfter some exhibitors at the 1979 Northeast Computer Show were forced to clarify that their products bearing the TRS-80 name were not affiliated with Radio Shack, publications and advertisers briefly began to use \"S-80\" generically rather than \"TRS-80\" under scare of legal action, though this never materialized.\nFollowing the Model III launch in mid-1980, Tandy stated that the Model I was still sold, but it was discontinued by the end of the year. Tandy cited one of the main reasons as being the prohibitive cost of redesigning it to meet stricter FCC regulations covering the significant levels of radio-frequency interference emitted by the original design. The Model I radiated so much interference that, while playing games, an AM radio placed next to the computer can be used to provide sounds. Radio Shack offered upgrades (double-density floppy controller, LDOS, memory, reliable keyboard with numeric keypad, lowercase, Level II, RS-232C) as late as its 1984 catalog.\nHardware.\nThe Model I combines the mainboard and keyboard into one unit, which became a design trend in the 8-bit microcomputer era, although the Model\u00a0I has a separate power supply unit. It uses a Zilog Z80 processor clocked at 1.78\u00a0MHz (later models shipped with a Z80A). The initial Level\u00a0I machines shipped in late 1977-early 1978 have only 4\u00a0KB of RAM. After the Expansion Interface and Level\u00a0II BASIC were introduced in mid-1978, RAM configurations of 16\u00a0KB and up were offered (the first 16\u00a0KB was in the Model\u00a0I itself and the remaining RAM in the Expansion Interface).\nThe OS ROMs, I/O area, video memory, and OS work space occupy the first 16\u00a0KB of memory space on the Model\u00a0I. The remaining 48\u00a0KB of the 64\u00a0KB memory map space is available for program use, subject to the amount of physical RAM installed. Although the Z80 CPU can use port-based I/O, the Model\u00a0I's I/O is memory-mapped aside from the cassette tape and RS-232 serial ports.\nKeyboard.\nThe TRS-80 Model I keyboard uses mechanical switches that suffer from \"keyboard bounce\", resulting in multiple letters being typed per keystroke. The problem was described in Wayne Green's editorial in the first issue of \"80\u00a0Micro\". Dirt, cigarette smoke, or other contamination enters the unsealed key switches, causing electrical noise that the computer detects as multiple presses. The key switches can be cleaned, but the bounce recurs when the keyboard is reexposed to the contaminating environment.\nKeyboard bounce only occurs in Model I computers with Level\u00a0II BASIC firmware; Level\u00a0I BASIC has a \"debounce\" delay to the keyboard driver to avoid the noisy switch contacts. Tandy's utility, the Model\u00a0III, the last Model\u00a0I firmware, and most third-party operating systems also implement the software fix, and Tandy changed the keyboard during the Model\u00a0III's lifetime to an Alps Electric design with sealed switches. The Alps keyboard was available as an upgrade for the Model\u00a0I for $79.\nThe keyboard is memory-mapped so that certain locations in the processor's memory space correspond to the status of a group of keys.\nVideo and audio.\nThe color of the KCS 172 RCA monitor's text is faintly blue (the standard P4 phosphor used in black-and-white televisions). Green and amber filters, or replacement tubes to reduce eye fatigue were popular aftermarket items. Later models came with a green-on-black display.\nComplaints about the video display quality were common. As Green wrote, \"hells bells, [the monitor] \"is\" a cheap black and white television set with a bit of conversion for computer use\". (The computer could be purchased without the Radio Shack monitor.) CPU access to the screen memory causes visible flicker. The bus arbitration logic blocks video display refresh (video-RAM reads) during CPU writes to the VRAM, causing a short black line. This has little effect on normal BASIC programs, but fast programs made with assembly language can be affected. Software authors worked to minimize the effect, and many arcade-style games are available for the Tandy TRS-80.\nBecause of bandwidth problems in the interface card that replaced the TV's tuner, the display loses horizontal sync if large areas of white are displayed. A simple half-hour hardware fix corrects the problem.\nThe graphics are displayed at a resolution of 64\u00d716 character positions on a screen measuring wide and tall. Each character is composed of a 2\u00d73 matrix of pixels, and corresponds to one byte of the 1\u00a0KB video memory used by the TRS-80. In each of those bytes, the first six bits control which pixel is displayed. The seventh bit is ignored, and the eighth toggles graphics mode. The reason that the seventh bit is ignored is due to the company's decision to have only seven 2102 static-RAM chips installed on the computer's motherboard instead of eight to keep the manufacturing cost low. Thus, there are no lowercase letters in the TRS-80 character set of an unmodified Model\u00a0I, and the number of both graphics symbols and alphanumeric symbols is 64. This can be worked around by deleting the unused bit and piggybacking an eighth 2102 chip onto another. The alphanumeric symbols are displayed in 5\u00d77 matrices of pixels. The 1978 manual for the popular word processor Electric Pencil came with instructions for modifying the computer. Although the modification needs to be disabled for Level\u00a0II BASIC, its design became the industry standard and was widely sold in kit form, along with an eighth 2102 chip. Later models came with the hardware for the lowercase character set to be displayed with descenders.\nWith higher-density RAM chips and purpose-built monitors, higher-resolution crisp displays are obtainable; 80\u00d724-character displays are available in the Model\u00a0II, Model\u00a04, and later systems.\nThe Model I has no built-in speaker. Square-wave tones can be produced by outputting data to the cassette port and plugging an amplifier into the cassette \"Mic\" line. Most games use this ability for sound effects. An adapter was available to use Atari joysticks.\nPeripherals.\nCassette tape drive.\nUser data was originally stored on cassette tape. Radio Shack's model CTR-41 cassette recorder was included with the US$599 package. Leininger described the format as similar to one published by Hal Chamberlin; Tandy did not use the Tarbell Cassette Interface because of its much greater hardware cost, Leninger said.\nThe software-based cassette tape interface is slow and erratic; Green described it as \"crummy ... drives users up the wall\", and the first issue of \"80 Micro\" has three articles on how to improve cassette performance. It is sensitive to audio volume, and the computer gives only a crude indication as to whether the correct volume was set, via a blinking character on screen while data is loaded. To find the correct volume at first use, the load is started and the volume is adjusted until the TRS-80 picked up the data. Then it is halted to rewind the tape and restart the load. Users were instructed to save multiple copies of a software program file, especially if audio tape cassettes instead of certified data tape was used. Automatic gain control or indicator circuits can be constructed to improve the loading process (the owner's manual provides complete circuit diagrams for the whole machine, including the peripheral interfaces, with notes on operation).\nAn alternative to using tape was data transmissions from the BBC's \"Chip Shop\" programme in the UK, which broadcast software for several different microcomputers over the radio. A special program was loaded using the conventional tape interface. Then the radio broadcast was connected to the cassette tape interface. Tandy eventually replaced the CTR-41 unit with the CTR-80 which had built-in AGC circuitry (and no volume control). This helped the situation, but tape operation is still unreliable.\nTRS-80 Model I computers with Level I BASIC read and write tapes at 250 baud (about 30 bytes per second); Level II BASIC doubles this to 500 baud (about 60 bytes per second). Some programmers wrote machine-language programs that increase the speed to up to 2,000 bits per second without a loss of reliability on their tape recorders. With the Model III and improved electronics in the cassette interface, the standard speed increased to 1,500 baud which works reliably on most tape recorders.\nFor loading and storing data from tape, the CPU creates the sound by switching the output voltage between three states, creating crude sine wave audio.\nThe first version of the Model I also has a hardware problem that complicated loading programs from cassette recorders. Tandy offered a small board which was installed at a service center to correct the issue. The ROMs in later models were modified to correct this.\nModel I Expansion Interface.\nOnly the Model I uses an Expansion Interface; all later models have everything integrated in the same housing.\nThe TRS-80 does not use the S-100 bus like other early 8080 and Z80-based computers, but according to Leininger, its I/O can easily adapt to S-100 or other buses. A Tandy-proprietary Expansion Interface (E/I) box, which fits under the video monitor and serves as its base, was offered instead. Standard features of the E/I are a floppy disk controller, Centronics parallel port for a printer, and an added cassette connector. Optionally, an extra 16 or 32 KB of RAM can be installed and a daughterboard with an RS-232 port. The 40-conductor expansion connector passes through to a card edge connector, which permits the addition of external peripherals such as an outboard hard disk drive, a voice synthesizer, or a VOXBOX voice recognition unit. Leininger predicted in 1977 that Radio Shack or another company would release an expansion interface compatible with S-100.\nOriginally, printing with the Model I required the Expansion Interface, but later Tandy made an alternative parallel printer interface available.\nThe Model I Expansion Interface is the most troublesome part of the TRS-80 Model I system. It went through several revisions. The E/I connects to the CPU/keyboard with a 6-inch ribbon cable which is unshielded against RF interference and its card edge connector tends to oxidize due to its base metal contacts. This demands periodic cleaning with a pencil eraser in order to avoid spontaneous reboots, which contributes to its \"Trash-80\" sobriquet. Aftermarket connectors plated with gold solved this problem permanently. Software developers also responded by devising a recovery method which became a standard feature of many commercial programs. They accept an \"asterisk parameter\", an asterisk (star) character typed following the program name when the program is run from the TRSDOS Ready prompt. When used following a spontaneous reboot (or an accidental reset, program crash, or exit to TRSDOS without saving data to disk), the program loads without initializing its data area(s), preserving any program data still present from the pre-reboot session. Thus, for example, if a VisiCalc user suffers a spontaneous reboot, to recover data the user enters at TRSDOS Ready, and Visicalc restores the previous computing session intact.\nThe power button on the E/I is difficult to operate as it is recessed so as to guard against the user accidentally hitting it and turning it off while in use. A pencil eraser or similar object is used to depress the power button and the E/I has no power LED, making it difficult to determine if it is running or not.\nThe expansion unit requires a second power supply, identical to the base unit power supply. An interior recess holds both supplies.\nThe user is instructed to power on and power off all peripherals in proper order to avoid corrupting data or potentially damaging hardware components. The manuals for the TRS-80 advise turning on the monitor first, then any peripherals attached to the E/I (if multiple disk drives are attached, the last drive on the chain is to be powered on first and work down from there), the E/I, and the computer last. When powering down, the computer is to be turned off first, followed by the monitor, E/I, and peripherals. In addition, users are instructed to remove all disks from the drives during power up or down (or else leave the drive door open to disengage the read/write head from the disk). This is because a transient electrical surge from the drive's read/write head would create a magnetic pulse that could corrupt data. This was a common problem on many early floppy drives.\nThe E/I displays a screen full of garbage characters on power up and unless a bootable system disk is present in Drive 0, it hangs there until the user either presses on the back of the computer, which causes it to attempt to boot the disk again, or was pressed, which drops the computer into BASIC. Due to the above-mentioned problems with potentially corrupting disks, it is recommended to power up to the garbage screen with the disk drives empty, insert a system disk, and then hit .\n\"InfoWorld\" compared the cable spaghetti connecting the TRS-80 Model I's various components to the snakes in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\". Radio Shack offered a \"TRS-80 System Desk\" that concealed nearly all the cabling. It can accommodate the complete computer system plus up to four floppy drives and the Quick Printer. Since the cable connecting the Expansion Interface carries the system bus, it is short (about 6 inches). The user has no choice but to place the E/I directly behind the computer with the monitor on top. This causes problems for a non-Tandy monitor whose case did not fit the mounting holes. Also, the friction fit of the edge connector on the already short interconnect cable makes it possible to disconnect the system bus from the CPU if either unit is bumped during operation.\nFloppy disk drives.\nRadio Shack introduced floppy drives in July 1978, about six months after the Model I went on sale. The Model I disk operating system TRSDOS was written by Randy Cook under license from Radio Shack; Randy claimed to have been paid $3000 for it. The first version released to the public was a buggy v2.0. This was quickly replaced by v2.1. Floppy disk operation requires buying the Expansion Interface, which included a single-density floppy disk interface (with a formatted capacity of 85K) based on the Western Digital 1771 single-density floppy disk controller chip. The industry standard Shugart Associates SA-400 minifloppy disk drive was used. Four floppy drives can be daisy-chained to the Model I. The last drive in the chain is supposed to have a termination resistor installed but often it is not needed as it is integrated into later cables.\nDemand for Model I drives greatly exceeded supply at first. The drive is unreliable, partly because the interface lacked an external data separator (buffer). The early versions of TRSDOS were also buggy, and not helped by the Western Digital FD1771 chip which cannot reliably report its status for several instruction cycles after it receives a command. A common method of handling the delay was to issue a command to the 1771, perform several \"NOP\" instructions, then query the 1771 for the result. Early TRSDOS neglects the required yet undocumented wait period, and thus false status often returns to the OS, generating random errors and crashes. Once the 1771 delay was implemented, it was fairly reliable.\nIn 1981, Steve Ciarcia published in \"Byte\" the design for a homemade, improved expansion interface with more RAM and a disk controller for the TRS-80.\nA data separator and a double-density disk controller (based on the WD 1791 chip) were made by Percom (a Texas peripheral vendor), LNW, Tandy, and others. The Percom Doubler adds the ability to boot and use double density floppies using a Percom-modified TRSDOS called DoubleDOS. The LNDoubler adds the ability to read and write diskette drives with up to 720 KB of storage, and also the older diskettes with up to 1,155 KB. Near the end of the Model I's lifespan in 1982, upgrades were offered to replace its original controller with a double-density one.\nThe first disk drives offered on the Model I were Shugart SA-400s which supported 35 tracks and was the sole &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20444-inch drive on the market in 1977\u201378. By 1979, other manufacturers began offering drives. Models 3/4/4P uses Tandon TM-100 40-track drives. The combination of 40 tracks and double density gives a capacity of 180 kilobytes per single-sided floppy disk. The use of index-sync means that a \"flippy disk\" requires a second index hole and write-enable notch. One could purchase factory-made \"flippies\". Some software publishers formatted one side for Apple systems and the other for the TRS-80.\nThe usual method of connecting floppy drives involves setting the drive number via jumper blocks on the drive controller board, but Tandy opted for a slightly more user-friendly technique where all four select pins on the drives are jumpered and the ribbon cable is missing the Drive Select line. Thus, the user does not need to worry about moving jumpers around depending on which position on the chain a drive was in.\nA standard flat floppy ribbon cable is usable on the Model I, in which case the drives is jumpered to their number on the chain, or even an IBM PC \"twist\" cable, which requires setting each drive number to 1, but only permits two drives on the chain.\nAlthough third-party DOSes allow the user to define virtually any floppy format wanted, the \"lowest common denominator\" format for TRS-80s is the baseline single-density, single-sided, 35-40 track format of the Model I.\nThird-party vendors like Aerocomp made available double-sided and 80 track &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20444-inch and later &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442-inch floppy drives with up to 720 KB of storage each. These new drives are half-height and therefore require different or modified drive housings.\nExatron Stringy Floppy.\nAn alternative to cassette tape and floppy disk storage from Exatron sold over 4,000 units by 1981. The device is a continuous loop tape drive, dubbed the stringy floppy or ESF. It requires no Expansion Interface, plugging directly into the TRS-80's 40-pin expansion bus, is much less expensive than a floppy drive, can read and write random-access data like a floppy drive unlike a cassette tape, and it transfers data at up to 14,400 baud. Exatron tape cartridges store over 64 KB of data. The ESF can coexist with the TRS-80 data cassette drive. Exatron also made a complementary RAM expansion board that installed in the TRS-80 keyboard to increase memory to 48 KB without the EI.\nHard drive.\nRadio Shack introduced a 5 MB external hard disk for the TRS-80 Model III/4 in 1983. It is the same hard disk unit offered for the Model II line, but came with OS software for Model III/4. An adapter is required to connect it to the Model I's E/I. The unit is about the same size as a modern desktop computer enclosure. Up to four hard disks can be daisy-chained for 20 MB of storage. The LDOS operating system by Logical Systems was bundled, which provides utilities for managing the storage space and flexible backup. The initial retail price for the first (primary) unit (US$). Later, a 15MB hard disk was offered in a white case, which can be daisy-chained for up to 60 MB. Like most hard disks used on 8-bit machines, there is no provision for subdirectories, but the DiskDISK utility is a useful alternative that creates virtual hard disk \".DSK\" files that can be mounted as another disk drive and used like a subdirectory would. To display the directory/contents of an unmounted DiskDISK virtual disk file, a shareware DDIR \"Virtual Disk Directory Utility\" program was commonly used.\nPrinters.\nThe \"Quick Printer\" is an electrostatic rotary printer that scans the video memory through the bus connector, and prints an image of the screen onto aluminum-coated paper in about one second. However, it is incompatible with both the final, buffered version of the Expansion Interface, and with the \"heartbeat\" interrupt used for the real-time clock under Disk BASIC. This can be overcome by using special cabling, and by doing a \"dummy\" write to the cassette port while triggering the printer.\nTwo third-party printers were for metal-coated paper, selling for approximately DM 600 in Germany, and a dot-matrix printer built by Centronics for normal paper, costing at first DM 3000, later sold at approximately DM 1500 in some stores. It has only 7 pins, so letters with descenders such as lowercase \"g\" do not reach under the baseline, but are elevated within the normal line.\nRadio Shack offered an extensive line of printers for the TRS-80 family, ranging from basic 9-pin dot matrix units to large wide-carriage line printers for professional use, daisy-wheel printers, inkjet, laser, and color plotters. All have a Centronics-standard interface and after the introduction of the Color Computer in 1980, many also had a connector for the CoCo's serial interface.\nFP-215 is a flatbed plotter.\nSoftware.\nBASIC.\nThree versions of the BASIC programming language were produced for the Model I. \"Level I BASIC\" fits in 4 KB of ROM, and \"Level II BASIC\" fits into 12 KB of ROM. Level I is single precision only and had a smaller set of commands. Level II introduced double precision floating point support and has a much wider set of commands. Level II was further enhanced when a disk system was added, allowing for the loading of \"Disk BASIC\".\nLevel I BASIC is based on Li-Chen Wang's free Tiny BASIC with more functions added by Radio Shack. David A. Lien helped French and Leininger decide what commands to add or remove from the language, and wrote the accompanying \"User's Manual for Level 1\", teaching programming with text and cartoons. Lien wrote that it was \"written specifically for people who don't know anything about computers ... I want you to have fun with your computer! I don't want you to be afraid of it, because there is nothing to fear\". Reviewers praised the manual's quality; Lien later said that only Tandy and Epson understood the importance of writing good documentation before designing a technical product. Level I BASIC has only two string variables (codice_1 and codice_2), 26 numeric variables (codice_3 \u2013 codice_4), and one array, codice_5. Code for functions like SIN(), COS() and TAN() is not included in ROM but printed at the end of the book. The only error messages are \"codice_6\" for syntax errors, \"codice_7\" for arithmetic errors such as division by zero, and \"codice_8\" for out of memory errors.\nLevel I BASIC is not tokenized; reserved words are stored literally. In order to maximize the code that fits into 4 KB of memory, users can enter abbreviations for reserved words. For example, writing \"codice_9\" instead of \"codice_10\" saves 3 bytes.\nLevel II BASIC, introduced in mid-1978, was licensed from Microsoft and is required to use the expansion bus and disk drives. Radio Shack always intended for Level I BASIC to be a stopgap until Level II was ready, and the first brochure for the Model I in January 1978 mentioned that Level II BASIC was \"coming soon\". It is an abridged version of the 16K Extended BASIC, since the Model I has 12 KB of ROM space. According to Bill Gates, \"It was a sort of intermediate between 8K BASIC and Extended BASIC. Some features from Extended BASIC such as descriptive errors and user-defined functions were not included, but there were double precision variables and the PRINT USING statement that we wanted to get in. The entire development of Level II BASIC took about four weeks from start to finish.\" The accompanying manual is more terse and technical than the Level I manual. Original Level I BASIC-equipped machines could be retrofitted to Level II through a ROM replacement performed by Radio Shack for a fee (originally $199). Users with Level I BASIC programs stored on cassette have to convert these to the tokenized Level II BASIC before use. A utility for this was provided with the Level II ROMS.\nDisk BASIC allows disk I/O, and in some cases (NewDos/80, MultiDOS, DosPlus, LDOS) adds powerful sorting, searching, full-screen editing, and other features. Level II BASIC reserves some of these keywords and issues a \"codice_11\", suggesting a behind-the-scenes change of direction intervened between the creation of the Level II ROMs and the introduction of Disk BASIC.\nMicrosoft also marketed an enhanced BASIC called Level III BASIC written by Bill Gates, on cassette tape. The cassette contains a \"Cassette File\" version on one side and a \"disk file\" version on the second side for disk system users (which was to be saved to disk). Level III BASIC adds most of the functions in the full 16 KB version of BASIC plus many other TRS-80 specific enhancements. Many of Level III BASIC's features are included in the TRS-80 Model III's Level II BASIC and disk BASIC.\nLevel I BASIC was still offered on the Model I in either 4K or 16K configurations after the introduction of Level II BASIC.\nOther programming languages.\nRadio Shack published a combined assembler and program editing package called the Series I Assembler Editor. \"80 Micro\" magazine printed a modification enabling it to run under the Model 4's TRSDOS Version 6. Also from Radio Shack was Tiny Pascal.\nMicrosoft made its Fortran, COBOL and BASCOM BASIC compiler available through Radio Shack.\nIn 1982, Scientific Time Sharing Corporation published a version of its APL for the TRS-80 Model III as APL*PLUS/80.\nOther applications.\nBlackjack and backgammon came with the TRS-80, and at its debut, Radio Shack offered four payroll, personal finance, and educational programs on cassette. Its own products' quality was often poor. A critical 1980 \"80 Micro\" review of a text adventure described it as \"yet another example of Radio Shack's inability to deal with the consumer in a consumer's market\". The magazine added, \"Sadly, too, as with some other Radio Shack programs, the instructions seem to assume that the reader is either a child or an adult with the mentality of a slightly premature corned beef\".\nThe more than 2,000 Radio Shack franchise stores as of \u00a01982[ [update]] sold third-party hardware and software, but the more than 4,300 company-owned stores were at first prohibited from reselling or even mentioning products not sold by Radio Shack itself. Green stated in 1980 that although \"there are more programs for the 80 than for all other systems combined\" because of the computer's large market share, \"Radio Shack can't advertise this because they are trying as hard as they can to keep this fact a secret from their customers. They don't want the TRS-80 buyers to know that there is anything more than their handful of mediocre programs available\", many of which \"are disastrous and, I'm sure, doing tremendous damage to the industry\". Broderbund, founded that year, began by publishing TRS-80 software, but by 1983 cofounder Doug Carlston said that the computer \"turned out to be a terrible market because most of the distribution networks were closed, even though there were plenty of machines out there\". Green wrote in 1982 that Apple had surpassed Tandy in sales and sales outlets despite the thousands of Radio Shack dealers because it supported third-party development, while \"we find the Shack seeming to begrudge any sale not made by them and them alone\". Dealers not affiliated with Radio Shack preferred to sell software for other computers and not compete with the company; mail-order sales were also difficult, because company-owned stores did not sell third-party publications like \"80 Micro\".\nCharles Tandy reportedly wanted to encourage outside developers but after his death a committee ran the company, which refused to help outside developers, hoping to monopolize the sale of software and peripherals. Leininger reportedly resigned because he disliked the company's bureaucracy after Tandy's death. An author wrote in a 1979 article on the computer's \"mystery of machine language graphics control\" that \"Radio Shack seems to hide the neat little jewels of information a hobbyist needs to make a treasure of the TRS-80\". He stated that other than the \"excellent\" Level I BASIC manual \"there has been little information until recently ... TRS-80 owners must be resourceful\", reporting that the computer's \"keyboard, video, and cassette\" functionality were also undocumented. The first book authorized by Tandy with technical information on TRSDOS for the Model I did not appear until after the computer's discontinuation.\nBy 1982, the company admitted\u2014after no software appeared for the Model 16 after five months\u2014that it should have, like Apple, encouraged third-party developers of products like the killer app VisiCalc. (A lengthy 1980 article in a Tandy publication introducing the TRS-80 version of VisiCalc did not mention that the spreadsheet had been available for the Apple II for a year.) However, in the early 1980s, it was not uncommon for small companies and municipalities to write custom programs for computers such as the TRS-80 to process a variety of data. In one case a small town's vehicle fleet was managed from a single TRS-80.\nBy 1985, the company's Ed Juge stated that other than Scripsit and DeskMate, \"we intend to rely mostly on 'big-name', market-proven software from leading software firms\". A full suite of office applications became available from the company and others, including the VisiCalc and Multiplan spreadsheets and the Lazy Writer, Electric Pencil, and from Radio Shack itself the Scripsit and SuperScripsit word processors.\nCompared to the contemporary Commodore and Apple micros, the TRS-80's block graphics and crude sound were widely considered limited. The faster speed available to the game programmer, not having to processor color data in high resolution, went a long way to compensating for this. TRS-80 arcade games tended to be faster with effects that emphasized motion. This perceived disadvantage did not deter independent software companies such as Big Five Software from producing unlicensed versions of arcade games like Namco's \"Galaxian\", Atari's \"Asteroids\", Taito's \"Lunar Rescue\", Williams's \"Make Trax\", and Exidy's \"Targ\" and \"Venture\". Sega's \"Frogger\" and \"Zaxxon\" were ported to the computer and marketed by Radio Shack. Namco/Midway's \"Pac-Man\" was cloned by Philip Oliver and distributed by Cornsoft Group as \"Scarfman\". Atari's \"Battlezone\" was cloned for the Models I/III by Wayne Westmoreland and Terry Gilman and published by Adventure International as \"Armored Patrol\". They also cloned \"Eliminator\" (based on \"Defender\") and \"Donkey Kong\"; the latter wasn't published until after the TRS-80 was discontinued, because Nintendo refused to license the game.\nSome games originally written for other computers were ported to the TRS-80. \"Microchess\" has three levels of play and can run in the 4 KB of memory that is standard with the Model\u00a0I; the classic \"ELIZA\" is another TRS-80 port. Both were offered by Radio Shack. \"Apple Panic\", itself a clone of Universal's \"Space Panic\", was written for the TRS-80 by Yves Lempereur and published by Funsoft. Epyx's \"Temple of Apshai\" runs slowly on the TRS-80. Infocom ported its series of interactive text-based adventure games to the Models I/III; the first, \"Zork I\", was marketed by Radio Shack.\nAdventure International's text adventures began on the TRS-80, as did \"Sea Dragon\" by Westmoreland and Gilman, later ported to the other home micros. \"Android Nim\" by Leo Christopherson was rewritten for the Commodore PET and Apple. Many games are unique to the TRS-80, including \"Duel-N-Droids\", also by Christopherson, an early first-person shooter \"13 Ghosts\" by Software Affair (the Orchestra-80, -85 and -90 people) and shooters like \"Cosmic Fighter\" and \"Defence Command\", and strange experimental programs such as Christopherson's \"Dancing Demon\", in which the player composes a song for a devil and choreographs his dance steps to the music. Radio Shack offered simple graphics animation programs \"Micro Movie\" and \"Micro Marquee\", and \"Micro Music\".\nRadio Shack offered a number of programming utilities, including an advanced debugger, a subroutine package, and a cross-reference builder. Probably the most popular utility package was Super Utility written by Kim Watt of Breeze Computing. Other utility software such as Stewart Software's Toolkit offered the first sorted directory, decoding or reset of passwords, and the ability to eliminate parts of TRSDOS that were not needed in order to free up floppy disk space. They also produced the On-Line 80 BBS, a TRSDOS-based Bulletin Board System. Misosys Inc. was a prolific producer of sophisticated TRS-80 utility and language software for all models of TRS-80 from the very beginning.\nPerhaps because of the lack of information on TRSDOS and its bugs, by 1982 perhaps more operating systems existed for the TRS-80 than for any other computer. TRSDOS is limited in its capabilities, since like Apple DOS 3.3 on the Apple II, it is mainly conceived of as a way of extending BASIC to support disk drives. Numerous alternative DOSes appeared, the most prominent being LDOS because Radio Shack licensed it from Logical Systems and adopted it as its official DOS for its Models I and III hard disk drive products. Other alternative TRS-80 DOSes included NewDOS from Apparat, Inc., and DoubleDOS, DOSPlus, MicroDOS, UltraDOS (later called Multidos). The DOS for the Model 4 line, TRSDOS Version 6, was produced by and licensed from Logical Systems. It is a derivative of LDOS, enhanced to allow for the new Model 4 hardware such as its all-RAM architecture (no ROM), external 32 KB memory banks, bigger screen and keyboard, and featured new utilities such as a ram disk and a printer spooler.\nThe memory map of the Model I and III render them incompatible with the standard CP/M OS for Z80 business computers, which loads at hexadecimal address $0000 with TPA (Transient Program Area) starting at $0100; the TRS-80 ROM resides in this address space. Omikron Systems' Mappers board remaps the ROM to run unmodified CP/M programs on the Model I. A customized version of CP/M is available but loses its portability advantage. \"80 Micro\" magazine published a do-it-yourself CP/M modification for the Model III.\nReception.\nDan Fylstra, among the first owners, wrote in \"Byte\" in April 1978 that as an \"'appliance' computer ... the TRS-80 brings the personal computer a good deal closer to the average customer\", suitable for home and light business use. He concluded that it \"is not the only alternative for the aspiring personal computer user, but it is a strong contender.\" Jerry Pournelle wrote in 1980 that \"the basic TRS-80 is a lot of computer for the money\". He criticized the quality of Tandy's application and system software and the high cost of peripherals, but reported that with the Omikron board a customer paid less than $5000 for a computer compatible with TRS-80 and CP/M software \"all without building a single kit\".\nThree years later Pournelle was less positive about the computer. He wrote in May 1983, \"As to our TRS-80 Model I, we trashed that sucker long ago. It was always unreliable, and repeated trips to the local Radio Shack outlet didn't help. The problem was that Tandy cut corners\". Pournelle wrote in July 1983:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm a little bitter about my experiences with Tandy. I had genuinely thought that the Model I was the machine of the future: an inexpensive home computer that could be expanded by stages until it would do professional work. Of course it was never that. First, Tandy tried to fence in Model I users through that goofy operating system, and then it wouldn't let Radio Shack stores sell non-Tandy software. ... It had never been all that well designed, and when sales took off much faster than anticipated, the quality control system couldn't cope.\nCompatible successors.\nTandy replaced the Model I with the broadly compatible Model III in 1980. (The TRS-80 Model II is an entirely different and incompatible design).\nModel III.\nTandy released the TRS-80 Model III on July 26, 1980. The improvements of the Model III over the Model I include: built-in lowercase, a better keyboard with repeating keys, an enhanced character set, a real-time clock, 1500-baud cassette interface, a faster (2.03\u00a0MHz) Z80 processor, and an all-in-one enclosure requiring fewer cables. A Model III with two floppy drives requires the use of only one electrical outlet; a two-drive Model I requires five outlets. The Model III avoids the complicated power on/off sequence of the Model I. Shortly after the Model III's introduction, Model I production was discontinued as it did not comply with new FCC regulations as of January 1, 1981, regarding electromagnetic interference.\nTandy distinguished between the high-end Model II and Model III, describing the former as \"an administrative system, good for things like word processing, data management and VisiCalc operations\" and suitable for small businesses. The lowest-priced version of the Model III was sold with 4 KB of RAM and cassette storage. The computer's CPU board has three banks of sockets (8 sockets to a bank) which take type 4116 DRAMs, so memory configurations come in 16 KB, 32 KB, or 48 KB RAM memory sizes. Computers with 32 KB or 48 KB RAM can be upgraded with floppy disk drive storage. There is space inside the computer cabinet for two full-height drives. Those offered by Tandy/Radio Shack are single-sided, 40-track, double-density (MFM encoding) for 180K of storage. Third-party suppliers offered double-sided and 80-track drives, though to control them they had to modify the TRSDOS driver code or else furnish an alternative third-party DOS which could (see below). The installation of floppy disk drives also requires the computer's power supply to be upgraded. There is no internal cooling fan in the Model III; it uses passive convection cooling (unless an unusual number of power-hungry expansions were installed internally, such as a hard disk drive, graphics board, speedup kit, RS-232 board, etc.).\nTandy claimed that the Model III was compatible with 80% of Model I software. Many software publishers issued patches to permit their Model I programs to run on the Model III. Marketing director Ed Juge explained that their designers considered changing from the Model I's 64-column by 16-row video screen layout, but that they ultimately decided that maintaining compatibility was most important.\nThe Model III's memory map and system architecture are mostly the same as the Model I's, but the disk drives and printer port were moved from memory mapped to port I/O, thus Model I software that attempts to manipulate the disk controller directly or output to the printer (in particular Model I DOSes and application packages such as Visicalc and Scripsit) will not work. Under the supplied TRSDOS 1.3 operating system Model I disks can be read in the Model III, but not vice versa. The optional LDOS OS (by Logical Systems Inc.) uses a common disk format for both Model I and Model III versions.\nCustomers and developers complained of bugs in the Model III's Microsoft BASIC interpreter and TRSDOS. Tandy/Radio Shack (and TRS-80 magazines like \"80 Micro\") periodically published many software patches to correct these deficiencies and to permit users to customize the software to their preferences.\nDifferences in the WD1771 and WD1791 floppy controllers created problems reading Model I disks on a Model III (the double-density upgrade in the Model I included both chips while a Model III had only the WD1791). The WD1771 supports four data markers while the WD1791 only supports two, and some versions of TRSDOS for the Model I also use them. In addition, they are used by copy protection schemes. Software was available to allow Model I disks to be read on a Model III. The WD1791 supports the 500-bit/s bitrate needed for high-density floppy drives, but the controller is not capable of using them without extensive modifications.\nTRSDOS for the Model III was developed in-house by Radio Shack rather than being contracted out like the Model I's DOS. None of the code base from Model I DOS was reused and the Model III DOS was rewritten from scratch; this also created some compatibility issues since the Model III DOS's API was not entirely identical to the Model I DOS. This was primarily to avoid legal disputes with Randy Cook over ownership of the code as had occurred with Model I DOS and also because Radio Shack originally planned several features for the Model III such as 80-column text support that were not included. Two early versions, 1.1 and 1.2, were replaced by version 1.3 in 1981 which became the standard Model III OS. TRSDOS 1.3 is not format compatible with 1.1 and 1.2; a utility called XFERSYS is provided which converts older format disks to TRSDOS 1.3 format (this change is permanent and the resultant disks cannot be read with the older DOS versions).\nThe Model III's boot screen was cleaned up from the Model I. Instead of displaying garbage on the screen at power up, it displays a \"Diskette?\" prompt if a bootable floppy is not detected. The user can insert a disk and press any key to boot. On powerup or reset holding down the key will boot the computer into ROM-based Level II BASIC. This ability is useful if the disk drive is not functioning and cannot boot a TRSDOS disk (or if a boot disk is not available); it permits an operator familiar with the machine hardware to perform diagnostics using BASIC's PEEK and POKE commands. This works for the Model 4 as well, but not for the 4P.\nWhile Model I DOS is fairly flexible in its capabilities, Model III DOS is hard-coded to only support 180K single-sided floppies, a problem fixed by the many third-party DOSes. To that end, when Radio Shack introduced hard disks for the TRS-80 line in 1982, the company licensed LDOS rather than attempting to modify Model III DOS for hard disk support.\nLevel II BASIC on the Model III is 16 KB in size and incorporates a few features from Level I Disk BASIC.\nTRSDOS 1.3 was given a few more minor updates, the last being in 1984, although the version number was unchanged. This includes at least one update that writes an Easter Egg message \"Joe, you rummy buzzard\" on an unused disk sector, which is reputedly a joke message left by a programmer in a beta version, but accidentally included in the production master.\nThe Model III keyboard lacks . Many application programs use , while others use . Often is used in combination with number and alpha keys. The Model III keyboard also lacks ; to caps-lock the alpha keys the user presses . Under LDOS typeahead is supported.\nBecause TRSDOS 1.3 was found wanting by many users, Tandy offered (at added cost) Logical System's LDOS Version 5 as an alternative. As with the Model I, other third-party sources also offered TRSDOS alternatives for the Model III, including NewDOS, Alphabit's MultiDOS, and Micro Systems Software's DOSPlus. These are compatible with TRSDOS 1.3 and run the same application programs, but offer improved command structures, more and better system utilities, and enhancements to the Microsoft BASIC interpreter. After writing the original Model I TRSDOS, Randy Cook began work on his own DOS, titled VTOS, which was superseded by LDOS and also created some frustration for users as it is the only TRS-80 DOS to be copy-protected.\nAlthough mostly intended as a disk-based computer, the Model III was available in a base cassette configuration with no disk hardware and only 16 KB of RAM with Level II BASIC. Radio Shack also offered a 4K version with Level I BASIC, identical to Model I Level I BASIC, but with the addition of LPRINT and LLIST commands for printer output. Upgrading to a disk machine necessitates installing at least 32 KB of RAM, the disk controller board, and another power supply for the disk drives. Disk upgrades purchased from Radio Shack included TRSDOS 1.3; users upgrading from third-party vendors had to purchase DOS separately (most opted for LDOS or DOSPlus), though a great many Model III applications programs included a licensed copy of TRSDOS 1.3.\nAs with the Model I's E/I, the RS-232C port on the Model III was an extra cost option and not included in the base price of the computer, though the dual disk Model III for $2495 included the serial port.\nLike the Model I, the Model III sold well in the educational market. Many school administrators valued the Model III's all-in-one hardware design because it made it more difficult for students to steal components. \"InfoWorld\" approved of the Model III's single-unit design, simplified cable management, and improvements such as lack of keyboard bounce and improved disk reliability. The reviewer, a former Model I owner, stated \"I'm impressed\" and that \"had the Model III been available, it's probable that I wouldn't have sold it\". He concluded, \"If you're looking for a computer that's not too expensive but that performs well, you would be wise to test the Model III\u2014you might end up buying it.\"\nDon French, who had left Radio Shack to found FMG Software after designing the Model I, expressed his disappointment in the new machine while trying to convert CP/M to run on it. \"I've encountered numerous problems with the floppy drive and its interface. Radio Shack will sell a Model III to anyone. They're trying to market it as a business computer when the existing software is woefully inadequate. 48K just isn't enough. You run out of memory before you get going. They're selling a medical package that takes up nine disks. I think the Model III is a very poorly conceived machine\".\nAftermarket products.\nAftermarket hardware was offered by Tandy/Radio Shack and many third-party manufacturers. The usual selection of add-ons and peripherals available for the Model I were offered: outboard floppy drives (one or two could be plugged into a card-edge connector on the back panel), an outboard hard disk drive (LDOS was furnished as Tandy's hard drive OS vice TRSDOS), an RS-232C serial port on an internal circuit card, and a parallel printer (connected by a card-edge connector). Multiple high-resolution graphics solutions were available. The official Radio Shack Model III high-resolution graphics board had a screen resolution of 640 x 240 pixels. The third-party Micro-Labs \"Grafyx Solution\" board had a screen resolution of 512 x 192 pixels.\nA popular hardware/software add-on was the Orchestra-90 music synthesizer. It can be programmed to play up to five voices with a range of six octaves stereophonically. A great many Orch-90 (as it was often called) music files were available for download from CompuServe. The Orch-90 was licensed from a company called Software Affair, which also produced the Model I-compatible Orchestra-85 from 1981.\nAt least three vendors produced CP/M modifications for the Model III, Omikron (also a Model I mod), Holmes Engineering, and Memory Merchant. Options were available for upgrading the CRT to the CP/M professional standard of 80 columns and 24 rows, as well as eight-inch floppy drives.\nA number of third-party manufacturers specialized in upgrading Model IIIs with high-performance hardware and software, and remarketing them under their own labels. The improvements typically included internal hard disk drives, greater capacity floppy drives, 4\u00a0MHz Z80 speedup kits, professional-grade green or amber CRT video displays, better DOS software (typically DOSPlus by Micro Systems Software or LDOS by Logical Systems) including the all-important hard drive backup utilities, and custom menu-driven shell interfaces which insulated non-expert users (business employees) from the DOS command line. These were touted as high productivity turnkey systems for small businesses at less cost than competing business systems from higher-end providers such as IBM and DEC, as well as Radio Shack's own TRS-80 Model II.\nModel 4.\nThe successor to the Model III is the TRS-80 Model 4 released in April 1983. It has a faster Z80A CPU, a larger video display 80 columns x 24 rows with reverse video, bigger keyboard, internal speaker, and its 64 KB of RAM can be upgraded to 128 KB of bank-switched RAM. The display can be upgraded with a high-resolution graphics card yielding 640\u00d7240 pixels. The Model 4 is fully compatible with Model III and CP/M application software. A diskless Model 4 (with 16 KB RAM and Level II BASIC) cost $, with 64 KB RAM and one single-sided 180K disk drive $, and two drives with RS-232C $; an upgrade for Model III owners cost $ and provided a new motherboard and keyboard. Tandy sold 71,000 in 1984.\nThe Model 4 includes all of the Model III's hardware, port assignments, and operating modes, making it 100% compatible. Model III programs running on a Model 4 can access the Model 4's added hardware features (like 4\u00a0MHz clock rate, bigger video screen and keyboard, banked RAM above 64 KB). There were aftermarket software packages that made this ability available to non-programmer users.\nThe Model 4P is a transportable version introduced in September 1983 and discontinued in early 1985. It is functionally the same as the dual-drive desktop model but lacks the card edge connector for two outboard diskette drives and for a cassette tape interface. It has a slot for an internal modem card and could emulate a Model III.\nThe Model 4D with bundled Deskmate productivity suite was introduced in early 1985. It has a revised CPU board using faster gate array logic which includes the floppy controller and RS-232C circuitry, all on a single board. The computer has two internal double-sided diskette drives and is the last model descended from the 1977 Model I. It retailed for $ at its introduction in 1985. During 1987\u20131988 the retail stores removed the Model 4Ds from display but they were available by special order through 1991.\nModel 100.\nAlso in April 1983, Radio Shack released the TRS-80 Model 100, one of the first laptop-portable computers.\nManufactured by Kyocera, the Model 100 features an LCD with 8 lines of 40 characters each, 8 kilobytes of RAM (expandable to 32KB), and is powered by AA cell batteries (or a plug-in adapter). A built-in modem and 25-pin RS-232 serial port provided connectivity.\nWith the rudimentary operating system held in ROM, the Model 100 (and the improved model, named the Tandy 102) was ready to use immediately after sliding the power switch on, and work would be held ready when switched off, making it convenient to use for a few moments at a time. This speed made the Model 100/102 useful well after powerful\u2014and slower-booting\u2014laptop computers became common.\nThe Model 100-series computers also found popularity as a field-portable communications terminal due to its light weight and simplicity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30748", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30748", "title": "Tankers", "text": ""}
{"id": "30749", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30749", "title": "Tanker", "text": "Tanker may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30752", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30752", "title": "Telephone number/country prefix", "text": ""}
{"id": "30755", "revid": "1288272711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30755", "title": "The Balloon-Hoax", "text": "Edgar Allan Poe hoax\n\"The Balloon-Hoax\" is the title used in collections and anthologies of a newspaper article by American writer Edgar Allan Poe, first published in 1844 in \"The Sun\" newspaper in New York. Originally presented as a true story, it detailed European Monck Mason's trip across the Atlantic Ocean in only three days in a gas balloon. It was later revealed as a hoax and the story was retracted two days later.\nOverview.\nThe story now known as \"The Balloon-Hoax\" was first printed in \"The Sun\" newspaper in New York. The article provided a detailed and highly plausible account of a lighter-than-air balloon trip by European balloonist Monck Mason across the Atlantic Ocean taking 75 hours, along with a diagram and specifications of the craft.\nPoe may have been inspired, at least in part, by a prior journalistic hoax known as the \"Great Moon Hoax\", published in the same newspaper in 1835. One of the suspected writers of that hoax, Richard Adams Locke, was Poe's editor at the time \"The Balloon-Hoax\" was published. Poe had complained for a decade that the paper's Great Moon Hoax had plagiarized (by way of Locke) the basic idea from \"The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall\", one of Poe's less successful stories which also involved similar inhabitants on the Moon. Poe felt \"The Sun\" had made tremendous profits from his story without giving him a cent. (Poe's anger at \"The Sun\" is chronicled in the 2008 book \"The Sun and the Moon\" by Matthew Goodman.)\nPublication history.\nThe story was first published on April 13, 1844 in the New York \"Sun\". It ran with the headline:\nASTOUNDING NEWS!\nBY EXPRESS VIA NORFOLK:\nTHE ATLANTIC CROSSED\nIN THREE DAYS!\nSIGNAL TRIUMPH OF\nMR. MONCK MASON'S\nFLYING MACHINE!!!\nArrival at Sullivan's Island,\nnear Charlestown, S. C., of\nMr. Mason, Mr. Robert Hol-\nland, Mr. Henson, Mr. Har-\nrison Ainsworth, and four\nothers, in the\nSTEERING BALLOON\n\"VICTORIA,\"\nAFTER A PASSAGE OF\nSEVENTY-FIVE HOURS\nFROM LAND TO LAND.\nFULL PARTICULARS\nOF THE\nVOYAGE!!!\nA retraction concerning the article was printed in \"The Sun\" on April 15, 1844:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;BALLOON \u2013 The mails from the South last Saturday night not having brought a confirmation of the arrival of the Balloon from England, the particulars of which from our correspondent we detailed in our Extra, we are inclined to believe that the intelligence is erroneous. The description of the Balloon and the voyage was written with a minuteness and scientific ability calculated to obtain credit everywhere, and was read with great pleasure and satisfaction. We by no means think such a project impossible.\nCritical reception and significance.\nPoe himself describes the enthusiasm his story had aroused: he writes that the \"Sun\" building was \"besieged\" by people wanting copies of the newspaper. \"I never witnessed more intense excitement to get possession of a newspaper\", he wrote. The story's impact reflects on the period's infatuation with progress. Poe added realistic elements, discussing at length the balloon's design and propulsion system in believable detail. His use of real people, including William Harrison Ainsworth, also lent credence to the story. The character of Monck Mason was not a real person, though he was based heavily on Thomas Monck Mason; the story borrowed heavily from Mason's 1836 book \"Account of the Late Aeronautical Expedition from London to Weilburg\".\n\"The Balloon-Hoax\" is like one of Poe's \"tales of ratiocination\" (such as \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\") in reverse: rather than taking things apart to solve a problem, Poe builds up fiction to make it seem true. The story is also an early form of science fiction, specifically responding to the emerging technology of hot air balloons.\nThe story may have later been an inspiration for Jules Verne's \"Around the World in Eighty Days\". As Verne scholar William Butcher pointed out, Verne was an early admirer of Poe and his novel \"Cinq semaines en ballon\" (\"Five Weeks in a Balloon\") was published within a year of his non-fiction book \"Edgar Poe et ses \u0153uvres\" (\"Edgar Allan Poe and his Works\"). Verne even has a character mention Poe's story in \"From the Earth to the Moon\". It is not difficult to see Poe's works, published in France as \"Histoires extraordinaires\" (\"\"Extraordinary Stories\"), as one of the influences on Verne's \"Voyages extraordinaires\" (\"Extraordinary Journeys\"\").\nReal trans-oceanic lighter-than-air flights.\nThe first human-carrying lighter-than-air craft of any type to cross the Atlantic was in 1919. The British dirigible R-34, a direct copy of the German L-33 which crashed in Britain during World War I. The 3559.5 mile flight from Britain to New York City took 108 hours 12 minutes.\nThe first human-carrying unpowered balloon to actually cross the Atlantic Ocean was \"Double Eagle II\" from August 11 to 17, 1978. The Pacific was crossed in three days by unmanned Japanese \"fire balloons\" called Fu-Go in 1944, exactly 100 years after Poe's story.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30756", "revid": "40726365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30756", "title": "Terence", "text": "Roman comic playwright (c. 195/185 BC\u2013c.159 BC\nPublius Terentius Afer (; c.\u2009195/185 \u2013 c.\u2009159 BC), better known in English as Terence (), was a playwright during the Roman Republic. He was the author of six comedies based on Greek originals by Menander or Apollodorus of Carystus. All six of Terence's plays survive complete and were originally produced between 166\u2013160 BC.\nAccording to ancient authors, Terence was born in Carthage and was brought to Rome as a slave, where he gained an education and his freedom; around the age of 25, Terence is said to have made a voyage to the east in search of inspiration for his plays, where he died either of disease in Greece, or by shipwreck on the return voyage. However, Terence's traditional biography is often thought to consist of speculation by ancient scholars who lived too long after Terence to have access to reliable facts about his life.\nTerence's plays quickly became standard school texts. He ultimately secured a place as one of the four authors taught to all grammar pupils in the Western Roman Empire, and retained a central place in the European school curriculum until the 19th Century, exercising a formative influence on authors such as William Shakespeare and Moli\u00e8re.\nLife and career.\nThe manuscripts of Terence's plays contain \"didascaliae,\" or production notices, recording the dates, occasions, and personnel of early productions of the plays, and identifying the author of the Greek original. Other traditional information about the life of Terence derives from the \"Vita Terenti,\" a biography preserved in Aelius Donatus' commentary, and attributed by him to Suetonius. However, it is not likely that Terence's contemporaries would have considered a dramatist important enough to write down his biography for posterity, and the narrative given by Suetonius' sources is often construed as conjecture based on the play texts and \"didascaliae.\"\nConditions of performance.\nIn the 2nd Century BC, plays were regular features of four annual Roman festivals: the Ludi Romani (September), the Ludi Plebeii (November), the Ludi Apollinares (July), and the Ludi Megalenses (April); plays would also be staged at votive games, triumphs, and the more elaborate aristocratic funerals. Because the Roman calendar ran some two and a half months ahead of the Sun in the 160s, Terence's plays that premiered at the Megalensia, though officially scheduled in April, would actually have premiered in late January.\nThere was no permanent theatre in Rome until the construction of the Theatre of Pompey in 55 BC, and Terence's plays would have been performed on temporary wooden stages constructed for the occasion. The limited space available would probably have accommodated an audience of less than 2,000 persons at a given performance. Admission was free to the entire population, seemingly on a first-come-first-served basis, except for the reservation of seats for members of the Senate after 194 BC; descriptions of 2nd Century theatre audiences refer to the presence of women, children, slaves, and the urban poor.\nIn Greek New Comedy, from which the Roman comic tradition derived, actors wore masks which were conventionally associated with stock character types. Ancient authors make conflicting statements on whether Roman actors also wore masks in the time of Terence. For a time, Christian Hoffer's 1877 dissertation \"On the Use of Masks in Publius Terentius' Comedies\" won universal acceptance for the view that masks were not worn at the original performances of the plays of Terence. However, most more recent authorities consider it highly likely that Roman actors of Terence's time did wear masks when performing this kind of play, and \"hard to believe\" or even \"inconceivable\" that they did not. Donatus states that the actors wore masks in the original productions of the \"Eunuchus\" and the \"Adelphoe.\"\nThe \"didascaliae\".\nAccording to the \"didascaliae,\" each of Terence's plays was originally produced by the acting company of Lucius Ambivius Turpio, and musical accompaniment for each of the plays was provided by a tibicen named Flaccus, a slave in the service of a certain Claudius. The traditional and generally accepted chronology of the plays established according to the \"didascaliae\" is as follows:\nThe \"didascalia\" for each play also identifies its position in the corpus by chronological order. The \"didascaliae\" state that \"Eunuchus\" was the second play (\"facta II\"), and \"Heauton timorumenos\" was the third (\"facta III\"), testimony seemingly contradicted by the dates of production, as well as by Donatus' statement that the \"Eunuchus\" was \"published third\" (\"edita tertium\"). Some scholars have explained the discrepancy by positing an unsuccessful production of \"Eunuchus\" in 165 or 164 BC, or by interpreting the numbering in reference to the order of composition rather than the order of production. The didascalic numbering, seemingly discounting the unsuccessful productions of \"Hecyra,\" reckons it the fifth play.\nThe \"didascaliae\" also appear to record some information about revival performances at least as late as the 140s. Patrick Tansey has argued that the \"didascalia\" to \"Phormio\" in the codex Bembinus contains garbled names of the consuls in 106 BC, which would be the last attested production of Terence before the Renaissance, though the consuls of 141 BC had similar names.\nThe prologues.\nThe Greek plays which provided the Roman comedians with their material typically had a prologue which either preceded the play, or interrupted the first act after one or two scenes. In the plays of Plautus, the prologue usually, but not invariably, provides exposition of the plot; Terence abandons the traditional expository function of the prologue entirely and uses it to provide a different kind of entertainment centring on replies to criticism of his work.\nTerence particularly refers the \"slanders\" he has suffered to a certain \"old\" and \"spiteful\" poet. Because Terence says this man was the translator of Menander's \"Phasma\" and \"Thesaurus\" (\"Eu.\" 9\u201310), Donatus (or an earlier commentator from whom Donatus gleaned this information) was able to identify him as Luscius Lanuvinus, although no names are used in the prologues. Nothing survives of Luscius' work save two lines of the \"Thesaurus\" quoted by Donatus, nor is anything known about Luscius independently of Terence's prologues except that Volcacius Sedigitus rated Luscius the ninth-best Latin comic poet (and Terence the sixth-best). Terence's description of Luscius as \"old\" may refer to a style of play-writing that Terence considered old-fashioned rather than to advanced age. Terence's judgement of Luscius' work is that \"by translating them well and writing them badly, he has made good Greek plays into Latin ones that aren't good\" (\"Eu.\" 7\u20138), and that Luscius' theatrical successes were due more to the efforts of the actors than of the author. (\"Ph.\" 9\u201311)\nSuetonian biography.\nAccording to Suetonius, Terence was born in Carthage. He came to Rome as a slave in the household of an otherwise unknown senator named P. Terentius Lucanus, who educated him and freed him because of his talent and good looks. Terence then took the \"nomen\" \"Terentius\" from his patron. Possibly winning noblemen's favour by his youthful beauty, Terence became a member of the so-called Scipionic Circle.\nWhen Terence offered his first play, \"Andria,\" to the aediles, they bade him first read it to Caecilius. Terence, shabbily dressed, went to the older poet's house when he was dining, and when Caecilius had heard only a few lines, he invited the young man to join him for the meal. The historicity of this meeting has been doubted on the grounds that it is improbable Terence, with his aristocratic patrons, would have been unable to dress himself decently for such an important interview; a suspiciously similar story is told about the tragedians Accius and Pacuvius; and Jerome's statement that Caecilius died the year after Ennius implies that Caecilius died two years before \"Andria\" was produced. However, Thomas Carney argues that Jerome's dating of Caecilius' death is not above suspicion, and besides, a delay of several years between this meeting and production is entirely plausible, as Caecilius may have been impressed by the novice playwright's work even while the discussion showed Terence the need for revision. R. C. Flickinger argues that the reported state of Terence's clothing shows that he had not yet become acquainted with his rich and influential patrons at the time of this meeting, and it was precisely Caecilius' death shortly thereafter, and the consequent loss of his support, which caused a two-year delay in production.\nAll six of Terence's plays pleased the people; the \"Eunuchus\" earned 8,000 \"nummi,\" the highest price that had ever been paid for a comedy at Rome, and was acted twice in the same day. Donatus, who appears to understand that Terence himself received this entire amount, interprets the price that Suetonius says was paid for the \"Eunuchus\" as 8,000 sesterces. However, Dwora Gilula argues that the term \"nummus,\" inscribed on the title page in 161 BC, would refer to a denarius, a coin containing a much larger quantity of silver, so that the price paid for the \"Eunuchus\" was really 32,000 sesterces.\nWhen he was about the age of 25 (or, according to some manuscripts, 35), Terence travelled to Greece or Asia and never returned. Suetonius' sources disagree about the motive and destination of Terence's voyage, as well as about whether he died of illness in Greece, or died by shipwreck on the return voyage. Suetonius places Terence's death \"in the consulship of Gnaeus Cornelius Dolabella and Marcus Fulvius Nobilior,\" i.e., in 159 BC. It is possible that the fateful voyage to Greece was a speculative explanation of why he wrote so few plays inferred from Terence's complaint in \"Eunuchus\" 41\u20133 about the limited materials at his disposal.\nAs transmitted in the manuscript tradition, the \"Vita\" attributes the claim to Q. Cosconius that Terence died by shipwreck while returning from Greece \"cum C et VIII fabulis conversis a Menandro,\" an expression interpreted by some to refer to 108 new plays that Terence had adapted from Menander, but by Carney as \"108 stories dramatised by Menander,\" who is credited with having written exactly this number of plays. If this number refers to new Terentian plays, it is improbable that Terence worked at such a rate after having previously finished less than one play a year, and some editors delete the number, supposing that the numeral \"CVIII\" is simply a double copying of the preposition \"CVM,\" subsequently rationalised as a number.\nTerence was said to have been of \"moderate height, slender, and of dark complexion.\" Suetonius' description of Terence's complexion is likely an inference from his supposed African origin, and his description of the poet's physique may have originated as a metaphor for the \"lightness\" of his verse style, just as the poet Philitas of Cos was said to have weighted his shoes with lead lest he blow away in the wind. Likenesses of Terence found in medieval manuscripts have no authenticity. Suetonius says that Terence was survived by a daughter who later married a Roman knight, and was said to have left 20 acres of gardens on the Appian Way, a report contradicted by another of Suetonius' sources who says that Terence died poor.\nName and ethnicity.\nAncient biographers' reports that Terence was born in Africa may be an inference from his name and not independent biographical information. His cognomen \"Afer\" (\"the [North] African\") may indicate that Terence hailed from ancient Libya. However, such names did not necessarily denote origin, and there were Romans who had this cognomen who were not Africans, such as Domitius Afer.\nIt has often been asserted on the basis of the name that Terence was of Berber descent, as the Romans distinguished between Berbers, called \"Afri\" in Latin, and Carthaginians, called \"Poeni.\" However, lexicographic evidence does not support the validity of this distinction during Terence's lifetime. If Terence was born as a slave in Carthage, it is possible his mother was an ethnic Italian brought there as a war captive by Hannibal. Carney argues that Terence must have been born from the Italiote Greek population enslaved by Hannibal, as this would explain his proficiency in Latin and Greek. F. H. Sandbach notes that in the modern world, it is rare, but not entirely unknown, for an author to achieve literary distinction in a second language.\nDates.\nTerence's date of birth is uncertain, though Sesto Prete infers from Terence's characterisation of himself as a \"new\" writer (\"Eu.\" 43), and of a rival poet as \"old\" (\"Hau.\" 23), that Terence was young when he wrote his plays in the 160s. Suetonius' statement that Terence died at about the age of 25 in 159 BC would imply that he was born in 184 BC, the same year as the death of Plautus, and was only 18 years old when he produced his first play. The variant reading that Terence was in his 30s when he died suggests instead that he was born ten years earlier in 194, which would appear to be supported by the statement attributed to Fenestella that Terence was older than Scipio and Laelius. Jerome's \"Chronicon\" places Terence's death in 158 BC.\nPlays.\nLike Plautus, Terence adapted Greek plays from the late phases of Attic comedy. Unlike Plautus though, Terence's way of writing his comedies was more in a simple conversational Latin, pleasant and direct, while less visually humorous to watch.\nFive of Terence's plays are about a pair of young men in love (in the \"Hecyra\" there is only one young man, who is already married, but who suspects his wife of infidelity). In all the plays there are two girls involved, one a citizen woman, the other a prostitute. In four of the plays a recognition (\"anagnorisis\" or \"anagnorismos\") occurs which proves that one of the girls is the long-lost daughter of a respectable citizen, thus making the way free for her marriage.\nTerence's six plays are:\nA young Athenian, Pamphilus, is desperately in love with Glycerium, a foreign girl of low class, and has made her pregnant. But his father Simo wants him to marry the daughter of his friend Chremes. Meanwhile his friend Charinus is in love with the daughter that Pamphilus rejects. The wily slave Davus advises Pamphilus to agree to the marriage, believing that Chremes will object to it because of his affair with Glycerium, but the plan goes wrong when Chremes agrees to the marriage after all. Pamphilus is furious with Davus. Simo is also furious since he believes that birth of Glycerium's baby is just one of Davus's tricks. The situation is saved when, thanks to the arrival of a stranger from Andros, Chremes realises that Glycerium is his own long-lost daughter. The two young men get to marry the girls of their choice and Davus is rescued from punishment.\nAn Athenian farmer, Chremes, asks his neighbour Menedemus why he works all day on his farm. Menedemus says he is punishing himself for allowing his anger over his son Clinia's love affair with a poor girl to push the boy into going abroad on military service; he misses him terribly. On returning home Chremes finds that Clinia has returned and is visiting Chremes' son Clitipho. Chremes' wily slave Syrus brings Clinia's girlfriend Antiphila to Chremes' house; but he also brings Clitipho's girlfriend, the expensive courtesan Bacchis. To conceal Clitipho's affair, he says they will pretend to Chremes that Bacchis is Clinia's girlfriend, and that Antiphila is one of Bacchis's servants. In another ruse he suggests to Chremes that Chremes should persuade Menedemus to buy Antiphila so that Clinia can stay with Bacchis. However, when Clitipho's mother discovers from a ring that Antiphila is her own daughter, whom Chremes had ordered to be exposed as a baby, this plan falls through. Undeterred, Syrus tricks Chremes into paying money to Bacchis for Antiphila's release. But when Chremes learns that it is Clitipho who is in love with Bacchis, he is furious, especially at the thought of how much Bacchis will cost. At first he threatens to disinherit Clitipho, but eventually he forgives him on condition that he agrees to marry a suitable girl at once. Clinia, meanwhile, is allowed to marry Antiphila. Syrus is also forgiven.\nA young man, Phaedria, is in love with a courtesan, Thais. He reluctantly agrees to leave town for a couple of days so that Thais can spend time with a rival lover, Thraso, who has promised to give her a certain slave girl who had previously been in her family. Before leaving town, Phaedria gives Thais an African maid and a eunuch. But while he is absent his 16-year-old brother Chaerea, at the suggestion of the slave Parmeno, disguises himself as the eunuch, gains access to Thais's house, and rapes the young girl, who is actually an Athenian citizen kidnapped in childhood. Thais's plans to restore the girl to her family are ruined. The situation is resolved when Chaerea begs Thais for forgiveness and offers to marry the girl himself. Phaedria gets to continue his affair with Thais, but is persuaded to share her with Thraso, who is richer than he is and can defray the expense of her upkeep. Parmeno, despite the gleeful predictions of Thais's maid Pythias, in the end escapes punishment.\nWhile their fathers are away Antipho has fallen in love with a poor orphaned citizen, and his cousin Phaedria has fallen for a slave girl. Phormio, a parasite, has helped Antipho to marry the poor girl by making a false claim in court. When Antipho's father Demipho returns he is furious because he had wanted Antipho to marry his brother Chremes's daughter. Chremes agrees to pay Phormio 30 minae on condition that he removes the girl and marries her himself. Too late Chremes realises that the poor girl is his own daughter. He tries to undo the arrangement with Phormio, but Phormio has already paid the money to Phaedria to buy his slave girl. Phormio escapes punishment since Chremes' wealthy wife Nausistrata is furious not only about Chremes' secret second marriage but that he had been embezzling her money to pay for it. Antipho is allowed to keep his wife, Phaedria to keep his girlfriend, and Phormio is invited to dinner.\nLaches' son, Pamphilus, has been made to marry Philumena, daughter of their neighbour Phidippus. At first he refused to sleep with her, because of his love for a courtesan, Bacchis, but gradually he grows to love his wife. But while he is away Philumena leaves their home and moves back to her father's house. Everyone blames the mother-in-law, Sostrata, or else his continuing love for Bacchis. But when Pamphilus returns he discovers that the real reason for her departure is that she is about to give birth to a child, which he believes is not his. He therefore decides to divorce Philumena even though he still loves her. The situation is resolved when Philumena's mother Myrrina discovers Philumena's ring which Pamphilus had given to Bacchis. It is revealed that Pamphilus had drunkenly raped a young unknown woman some ten months ago and taken her ring, making Pamphilus the father of Philumena's child. The couple reconcile, and the gossipy slave Parmeno and the two fathers are kept in the dark about the rape.\nMicio, a wealthy Athenian bachelor, has brought up Aeschinus, the adopted elder son of his brother Demea, in town in an indulgent way. Meanwhile Demea has brought up his younger son Ctesipho in the village in a strict fashion. When Ctesipho falls in love with a slave-girl, Aeschinus on his behalf abducts the girl from the slave-dealer, Sannio, who owns her. Meanwhile, however, the widowed neighbour, Sostrata, alarmed that Aeschinus seems to have abandoned her daughter whom Aeschinus had made pregnant, sends her relative Hegio to complain to Micio, to Aeschinus's embarrassment. A rascally slave, Syrus, plays his part by negotiating with the slave-dealer, and by keeping Demea out of the way of Ctesipho by various ruses. When Demea at last finds Ctesipho and his girlfriend in Micio's house, he is furious and reproaches Micio for interfering in Ctesipho's upbringing. The situation is resolved when Demea takes control. Changing from strictness to indulgence, he suggests that they should forego Aeschinus's wedding procession and simply knock down the dividing wall between the two houses; in addition he insists that Micio must marry Sostrata, give Syrus his freedom and some business capital, and grant Hegio an income from part of his land. Ctesipho is allowed to keep his music-girl.\nAncient commentary.\nJerome mentions in \"Contra Rufinum\" I.16 that \"my teacher Donatus\" had written a commentary on the comedies of Terence. Donatus' commentary does not survive in the form in which he originally wrote it. It is commonly believed that an unknown medieval scribe, using two or more manuscripts of Terence containing marginal notes excerpted from Donatus, copied the notes in order to reconstitute the commentary as a separate book, incorporating extraneous material in the process, assigning notes to verses where they did not originally belong, or including material that had been otherwise changed in the course of transmission. Citations from Donatus' commentary which are not found in the extant redaction occur in Priscian and in scholia to the Codex Bembinus and Codex Victorianus. Another ancient commentary is attributed to one Eugraphius, of whom nothing is known but his authorship of this commentary. Donatus' commentary on the \"Heauton timorumenos\" is lacking, but his references to this play in his commentary on other parts of the corpus and Eugraphius' commentary help to make up the gap.\nIn its extant form, Donatus' commentary is prefaced by Suetonius' \"Vita Terenti,\" a short essay on the genre of comedy and its differences from tragedy now commonly called \"De fabula,\" and a separate, shorter work on the same subject which in some manuscripts begins with the heading \"De comoedia.\" Friedrich Lindenbrog was able to identify the \"De fabula\" as the work of an earlier commentator on Terence named Evanthius (probably identical with the grammarian Evanthius said in Jerome's \"Chronicon\" to have died at Constantinople in AD 358) because the grammarian Rufinus of Antioch (5th cent. AD), in a work \"On the Metres of Terence,\" quotes the \"De fabula\" and ascribes it to Evanthius. Evanthius' work is otherwise lost. The \"De comoedia\" has continued to be considered the work of Donatus.\nManuscripts of Terence.\nThe manuscripts of Terence can be divided into two main groups. One group has just one representative, the Codex Bembinus (known as A), dating to the 4th or early 5th century AD, and kept in the Vatican library. This book, written in rustic capitals, is one of the earliest surviving manuscripts of any Latin writer. It has the plays in the order \"An., Eu., Hau., Ph., Hec., Ad.\" Three small fragments of similar antiquity survive as well.\nApproximately 650 manuscripts exist of later date. These are often known as the \"Calliopian\" manuscripts, based on subscriptions to the plays found in several of the earlier manuscripts indicating the text had been corrected by someone named Calliopius; nothing further is known of this individual. They date from the 9th century onwards and are written in minuscule letters. This group can be subdivided into three classes. The first class, known as \u03b3 (\"gamma\"), dates to the 9th, 10th, and 11th centuries and includes manuscripts P (Parisinus), C (Vaticanus), and possibly F (Ambrosianus), and E (Riccardianus) among others. They have the plays in the order \"An., Eu., Hau., Ad., Hec., Ph.\". Manuscript C is the famous Codex Vaticanus Latinus 3868, which has illustrations which seem to be copied from originals dating in style to the mid-third century.\nAnother group, known as \u03b4 (\"delta\"), has the plays in alphabetical order: \"An., Ad., Eu., Ph.\"(=F), \"Hau., Hec.\" This consists of 3 or 4 10th-century manuscripts: D (Victorianus), G (Decurtatus), p (Parisinus), and perhaps also L (Lipsiensis).\nAll the remaining manuscripts belong to the \"mixed\" group and contain readings copied from both \u03b3 and \u03b4, and so are of little value in establishing the text.\nIt is thought that the \u03b3 group and the \u03b4 group go back to two archetypes, both now lost, called \u0393 (\"Gamma\") and \u0394 (\"Delta\"), and that both of these were copied from a single archetype, also now lost, known as \u03a3 (\"sigma\"). According to A. J. Brothers, manuscript A, although it contains some errors, generally has a better text than \u03a3, which has a number of changes designed perhaps to make Terence easier to read in schools. Both A and the now lost \u03a3 are believed to be derived from an even earlier archetype known as \u03a6 (\"phi\"), the date of which is unknown.\nIn addition to these manuscripts there are also certain commentaries, glossaries, and quotations in ancient writers and grammarians which sometimes assist editors in establishing the original reading. The best known of these is the , a commentary by the 4th-century grammarian Aelius Donatus, which is often helpful, although the part dealing with the \"Heauton Timorumenos\" is missing.\nCultural legacy.\nAt a relatively early date, Terence's play texts began to circulate as literary works for a reading public, as opposed to scripts for the use of actors. By the end of the 2nd century BC, Terence had been established as a literary \"classic\" and a standard school text. Cicero (born 106 BC) recalls that when he was a boy, his education in rhetoric included an assignment to recount Simo's narrative from the first scene of the \"Andria\" in his own words. Throughout the imperial period, Terence was second only to Vergil as the most widely known and read of Latin poets, and he remained a core school author while other Republican authors were displaced from the curriculum by Vergil and other Augustan poets. By the late 4th century AD, Terence had become one of the four main canonical school authors (the others being Cicero, Sallust, and Vergil), canonised in a celebrated work by Arusianus Messius, and later referred to by Cassiodorus as \"Messius' quadriga.\" St Jerome, St Augustine of Hippo, and the pupils of a \"grammarian\" friend of St Sidonius Apollinaris were all set to read the \"Eunuchus\" in school, and in another of his letters, Sidonius describes reading the \"Hecyra\" together with his son at home.\nTerence was one of the few canonical classical authors to maintain a continuous presence in medieval literacy, and the large number of surviving manuscripts bears witness to his great popularity. Adolphus Ward said that Terence led \"a charmed life in the darkest ages of learning\", a remark approved by E. K. Chambers, but Paul Theiner takes issue with this, suggesting that it is more appropriate to attribute \"a charmed life\" to authors who survived the Middle Ages by chance in a few manuscripts found in isolated libraries, whereas the broad and constant popularity of Terence \"rendered elfin administrations quite unnecessary.\"\nRoman students learning to write would regularly be assigned to copy edifying \"sententiae\", or \"maxims\", a practice adopted from Greek paedagogy, and Terence was a rich source of such \"sententiae\". Scores of Terentian maxims enjoyed such currency in late antiquity that they often lost nominal association with their author, with those who quoted Terence qualifying his words as a common proverb. Through the Middle Ages, Terence was frequently quoted as an authority on human nature and the mores of men, without regard for which character spoke the line or the original dramatic context, as long as the quotation was sententious in itself when separated from the rest of the play.\nAugustine was a lifelong admirer of Terence's observations on the human condition, and 38 quotations from 28 distinct passages of Terence have been identified in Augustine's works. Notwithstanding his respect for Terence's moralising, when Augustine writes in the \"Confessions\" about his school days, he quotes the scene from the \"Eunuchus\" where Chaerea recounts how he and Pamphila looked together at a painting of Zeus intruding in the home of Dana\u00eb, after which Chaerea, emboldened by the example of the pagan god, took the opportunity to rape Pamphila. Augustine argues that it is not necessary for students to be exposed to such \"vileness\" (\"turpitudo\") merely to learn vocabulary and eloquence.\nIn the 10th century, Hrotsvit of Gandersheim wrote six plays based on the lives of Christian saints, on the model of the six comedies of Terence. In a preface explaining her purpose in writing, Hrotsvit takes up Augustine's critique of the moral influence of the comedies, saying that many Christians attracted by Terence's style find themselves corrupted by his subject matter, and she has undertaken to write works in the same genre so that the literary form once used \"to describe the shameless acts of licentious women\" might be repurposed to glorify the chastity of holy virgins. As Terence's subject matter is trivial while Hrotsvit's is important, his plays are in verse while hers are in prose, her plays are written in the same style as other medieval literature and lack verbal reminiscences of Terence apart from some oaths and interjections, and she does not respect the unity of time or other ancient dramatic conventions, it has been argued that Terence's influence on Hrotsvit is superficial, and the only similarity between them is that they each wrote six plays.\nHrotsvit's indebtedness to Terence lies rather in situations and subject matter, transposed to invert the Terentian plot and its values; the place of the Terentian hero who successfully pursues a woman is taken by the girl who triumphs by resisting all advances (or a prostitute who abandons her former life), and a happy ending lies not in the consummation of the young couple's marriage, but in a figurative marriage to Christ. Whereas in the \"Eunuchus\", Chaerea entered a courtesan's home disguised as a eunuch to gain access to his beloved, two of Hrotsvit's plays (\"Abraham\" and \"Paphnutius\") feature a man entering a brothel disguised as a lover in order to win a woman to repentance and a life of continence. Robert Talbot reads Hrotsvit's plays as a Christian allegorisation of Terence designed to rehabilitate the comedies themselves, as Hrotsvit's reconfiguration of the genre to demonstrate the superiority of heavenly love to earthly love will enable readers to read Terence in a new way, with their minds directed from the sinful content to a higher Christian meaning. Hrotsvit did not exercise a significant influence on European literature before her works were rediscovered and printed in 1501.\nIn the \"Divine Comedy\", Dante's guide Vergil tells him that Terence is in Limbo among the virtuous pagans (\"Purg.\" XXII, 94\u2013105), and shows him Thais, the character from the \"Eunuchus,\" in the eighth circle of hell where flatterers are punished. (\"Inf.\" XVIII, 133\u20135) It has been claimed that Dante did not know Terence directly, and his references to Terence are derived from citations in Cicero or medieval florilegia. However, Terence was one of the most commonly read authors in the 14th century, and Joseph Russo argues that considering the access Dante would have had to manuscripts of Terence and the desire he would have had to read Terence, the logical conclusion is that \"Dante must have known Terence.\"\nRenaissance humanists delighted in Terence. Giovanni Boccaccio copied out in his own hand all of Terence's comedies in a manuscript that is now in the Laurentian Library.\nThe first printed edition of Terence appeared in Strasbourg in 1470, while the first certain post-antique performance of one of Terence's plays, \"Andria\", took place in Florence in 1476. There is evidence, however, that Terence was performed much earlier. The short dialogue \"Terentius et delusor\" was probably written to be performed as an introduction to a Terentian performance in the 9th century (possibly earlier).\nBeatus Rhenanus writes that Erasmus, gifted in his youth with a tenacious memory, held Terence's comedies as closely as his fingers and toes. In the \"De ratione studii\" (1511), a central text for European curricula, Erasmus wrote, \"among Latin authors, who is more useful for learning to speak than Terence? He is pure, concise, and near to everyday conversation, and pleasant to youth as well for his genre of plot.\" Martin Luther wrote that \"I love Terence\" and considered his comedies useful not only to help schoolboys improve their language skills, but also to teach them about society, because Terence \"saw how it goes with people\"; even if there were some \"obscene\" passages in the comedies, Luther insisted that they were no less appropriate for young people to read without censorship than the Bible, which \"contains amatory things everywhere.\" The indexes of the Weimar edition of Martin Luther's works note nearly 200 references to Terence and his plays.\nThe preservation of Terence through the church enabled his work to influence much of later Western drama. Two of the earliest English comedies, the 16th-century \"Ralph Roister Doister\" and \"Gammer Gurton's Needle\", are thought to parody Terence's plays. Montaigne and Moli\u00e8re cite and imitate him.\nBased on what is known about a typical curriculum at a grammar school such as William Shakespeare went to, it may be considered certain that Shakespeare must have studied Terence as a boy. In Shakespeare's day, a typical schoolboy at the age of 9 would begin to memorise a great part, if not all, of Terence. A quote from the \"Eunuchus\" in Shakespeare's \"The Taming of the Shrew\" is not taken direct from the play, but quoted in a form in which it is found in William Lily's Latin Grammar and Nicholas Udall's \"Floures for Latine spekynge,\" with the syntax adapted to form an independent sentence. However, the indebtedness of the character of Armado in \"Love's Labour's Lost\" to Thraso in the \"Eunuchus\" points to Shakespeare's familiarity with the play as a whole. Chaerea's exultation upon coming out of Thais' house after the rape, declaring himself content to die in that blissful moment, also seems to be echoed in \"Othello\" II.1 and \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" III.3. Shakespeare's encounter with Terence in grammar school introduced him to comedy and scenic structure, laying the foundations for his art.\nTerence's plays were a standard part of the Latin curriculum of the neoclassical period. In a letter prescribing a course of education for his nephew Peter Carr, Thomas Jefferson listed Terence among classical poets Carr already had read or would read at school. Jefferson copied four extracts from the \"Andria\" into his literary commonplace book, seemingly in the late 1760s and 1770s, and the presence of three different editions of Terence in the carefully selected second Monticello library is a clear indication that Terence formed a part of Jefferson's retirement reading.\nIn 1781, John Adams offered his son John Quincy Adams a copy of Anne Dacier's edition of Terence with a parallel French translation, writing, \"Terence is remarkable, for good Morals, good Taste and good Latin\u2014his Language has a Simplicity and an elegance, that makes him proper to be accurately studied, as A Model.\" This was declined, as John Quincy believed his teacher would not like him to have a translation \"because when I shall translate him he would desire that I might do it without help.\" John Quincy eventually read the \"Andria\" over three evenings in February 1786, and was not impressed with the pace of his Harvard class, which finished the play three months later. He recorded in his diary that \"The Play is interesting, and many of the Sentiments are fine\", and though he found the plot highly improbable, \"the Critic can never find Perfection, and the person that is willing to be pleased with what he reads, is happier than he who is always looking for faults.\"\nIn 1816, John Quincy's son George Washington Adams performed in a school production of \"Andria\" in the role of the old man Crito, to the relief of the family, who had worried he might be given a less \"respectable\" part. George's grandmother Abigail Adams, having read the play, took exception to \"the manners and morals\". Grandfather John, after rereading all six of Terence's comedies, also expressed apprehension about whether they were fit to be taught or exhibited to impressionable youths, who lacked sufficient life experience to recognise certain characters and their deeds as morally repugnant and react appropriately. Accordingly, Adams undertook a month-long project to go through the plays excerpting approximately 140 passages that he considered illustrative of human nature as it is the same in all ages and countries, adding translations and comments explaining the moral lessons his grandsons should draw from the texts. John Quincy believed the manners and plots of Terence's plays were too remote from modern life for there to be a danger of a detrimental influence on students' morals, but praised his father's project, writing, \"You have indeed skimmed the cream of Terence and sent it to my boys\u2014I trust they will preserve it and that it will aid them in drawing all the solid benefit from the amanuensis of Laelius and Scipio, which he can afford to their future lives.\" When Adams sent his grandson Charles Francis Adams his excerpts from the \"Phormio,\" he remarked, \"in these Plays of Terence ... Are not the Slaves Superior Beings to the Citizens? Every Smart Expression; every brilliant Image, every Moral Sentiment is in the Mouth of a Slave.\" In 1834, when Charles read the works of Terence, copying in his grandfather's comments and making other notes, he responded, \"In returning to answer these questions, I must disagree with the sentiment. I cannot overlook the characters of Menedemus and Chremes, of Micio and Demea which contain more moral sentiment than all the Slaves in the six Plays.\"\nAmerican playwright Thornton Wilder based his novel \"The Woman of Andros\" on Terence's \"Andria\".\nDue to his cognomen Afer, Terence has long been identified with Africa and heralded as the first poet of the African diaspora by generations of writers, including Juan Latino, Alexandre Dumas, Langston Hughes and Maya Angelou. Phyllis Wheatley, the first published African-American poet, asked why the Muses had inspired \"one alone of Afric's sable race.\" Thomas Jefferson, on the other hand, in an attempt to prove that African-Americans were naturally incapable of poetry, claimed that Terence had been \"of the race of whites.\" Two of his plays were produced in Denver with black actors.\nQuestions as to whether Terence received assistance in writing or was not the actual author have been debated over the ages, as described in the 1911 edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica:\"\n[In a prologue to one of his plays, Terence] meets the charge of receiving assistance in the composition of his plays by claiming as a great honour the favour which he enjoyed with those who were the favorites of the Roman people. But the gossip, not discouraged by Terence, lived and throve; it crops up in Cicero and Quintilian, and the ascription of the plays to Scipio had the honour to be accepted by Montaigne and rejected by Diderot.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30757", "revid": "50757498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30757", "title": "The Pit and the Pendulum", "text": "Short story by Edgar Allan Poe\n\"The Pit and the Pendulum\" is a short story by American writer Edgar Allan Poe and a work of horror fiction. It was first published in 1842 in the literary annual \"The Gift: A Christmas and New Year's Present for 1843\". The story is about the torments endured by a prisoner of the Spanish Inquisition, and is set very loosely during the Peninsular War between Spain and Napoleonic France (1808\u20131814), although it invokes the feared Inquisition of earlier centuries. The narrator of the story describes his experience of being tortured. The story inspires fear in the reader via its heavy focus on the senses, such as sound, emphasizing the inescapable reality of the coming doom. In this it is unlike Poe's stories which invoke the supernatural. The tale has been adapted to film several times.\nPlot summary.\nThe unnamed narrator is brought to trial before sinister judges of the Spanish Inquisition, charged with offenses that are never stated. As seven tall white candles on a table slowly burn down, the narrator feels his hopes of survival diminishing as well. He is condemned to death, whereupon he faints and later awakens to find himself in a totally dark room. At first the prisoner thinks that he is locked in a tomb, but then he discovers that he is in a cell. He decides to explore the cell by placing a scrap of his robe against the wall so that he can count the paces around the room, but he faints before he can measure the whole perimeter.\nWhen he reawakens, he discovers food and water nearby. He tries to measure the cell again, and finds that the perimeter measures one hundred steps. While crossing the room in the darkness, he trips on the hem of his robe and falls, his chin landing at the edge of a deep pit. He realizes that had he not tripped, he would have fallen into this pit.\nAfter losing consciousness again, the narrator discovers that the prison is slightly illuminated and that he is strapped to a wooden frame on his back, facing the ceiling. Above him is a picture of Father Time, holding a razor-edged pendulum measuring \"a foot in length from horn to horn.\" The pendulum is swinging back and forth and slowly descending, designed to kill the narrator eventually. However, he smears his bonds with the meat left for him to eat, which attracts rats. The rats chew through the straps, and he slips free just before the pendulum would have begun to slice into his chest.\nThe pendulum is withdrawn into the ceiling, and the walls become red hot and start to move inward, forcing him slowly toward the center of the room and into the pit. As he loses his last foothold and begins to topple in, he hears a roar of voices and trumpets, the walls retract, and an arm pulls him to safety. The French Army has captured the city of Toledo and the Inquisition has fallen into its enemies' hands.\nPublication and response.\n\"The Pit and the Pendulum\" was included in \"The Gift: A Christmas and New Year's Present\" for 1843, edited by Eliza Leslie and published by Carey &amp; Hart. It was slightly revised for a republication in the May 17, 1845 issue of the \"Broadway Journal\".\nWilliam Butler Yeats was generally critical of Poe, calling him \"vulgar\". Of \"The Pit and the Pendulum\" in particular he said it does \"not seem to me to have permanent literary value of any kind... Analyse the Pit and the Pendulum and you find an appeal to the nerves by tawdry physical affrightments.\"\nAnalysis.\n\"The Pit and the Pendulum\" is a study of the effect terror has on the narrator, starting with the opening line, which suggests that he is already suffering from death anxiety (\"I was sick \u2014 sick unto death with that long agony\"). However, there is an implicit irony in the reference to the black-robed judges having lips \"whiter than the sheet upon which I trace these words\", which shows that he has survived and is writing the story after the events. Unlike much of Poe's work, this story has no supernatural elements. The \"realism\" of the story is enhanced through Poe's focus on reporting : the dungeon is airless and unlit; the narrator is subject to thirst and starvation; he is swarmed by rats; the razor-sharp pendulum threatens to slice into him; and the closing walls are red hot. The narrator experiences the blade mostly through sound as it \"hissed\" while swinging. Poe emphasizes this element of sound with such words as \"surcingle\", \"cessation\", \"crescent\", and \"scimitar\", and various forms of literary consonance.\nPoe was following an established model of terror writing of his day, often seen in \"Blackwood's Magazine\" (a formula he mocks in \"A Predicament\"). Those stories, however, often focused on chance occurrences or personal vengeance as a source of terror. Poe may have been inspired to focus on the purposeful impersonal torture in part by Juan Antonio Llorente's \"History of the Spanish Inquisition\", first published in 1817. It has also been suggested that Poe's \"pit\" was inspired by a translation of the Qur'an (Poe had referenced the Qur'an also in \"Al Aaraaf\" and \"Israfel\") by George Sale. Poe was familiar with Sale, and even mentioned him by name in a note in his story \"The Thousand-and-Second Tale of Scheherazade\". Sale's translation was a part of commentary and, in one of those notes, refers to an allegedly common form of torture and execution by \"throwing [people] into a glowing pit of fire, whence he had the opprobrious appellation of the Lord of the Pit.\" In the Koran itself, in Sura (Chapter) 85, \"The Celestial Signs\", a passage reads: \"...cursed were the contrivers of the pit, of fire supplied with the fuel... and they afflicted them for no other reason, but because they believed in the mighty, the glorious God.\" Poe is also considered to have been influenced by William Mudford's \"The Iron Shroud\", a short story about an iron torture chamber which shrinks through mechanical action and eventually crushes the victim inside. Poe apparently got the idea for the shrinking chamber in the \"Pit and the Pendulum\" after Mudford's story was published in \"Blackwood's magazine\" in 1830.\nHistorical authenticity.\nPoe makes no attempt to describe accurately the operations of the Spanish Inquisition, and takes considerable dramatic license with the broader history premised in this story. The rescuers are led by Napoleon's General Lasalle (who was not, however, in command of the French occupation of Toledo) and this places the action during the Peninsular War (1808\u201314), centuries after the height of the Spanish Inquisition. The elaborate tortures of this story have no historic parallels in the activity of the Spanish Inquisition in any century, let alone the nineteenth when under Charles III and Charles IV only four persons were condemned. The Inquisition was, however, abolished during the period of French intervention (1808\u201313).\nThe original source of the pendulum torture method is one paragraph in the preface of the 1826 book \"The history of the Inquisition of Spain\" by the Spanish priest, historian and activist Juan Antonio Llorente, relating a second-hand account by a single prisoner released from the Inquisition's Madrid dungeon in 1820, who purportedly described the pendulum torture method. Most modern sources dismiss this as fantasy. One theory is that Llorente misunderstood the account he heard; the prisoner was actually referring to another common Inquisition torture, the \"strappado\" (garrucha), in which the prisoner has his hands tied behind his back and is hoisted off the floor by a rope tied to his hands. This method was also known as the \"pendulum\".\nPoe places a Latin epigraph before the story, describing it as \"a quatrain composed for the gates of a market to be erected upon the site of the Jacobin Club House at Paris\". The epigraph was not Poe's invention; such an inscription had been reported, no later than 1803, as having been composed with the intention (possibly facetious) of having it placed on the site, and it had appeared, without attribution, as an item of trivia in the 1836 \"Southern Literary Messenger\", a periodical to which Poe contributed. It does not appear, however, that the market was ever built as intended. Charles Baudelaire, a French poet who translated Poe's works into French and who viewed Poe as an inspiration, said that the building on the site of the Old Jacobin Club had no gates and, therefore, no inscription.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30758", "revid": "195596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30758", "title": "Age of Enlightenment", "text": "European cultural movement\nThe Age of Enlightenment (also the Age of Reason) was a period in the history of Europe and Western civilization during which the Enlightenment, an intellectual and cultural movement, flourished, emerging in the late 17th century in Western Europe and reaching its peak in the 18th century, as its ideas spread more widely across Europe and into the European colonies, in the Americas and Oceania. Characterized by an emphasis on reason, empirical evidence, and scientific method, the Enlightenment promoted ideals of individual liberty, religious tolerance, progress, and natural rights. Its thinkers advocated for constitutional government, the separation of church and state, and the application of rational principles to social and political reform.\nThe Enlightenment emerged from and built upon the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries, which had established new methods of empirical inquiry through the work of figures such as Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, Francis Bacon, Pierre Gassendi, Christiaan Huygens and Isaac Newton. Philosophical foundations were laid by thinkers including Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Thomas Hobbes, Baruch Spinoza, and John Locke, whose ideas about reason, natural rights, and empirical knowledge became central to Enlightenment thought. The dating of the period of the beginning of the Enlightenment can be attributed to the publication of Descartes' \"Discourse on the Method\" in 1637, with his method of systematically disbelieving everything unless there was a well-founded reason for accepting it, and featuring his dictum, ('I think, therefore I am'). Others cite the publication of Newton's (1687) as the culmination of the Scientific Revolution and the beginning of the Enlightenment. European historians traditionally dated its beginning with the death of Louis XIV of France in 1715 and its end with the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789. Many historians now date the end of the Enlightenment as the start of the 19th century, with the latest proposed year being the death of Immanuel Kant in 1804.\nThe movement was characterized by the widespread circulation of ideas through new institutions: scientific academies, literary salons, coffeehouses, Masonic lodges, and an expanding print culture of books, journals, and pamphlets. The ideas of the Enlightenment undermined the authority of the monarchy and religious officials and paved the way for the political revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries. A variety of 19th-century movements, including liberalism, socialism, and neoclassicism, trace their intellectual heritage to the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment was marked by an increasing awareness of the relationship between the mind and the everyday media of the world, and by an emphasis on the scientific method and reductionism, along with increased questioning of religious dogma\u2014an attitude captured by Kant's essay \",\" where the phrase ('dare to know') can be found.\nThe central doctrines of the Enlightenment were individual liberty, representative government, the rule of law, and religious freedom, in contrast to an absolute monarchy or single party state and the religious persecution of faiths other than those formally established and often controlled outright by the State. By contrast, other intellectual currents included arguments in favour of anti-Christianity, Deism and Atheism, accompanied by demands for secular states, bans on religious education, suppression of monasteries, the suppression of the Jesuits, and the expulsion of religious orders. The Enlightenment also faced contemporary criticism, later termed the \"Counter-Enlightenment\" by Sir Isaiah Berlin, which defended traditional religious and political authorities against rationalist critique.\nInfluential intellectuals.\nThe Age of Enlightenment was preceded by and closely associated with the Scientific Revolution. Earlier philosophers whose work influenced the Enlightenment included Francis Bacon, Pierre Gassendi, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Thomas Hobbes, Baruch Spinoza, John Locke, Pierre Bayle, and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Some of the figures of the Enlightenment included Cesare Beccaria, George Berkeley, Denis Diderot, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Lord Monboddo, Montesquieu, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Adam Smith, Hugo Grotius, and Voltaire.\nOne of the most influential Enlightenment publications was the \"\" (\"Encyclopedia\"). Published between 1751 and 1772 in 35 volumes, it was compiled by Diderot, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and a team of 150 others. The \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" helped spread the ideas of the Enlightenment across Europe and beyond.\nOther publications of the Enlightenment included Locke's \"A Letter Concerning Toleration\" (1689) and \"Two Treatises of Government\" (1689); Berkeley's \"A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" (1710), Voltaire's \"Letters on the English\" (1733) and \"Philosophical Dictionary\" (1764); Hume's \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1740); Montesquieu's \"The Spirit of the Laws\" (1748); Rousseau's \"Discourse on Inequality\" (1754) and \"The Social Contract\" (1762); Cesare Beccaria's \"On Crimes and Punishments\" (1764); Adam Smith's \"The Theory of Moral Sentiments\" (1759) and \"The Wealth of Nations\" (1776); and Kant's \"Critique of Pure Reason\" (1781).\nTopics.\nPhilosophy.\nBacon's empiricism and Descartes' rationalist philosophy laid the foundation for enlightenment thinking. Descartes' attempt to construct the sciences on a secure metaphysical foundation was not as successful as his method of doubt applied to philosophy, which led to a dualistic doctrine of mind and matter. His skepticism was refined by Locke's \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1690) and Hume's writings in the 1740s. Descartes' dualism was challenged by Spinoza's uncompromising assertion of the unity of matter in his \"Tractatus\" (1670) and \"Ethics\" (1677).\nAccording to Jonathan Israel, these laid down two distinct lines of Enlightenment thought: first, the moderate variety, following Descartes, Locke, and Christian Wolff, which sought accommodation between reform and the traditional systems of power and faith, and, second, the Radical Enlightenment, inspired by the philosophy of Spinoza, advocating democracy, individual liberty, freedom of expression, and eradication of religious authority. The moderate variety tended to be deistic whereas the radical tendency separated the basis of morality entirely from theology. Both lines of thought were eventually opposed by a conservative Counter-Enlightenment which sought a return to faith.\nIn the mid-18th century, Paris became the center of philosophic and scientific activity challenging traditional doctrines and dogmas. After the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, the relationship between church and the absolutist government was very strong. The early enlightenment emerged in protest to these circumstances, gaining ground under the support of Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of Louis XV. Called the \"Si\u00e8cle des Lumi\u00e8res,\" the philosophical movement of the Enlightenment had already started by the early 18th century, when Pierre Bayle launched the popular and scholarly Enlightenment critique of religion. As a skeptic Bayle only partially accepted the philosophy and principles of rationality. He did draw a strict boundary between morality and religion. The rigor of his \"Dictionnaire Historique et Critique\" influenced many of the Enlightenment \"Encyclop\u00e9distes.\" By the mid-18th century the French Enlightenment had found a focus in the project of the \"Encyclop\u00e9die.\" The philosophical movement was led by Voltaire and Rousseau, who argued for a society based upon reason rather than faith and Catholic doctrine, for a new civil order based on natural law, and for science based on experiments and observation. The political philosopher Montesquieu introduced the idea of a separation of powers in a government, a concept which was enthusiastically adopted by the authors of the United States Constitution. While the \"philosophes\" of the French Enlightenment were not revolutionaries and many were members of the nobility, their ideas played an important part in undermining the legitimacy of the Old Regime and shaping the French Revolution.\nFrancis Hutcheson, a moral philosopher and founding figure of the Scottish Enlightenment, described the utilitarian and consequentialist principle that virtue is that which provides, in his words, \"the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers.\" Much of what is incorporated in the scientific method (the nature of knowledge, evidence, experience, and causation) and some modern attitudes towards the relationship between science and religion were developed by Hutcheson's prot\u00e9g\u00e9s in Edinburgh: David Hume and Adam Smith. Hume became a major figure in the skeptical philosophical and empiricist traditions of philosophy.\nKant tried to reconcile rationalism and religious belief, individual freedom and political authority, as well as map out a view of the public sphere through private and public reason. Kant's work continued to influence German intellectual life and European philosophy more broadly well into the 20th century.\nMary Wollstonecraft was one of England's earliest feminist philosophers. She argued for a society based on reason and that women as well as men should be treated as rational beings. She is best known for her 1792 work, \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\".\nScience.\nScience played an important role in Enlightenment discourse and thought. Many Enlightenment writers and thinkers had backgrounds in the sciences and associated scientific advancement with the overthrow of religion and traditional authority in favour of the development of free speech and thought. There were immediate practical results. The experiments of Antoine Lavoisier were used to create the first modern chemical plants in Paris, and the experiments of the Montgolfier brothers enabled them to launch the first manned flight in a hot air balloon in 1783.\nBroadly speaking, Enlightenment science greatly valued empiricism and rational thought and was embedded with the Enlightenment ideal of advancement and progress. The study of science, under the heading of natural philosophy, was divided into physics and a conglomerate grouping of chemistry and natural history, which included anatomy, biology, geology, mineralogy, and zoology. As with most Enlightenment views, the benefits of science were not seen universally: Rousseau criticized the sciences for distancing man from nature and not operating to make people happier.\nScience during the Enlightenment was dominated by scientific societies and academies, which had largely replaced universities as centres of scientific research and development. Societies and academies were also the backbone of the maturation of the scientific profession. Scientific academies and societies grew out of the Scientific Revolution as the creators of scientific knowledge, in contrast to the scholasticism of the university. Some societies created or retained links to universities, but contemporary sources distinguished universities from scientific societies by claiming that the university's utility was in the transmission of knowledge while societies functioned to create knowledge. As the role of universities in institutionalized science began to diminish, learned societies became the cornerstone of organized science. Official scientific societies were chartered by the state to provide technical expertise.\nMost societies were granted permission to oversee their own publications, control the election of new members and the administration of the society. In the 18th century, a very large number of official academies and societies were founded in Europe; by 1789 there were over 70 official scientific societies. In reference to this growth, Bernard de Fontenelle coined the term \"the Age of Academies\" to describe the 18th century.\nAnother important development was the popularization of science among an increasingly literate population. \"Philosophes\" introduced the public to many scientific theories, most notably through the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" and the popularization of Newtonianism by Voltaire and \u00c9milie du Ch\u00e2telet. Some historians have marked the 18th century as a drab period in the history of science. The century saw significant advancements in the practice of medicine, mathematics, and physics; the development of biological taxonomy; a new understanding of magnetism and electricity; and the maturation of chemistry as a discipline, which established the foundations of modern chemistry.\nThe influence of science began appearing more commonly in poetry and literature. While some societies were established with ties to universities or maintained existing ones contemporary sources often distinguished between the two, asserting that universities primarily served to transmit knowledge, whereas scientific societies were oriented toward the creation of new knowledge. James Thomson penned his \"A Poem to the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton,\" which mourned the loss of Newton and praised his science and legacy.\nSociology, economics, and law.\nHume and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers developed a \"science of man,\" which was expressed historically in works by authors including James Burnett, Adam Ferguson, John Millar, and William Robertson, all of whom merged a scientific study of how humans behaved in ancient and primitive cultures with a strong awareness of the determining forces of modernity. Modern sociology largely originated from this movement, and Hume's philosophical concepts that directly influenced James Madison (and thus the U.S. Constitution), and as popularised by Dugald Stewart was the basis of classical liberalism.\nIn 1776, Adam Smith published \"The Wealth of Nations,\" often considered the first work on modern economics as it had an immediate impact on British economic policy that continues into the 21st century. It was immediately preceded and influenced by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot's drafts of \"Reflections on the Formation and Distribution of Wealth\" (1766). Smith acknowledged indebtedness and possibly was the original English translator.\nBeccaria, a jurist, criminologist, philosopher, and politician and one of the great Enlightenment writers, became famous for his masterpiece \"Dei delitti e delle pene\" (Of Crimes and Punishments, 1764). His treatise, translated into 22 languages, condemned torture and the death penalty and was a founding work in the field of penology and the classical school of criminology by promoting criminal justice. Francesco Mario Pagano wrote studies such as \"Saggi politici\" (Political Essays, 1783); and \"Considerazioni sul processo criminale\" (Considerations on the Criminal Trial, 1787), which established him as an international authority on criminal law.\nPolitics.\nThe Enlightenment has long been seen as the foundation of modern Western political and intellectual culture. The Enlightenment brought political modernization to the West, in terms of introducing democratic values and institutions and the creation of modern, liberal democracies. This thesis has been widely accepted by scholars and has been reinforced by the large-scale studies by Robert Darnton, Roy Porter, and, most recently, by Jonathan Israel. Enlightenment thought was deeply influential in the political realm. European rulers such as Catherine II of Russia, Joseph II of Austria, and Frederick II of Prussia tried to apply Enlightenment thought on religious and political tolerance, which became known as enlightened absolutism. Many of the major political and intellectual figures behind the American Revolution associated themselves closely with the Enlightenment: Benjamin Franklin visited Europe repeatedly and contributed actively to the scientific and political debates there and brought the newest ideas back to Philadelphia; Thomas Jefferson closely followed European ideas and later incorporated some of the ideals of the Enlightenment into the Declaration of Independence; and Madison incorporated these ideals into the U.S. Constitution during its framing in 1787.\nTheories of government.\nLocke, one of the most influential Enlightenment thinkers, based his governance philosophy on social contract theory, a subject that permeated Enlightenment political thought. English philosopher Thomas Hobbes ushered in this new debate with his work \"Leviathan\" in 1651. Hobbes also developed some of the fundamentals of European liberal thought: the right of the individual, the natural equality of all men, the artificial character of the political order (which led to the later distinction between civil society and the state), the view that all legitimate political power must be \"representative\" and based on the consent of the people, and a liberal interpretation of law which leaves people free to do whatever the law does not explicitly forbid.\nBoth Locke and Rousseau developed social contract theories in \"Two Treatises of Government\" and \"Discourse on Inequality,\" respectively. While quite different works, Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau agreed that a social contract, in which the government's authority lies in the consent of the governed, is necessary for man to live in civil society. Locke defines the state of nature as a condition in which humans are rational and follow natural law, in which all men are born equal and with the right to life, liberty, and property. However, when one citizen breaks the law of nature both the transgressor and the victim enter into a state of war, from which it is virtually impossible to break free. Therefore, Locke said that individuals enter into civil society to protect their natural rights via an \"unbiased judge\" or common authority, such as courts. In contrast, Rousseau's conception relies on the supposition that \"civil man\" is corrupted, while \"natural man\" has no want he cannot fulfill himself. Natural man is only taken out of the state of nature when the inequality associated with private property is established. Rousseau said that people join into civil society via the social contract to achieve unity while preserving individual freedom. This is embodied in the sovereignty of the general will, the moral and collective legislative body constituted by citizens.\nLocke is known for his statement that individuals have a right to \"Life, Liberty, and Property,\" and his belief that the natural right to property is derived from labor. Tutored by Locke, Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, wrote in 1706: \"There is a mighty Light which spreads its self over the world especially in those two free Nations of England and Holland; on whom the Affairs of Europe now turn.\" Locke's theory of natural rights has influenced many political documents, including the U.S. Declaration of Independence and the French National Constituent Assembly's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.\nSome \"philosophes\" argued that the establishment of a contractual basis of rights would lead to the market mechanism and capitalism, the scientific method, religious tolerance, and the organization of states into self-governing republics through democratic means. In this view, the tendency of the \"philosophes\" in particular to apply rationality to every problem is considered the essential change.\nAlthough much of Enlightenment political thought was dominated by social contract theorists, Hume and Ferguson criticized this camp. Hume's essay \"Of the Original Contract\" argues that governments derived from consent are rarely seen and civil government is grounded in a ruler's habitual authority and force. It is precisely because of the ruler's authority over-and-against the subject that the subject tacitly consents, and Hume says that the subjects would \"never imagine that their consent made him sovereign,\" rather the authority did so. Similarly, Ferguson did not believe citizens built the state, rather polities grew out of social development. In his 1767 \"An Essay on the History of Civil Society,\" Ferguson uses the four stages of progress, a theory that was popular in Scotland at the time, to explain how humans advance from a hunting and gathering society to a commercial and civil society without agreeing to a social contract.\nBoth Rousseau's and Locke's social contract theories rest on the presupposition of natural rights, which are not a result of law or custom but are things that all men have in pre-political societies and are therefore universal and inalienable. The most famous natural right formulation comes from Locke's \"Second Treatise,\" when he introduces the state of nature. For Locke, the law of nature is grounded on mutual security or the idea that one cannot infringe on another's natural rights, as every man is equal and has the same inalienable rights. These natural rights include perfect equality and freedom, as well as the right to preserve life and property.\nLocke argues against indentured servitude on the basis that enslaving oneself goes against the law of nature because a person cannot surrender their own rights: freedom is absolute, and no one can take it away. Locke argues that one person cannot enslave another because it is morally reprehensible, although he introduces a caveat by saying that enslavement of a lawful captive in time of war would not go against one's natural rights.\nEnlightened absolutism.\nThe leaders of the Enlightenment were not especially democratic, as they more often look to absolute monarchs as the key to imposing reforms designed by the intellectuals. Voltaire despised democracy and said the absolute monarch must be enlightened and must act as dictated by reason and justice\u2014in other words, be a \"philosopher-king.\"\nIn several nations, rulers welcomed leaders of the Enlightenment at court and asked them to help design laws and programs to reform the system, typically to build stronger states. These rulers are called \"enlightened despots\" by historians. They included Frederick the Great of Prussia, Catherine the Great of Russia, Leopold II of Tuscany and Joseph II of Austria. Joseph was over-enthusiastic, announcing many reforms that had little support so that revolts broke out and his regime became a comedy of errors, and nearly all his programs were reversed. Senior ministers Pombal in Portugal and Johann Friedrich Struensee in Denmark also governed according to Enlightenment ideals. In Poland, the model constitution of 1791 expressed Enlightenment ideals, but was in effect for only one year before the nation was partitioned among its neighbors. More enduring were the cultural achievements, which created a nationalist spirit in Poland.\nFrederick the Great, the king of Prussia from 1740 to 1786, saw himself as a leader of the Enlightenment and patronized philosophers and scientists at his court in Berlin. Voltaire, who had been imprisoned and maltreated by the French government, was eager to accept Frederick's invitation to live at his palace. Frederick explained: \"My principal occupation is to combat ignorance and prejudice... to enlighten minds, cultivate morality, and to make people as happy as it suits human nature, and as the means at my disposal permit.\"\nAmerican Revolution and French Revolution.\nThe Enlightenment has been frequently linked to the American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1789\u2014both had some intellectual influence from Thomas Jefferson. A key aspect of this era was a profound shift from the absolute monarchies of Europe, which asserted the \"divine right\" to rule. John Locke rejected this view in his writings on the Two Treatises of Government (1689). He asserted that citizens were seen to possess natural rights, including life, liberty, and property. Therefore governments exist to protect these rights through the \"consent of the governed.\" The clash between these competing ethos often resulted in violent upheaval in differing ways. In France, Ancien r\u00e9gime, with its rigid social hierarchy and absolute monarchical power, was systematically dismantled during the French Revolution. While the American Revolution focused more on breaking free from a government - represented by King George III and Parliament - that colonists felt did not adequately represent their interests.\nAlexis de Tocqueville proposed the French Revolution as the inevitable result of the radical opposition created in the 18th century between the monarchy and the men of letters of the Enlightenment. These men of letters constituted a sort of \"substitute aristocracy that was both all-powerful and without real power.\" This illusory power came from the rise of \"public opinion,\" born when absolutist centralization removed the nobility and the bourgeoisie from the political sphere. The \"literary politics\" that resulted promoted a discourse of equality and was hence in fundamental opposition to the monarchical regime. De Tocqueville \"clearly designates... the cultural effects of transformation in the forms of the exercise of power.\"\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt does not require great art or magnificently trained eloquence, to prove that Christians should tolerate each other. I, however, am going further: I say that we should regard all men as our brothers. What? The Turk my brother? The Chinaman my brother? The Jew? The Siam? Yes, without doubt; are we not all children of the same father and creatures of the same God?\nVoltaire (1763)\nEnlightenment era religious commentary was a response to the preceding century of religious conflict in Europe, especially the Thirty Years' War. Theologians of the Enlightenment wanted to reform their faith to its generally non-confrontational roots and to limit the capacity for religious controversy to spill over into politics and warfare while still maintaining a true faith in God. For moderate Christians, this meant a return to simple Scripture. Locke abandoned the corpus of theological commentary in favor of an \"unprejudiced examination\" of the Word of God alone. He determined the essence of Christianity to be a belief in Christ the redeemer and recommended avoiding more detailed debate. Anthony Collins, one of the English freethinkers, published his \"Essay concerning the Use of Reason in Propositions the Evidence whereof depends on Human Testimony\" (1707), in which he rejects the distinction between \"above reason\" and \"contrary to reason,\" and demands that revelation should conform to man's natural ideas of God. In the \"Jefferson Bible,\" Thomas Jefferson went further and dropped any passages dealing with miracles, visitations of angels, and the resurrection of Jesus after his death, as he tried to extract the practical Christian moral code of the New Testament.\nEnlightenment scholars sought to curtail the political power of organized religion and thereby prevent another age of intolerant religious war. Spinoza determined to remove politics from contemporary and historical theology (e.g., disregarding Judaic law). Moses Mendelssohn advised affording no political weight to any organized religion but instead recommended that each person follow what they found most convincing. They believed a good religion based in instinctive morals and a belief in God should not theoretically need force to maintain order in its believers, and both Mendelssohn and Spinoza judged religion on its moral fruits, not the logic of its theology.\nSeveral novel ideas about religion developed with the Enlightenment, including deism and talk of atheism. According to Thomas Paine, deism is the simple belief in God the Creator with no reference to the Bible or any other miraculous source. Instead, the deist relies solely on personal reason to guide his creed, which was eminently agreeable to many thinkers of the time. Atheism was much discussed, but there were few proponents. Wilson and Reill note: \"In fact, very few enlightened intellectuals, even when they were vocal critics of Christianity, were true atheists. Rather, they were critics of orthodox belief, wedded rather to skepticism, deism, vitalism, or perhaps pantheism.\" Some followed Pierre Bayle and argued that atheists could indeed be moral men. Many others like Voltaire held that without belief in a God who punishes evil, the moral order of society was undermined; that is, since atheists gave themselves to no supreme authority and no law and had no fear of eternal consequences, they were far more likely to disrupt society. Bayle observed that, in his day, \"prudent persons will always maintain an appearance of [religion],\" and he believed that even atheists could hold concepts of honor and go beyond their own self-interest to create and interact in society. Locke said that if there were no God and no divine law, the result would be moral anarchy: every individual \"could have no law but his own will, no end but himself. He would be a god to himself, and the satisfaction of his own will the sole measure and end of all his actions.\"\nSeparation of church and state.\nThe \"Radical Enlightenment\" promoted the concept of separating church and state, an idea that is often credited to Locke. According to his principle of the social contract, Locke said that the government lacked authority in the realm of individual conscience, as this was something rational people could not cede to the government for it or others to control. For Locke, this created a natural right in the liberty of conscience, which he said must therefore remain protected from any government authority.\nThese views on religious tolerance and the importance of individual conscience, along with the social contract, became particularly influential in the American colonies and the drafting of the United States Constitution. In a letter to the Danbury Baptist Association in Connecticut, Thomas Jefferson calls for a \"wall of separation between church and state\" at the federal level. He previously had supported successful efforts to disestablish the Church of England in Virginia and authored the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Jefferson's political ideals were greatly influenced by the writings of Locke, Bacon, and Newton, whom he considered the three greatest men that ever lived.\nNational variations.\nThe Enlightenment took hold in most European countries and influenced nations globally, often with a specific local emphasis. For example, in France it became associated with anti-government and anti-Church radicalism, while in Germany it reached deep into the middle classes, where it expressed a spiritualistic and nationalistic tone without threatening governments or established churches. Government responses varied widely. In France, the government was hostile, and the \"philosophes\" fought against its censorship, sometimes being imprisoned or hounded into exile. The British government, for the most part, ignored the Enlightenment's leaders in England and Scotland, although it did give Newton a knighthood and a very lucrative government office.\nA common theme among most countries which derived Enlightenment ideas from Europe was the intentional non-inclusion of Enlightenment philosophies pertaining to slavery. Originally during the French Revolution, a revolution deeply inspired by Enlightenment philosophy, \"France's revolutionary government had denounced slavery, but the property-holding 'revolutionaries' then remembered their bank accounts.\" Slavery frequently showed the limitations of the Enlightenment ideology as it pertained to European colonialism, since many colonies of Europe operated on a plantation economy fueled by slave labor. In 1791, the Haitian Revolution, a slave rebellion by emancipated slaves against French colonial rule in the colony of Saint-Domingue, broke out. European nations and the United States, despite the strong support for Enlightenment ideals, refused to \"[give support] to Saint-Domingue's anti-colonial struggle.\"\nGreat Britain.\nEngland.\nThe very existence of an English Enlightenment has been hotly debated by scholars. The majority of textbooks on British history make little or no mention of an English Enlightenment. Some surveys of the entire Enlightenment include England and others ignore it, although they do include coverage of such major intellectuals as Joseph Addison, Edward Gibbon, John Locke, Isaac Newton, Alexander Pope, Joshua Reynolds, and Jonathan Swift. Freethinking, a term describing those who stood in opposition to the institution of the Church, and the literal belief in the Bible, can be said to have begun in England no later than 1713, when Anthony Collins wrote his \"Discourse of Free-thinking,\" which gained substantial popularity. This essay attacked the clergy of all churches and was a plea for deism.\nRoy Porter argues that the reasons for this neglect were the assumptions that the movement was primarily French-inspired, that it was largely a-religious or anti-clerical, and that it stood in outspoken defiance to the established order. Porter admits that after the 1720s England could claim thinkers to equal Diderot, Voltaire, or Rousseau. However, its leading intellectuals such as Gibbon, Edmund Burke and Samuel Johnson were all quite conservative and supportive of the standing order. Porter says the reason was that Enlightenment had come early to England and had succeeded such that the culture had accepted political liberalism, philosophical empiricism, and religious toleration, positions which intellectuals on the continent had to fight against powerful odds. Furthermore, England rejected the collectivism of the continent and emphasized the improvement of individuals as the main goal of enlightenment.\nAccording to Derek Hirst, the 1640s and 1650s saw a revived economy characterised by growth in manufacturing, the elaboration of financial and credit instruments, and the commercialisation of communication. The gentry found time for leisure activities, such as horse racing and bowling. In the high culture important innovations included the development of a mass market for music, increased scientific research, and an expansion of publishing. All the trends were discussed in depth at the newly established coffee houses.\nScotland.\nIn the Scottish Enlightenment, the principles of sociability, equality, and utility were disseminated in schools and universities, many of which used sophisticated teaching methods which blended philosophy with daily life. Scotland's major cities created an intellectual infrastructure of mutually supporting institutions such as schools, universities, reading societies, libraries, periodicals, museums, and masonic lodges. The Scottish network was \"predominantly liberal Calvinist, Newtonian, and 'design' oriented in character which played a major role in the further development of the transatlantic Enlightenment.\" In France, Voltaire said \"we look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilization.\" The focus of the Scottish Enlightenment ranged from intellectual and economic matters to the specifically scientific as in the work of William Cullen, physician and chemist; James Anderson, agronomist; Joseph Black, physicist and chemist; and James Hutton, the first modern geologist.\nAnglo-American colonies.\nSeveral Americans, especially Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, played a major role in bringing Enlightenment ideas to the New World and in influencing British and French thinkers. Franklin was influential for his political activism and for his advances in physics. The cultural exchange during the Age of Enlightenment ran in both directions across the Atlantic. Thinkers such as Paine, Locke, and Rousseau all take Native American cultural practices as examples of natural freedom. The Americans closely followed English and Scottish political ideas, as well as some French thinkers such as Montesquieu. As deists, they were influenced by ideas of John Toland and Matthew Tindal. There was a great emphasis upon liberty, republicanism, and religious tolerance. There was no respect for monarchy or inherited political power. Deists reconciled science and religion by rejecting prophecies, miracles, and biblical theology. Leading deists included Thomas Paine in \"The Age of Reason\" and Thomas Jefferson in his short \"Jefferson Bible,\" from which he removed all supernatural aspects.\nNetherlands.\nThe Dutch Enlightenment began in 1640. During the Early Dutch Enlightenment (1640\u20131720), many books were translated from Latin, French or English to Dutch, often at the risk of their translators and publishers. By the 1720s, the Dutch Republic had also become a major center for printing and exporting banned books to France. The most famous figure of the Dutch Enlightenment was Baruch Spinoza.\nFrance.\nThe French Enlightenment was influenced by England and in turn influenced other national enlightenments. As worded by Sharon A. Stanley, \"the French Enlightenment stands out from other national enlightenments for its unrelenting assault on church leadership and theology.\"\nGerman states.\nPrussia took the lead among the German states in sponsoring the political reforms that Enlightenment thinkers urged absolute rulers to adopt. There were important movements as well in the smaller states of Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, and the Palatinate. In each case, Enlightenment values became accepted and led to significant political and administrative reforms that laid the groundwork for the creation of modern states. The princes of Saxony, for example, carried out an impressive series of fundamental fiscal, administrative, judicial, educational, cultural, and general economic reforms. The reforms were aided by the country's strong urban structure and influential commercial groups and modernized pre-1789 Saxony along the lines of classic Enlightenment principles.\nBefore 1750, the German upper classes looked to France for intellectual, cultural, and architectural leadership, as French was the language of high society. By the mid-18th century, the \"Aufkl\u00e4rung\" (The Enlightenment) had transformed German high culture in music, philosophy, science, and literature. Christian Wolff was the pioneer as a writer who expounded the Enlightenment to German readers and legitimized German as a philosophic language.\nJohann Gottfried von Herder broke new ground in philosophy and poetry, as a leader of the Sturm und Drang movement of proto-Romanticism. Weimar Classicism (\"Weimarer Klassik\") was a cultural and literary movement based in Weimar that sought to establish a new humanism by synthesizing Romantic, classical, and Enlightenment ideas. The movement (from 1772 until 1805) involved Herder as well as polymath Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schiller, a poet and historian. The theatre principal Abel Seyler greatly influenced the development of German theatre and promoted serious German opera, new works and experimental productions, and the concept of a national theatre. Herder argued that every group of people had its own particular identity, which was expressed in its language and culture. This legitimized the promotion of German language and culture and helped shape the development of German nationalism. Schiller's plays expressed the restless spirit of his generation, depicting the hero's struggle against social pressures and the force of destiny.\nGerman music, sponsored by the upper classes, came of age under composers Johann Sebastian Bach, Joseph Haydn, and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.\nIn remote K\u00f6nigsberg, Kant tried to reconcile rationalism and religious belief, individual freedom, and political authority. Kant's work contained basic tensions that would continue to shape German thought\u2014and indeed all of European philosophy\u2014well into the 20th century. German Enlightenment won the support of princes, aristocrats, and the middle classes, and it permanently reshaped the culture. However, there was a conservatism among the elites that warned against going too far.\nIn 1788, Prussia issued an \"Edict on Religion\" that forbade preaching any sermon that undermined popular belief in the Holy Trinity or the Bible. The goal was to avoid theological disputes that might impinge on domestic tranquility. Men who doubted the value of Enlightenment favoured the measure, but so too did many supporters. German universities had created a closed elite that could debate controversial issues among themselves, but spreading them to the public was seen as too risky. This intellectual elite was favoured by the state, but that might be reversed if the process of the Enlightenment proved politically or socially destabilizing.\nAustria.\nDuring the 18th century, Austria was under Habsburg rule. The reign of Maria Theresa, the first Habsburg monarch to be considered influenced by the Enlightenment in some areas, was marked by a mix of enlightenment and conservatism. Her son Joseph II's brief reign was marked by this conflict, with his ideology of Josephinism facing opposition. Joseph II carried out numerous reforms in the spirit of the Enlightenment, which affected, for example, the school system, monasteries and the legal system. Emperor Leopold II, who was an early opponent of capital punishment, had a brief and contentious rule that was mostly marked by relations with France. Similarly, Emperor Francis II's rule was primarily marked by relations with France.\nThe ideas of the Enlightenment also appeared in literature and theater works. Joseph von Sonnenfels was an important representative. In music, Austrian musicians such as Joseph Haydn and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart were associated with the Enlightenment.\nHungary.\nThe Hungarian Enlightenment emerged during the 18th century, while Hungary was part of the Habsburg Empire. The Hungarian Enlightenment is usually said to have begun in 1772 and was greatly influenced by French Enlightenment (through Vienna).\nRomania.\nThe Romanian Enlightenment emerged during the 18th century across the three major historical regions inhabited by Romanians: Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia. At that time, Transylvania was in the Habsburg Empire while Wallachia and Moldavia were vassals of the Ottoman Empire.\nThe Transylvanian Enlightenment was represented by the Transylvanian School, a group of thinkers who promoted a cultural revival and rights for Romanians (who were marginalized by the Habsburgs).\nThe Wallachian Enlightenment was represented by such figures as Dinicu Golescu (1777\u20131830), while the Moldavian Englightenment was headed by prince Dimitrie Cantemir (1673-1723).\nSwitzerland.\nThe Enlightenment arrived relatively late in Switzerland, spreading from England, the Netherlands, and France toward the end of the 17th century. The movement initially took hold in Protestant regions, where it gradually replaced orthodox religious thinking. The 1712 victory of the reformed cantons of Zurich and Bern over the five Catholic cantons of central Switzerland in the Second War of Villmergen marked both a Protestant triumph and a victory for Enlightenment ideas in the economically more developed regions.\nIn Switzerland, which lacked a central court or academy, the Enlightenment spread through the intellectual elite of reformed cities, particularly pastors educated in academies and colleges with strong humanist traditions. The theological \"Helvetic triumvirate\" of Jean-Alphonse Turrettini (Geneva), Jean-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Ostervald (Neuch\u00e2tel), and Samuel Werenfels (Basel) led their churches toward a humanistic Christianity beginning in 1697, creating what Paul Wernle termed \"reasoned orthodoxy\" that balanced rational thought with Christian ethics.\nSwiss Enlightenment thinkers made significant contributions across multiple fields. The Romand school developed influential theories of natural law, with scholars like Jean Barbeyrac (Lausanne), Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui (Geneva), and Emer de Vattel (Neuch\u00e2tel) promoting concepts of inalienable rights and justified resistance to tyranny that influenced the American independence movement. In literature, Johann Jakob Bodmer and Johann Jakob Breitinger made Zurich a center of German literary innovation, while Albert von Haller's poetry represented the peak of Swiss Enlightenment literature. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, considering himself both a Genevan and Swiss citizen, developed democratic republican theories that extended Genevan models to broader European federalist principles.\nThe movement was characterized by what scholars term \"Helvetism\" \u2013 specifically Swiss aspects including a Christian conception of natural law, patriotic ethics, and philosophical approaches grounded in practical pedagogy and economics. Most distinctively, Swiss Enlightenment thought celebrated Alpine nature, viewing Switzerland as the \"land of shepherds\" whose republican and federalist traditions were shaped by its mountain environment. The movement organized through numerous societies and publications, including the \"Encyclop\u00e9die d'Yverdon\" (1770-1780), which offered a moderate alternative to the French \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". Swiss intellectuals gained international prominence, with many serving in foreign academies, particularly in Berlin under Frederick II and in St. Petersburg under Catherine II.\nItaly.\nIn Italy the main centers of diffusion of the Enlightenment were Naples and Milan: in both cities the intellectuals took public office and collaborated with the Bourbon and Habsburg administrations. In Naples, Antonio Genovesi, Ferdinando Galiani, and Gaetano Filangieri were active under the tolerant King Charles of Bourbon. However, the Neapolitan Enlightenment, like Vico's philosophy, remained almost always in the theoretical field. Only later, many Enlighteners animated the unfortunate experience of the Parthenopean Republic. In Milan, however, the movement strove to find concrete solutions to problems. The center of discussions was the magazine \"Il Caff\u00e8\" (1762\u20131766), founded by brothers Pietro and Alessandro Verri (famous philosophers and writers, as well as their brother Giovanni), who also gave life to the Accademia dei Pugni, founded in 1761. Minor centers were Tuscany, Veneto, and Piedmont, where among others, Pompeo Neri worked.\nFrom Naples, Genovesi influenced a generation of southern Italian intellectuals and university students. His textbook \"Della diceosina, o sia della Filosofia del Giusto e dell'Onesto\" (1766) was a controversial attempt to mediate between the history of moral philosophy on the one hand and the specific problems encountered by 18th-century commercial society on the other. It contained the greater part of Genovesi's political, philosophical, and economic thought, which became a guidebook for Neapolitan economic and social development.\nScience flourished as Alessandro Volta and Luigi Galvani made break-through discoveries in electricity. Pietro Verri was a leading economist in Lombardy. Historian Joseph Schumpeter states he was \"the most important pre-Smithian authority on Cheapness-and-Plenty.\" The most influential scholar on the Italian Enlightenment has been Franco Venturi. Italy also produced some of the Enlightenment's greatest legal theorists, including Cesare Beccaria, Giambattista Vico, and Francesco Mario Pagano.\nBourbon Spain and Spanish America.\nWhen Charles II, the last Spanish Habsburg monarch, died his successor was from the French House of Bourbon, initiating a period of French Enlightenment influence in Spain and the Spanish Empire.\nIn the 18th Century, the Spanish continued to expand their empire in the Americas with the Spanish missions in California and established missions deeper inland in South America. Under Charles III, the crown began to implement serious structural changes. The monarchy curtailed the power of the Catholic Church, and established a standing military in Spanish America. Freer trade was promoted under \"comercio libre\" in which regions could trade with companies sailing from any other Spanish port, rather than the restrictive mercantile system. The crown sent out scientific expeditions to assert Spanish sovereignty over territories it claimed but did not control, but also importantly to discover the economic potential of its far-flung empire. Botanical expeditions sought plants that could be of use to the empire. Charles IV gave Prussian scientist Alexander von Humboldt free rein to travel in Spanish America, usually closed to foreigners, and more importantly, access to crown officials to aid the success of his scientific expedition.\nWhen Napoleon invaded Spain in 1808, Ferdinand VII abdicated and Napoleon placed his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the throne. To add legitimacy to this move, the Bayonne Constitution was promulgated, which included representation from Spain's overseas components, but most Spaniards rejected the whole Napoleonic project. A war of national resistance erupted. The Cortes de C\u00e1diz (parliament) was convened to rule Spain in the absence of the legitimate monarch, Ferdinand. It created a new governing document, the Constitution of 1812, which laid out three branches of government: executive, legislative, and judicial; put limits on the king by creating a constitutional monarchy; defined citizens as those in the Spanish Empire without African ancestry; established universal manhood suffrage; and established public education starting with primary school through university as well as freedom of expression. The constitution was in effect from 1812 until 1814, when Napoleon was defeated and Ferdinand was restored to the throne of Spain. Upon his return, Ferdinand repudiated the constitution and reestablished absolutist rule.\nHaiti.\nThe Haitian Revolution began in 1791 and ended in 1804 and shows how Enlightenment ideas \"were part of complex transcultural flows.\" Radical ideas in Paris during and after the French Revolution were mobilized in Haiti, such as by Toussaint Louverture. Toussaint had read the critique of European colonialism in Guillaume Thomas Fran\u00e7ois Raynal's book \"Histoire des deux Indes\" and \"was particularly impressed by Raynal's prediction of the coming of a 'Black Spartacus.'\"\nThe revolution combined Enlightenment ideas with the experiences of the slaves in Haiti, two-thirds of whom had been born in Africa and could \"draw on specific notions of kingdom and just government from West and Central Africa, and to employ religious practices such as voodoo for the formation of revolutionary communities.\" The revolution also affected France and \"forced the French National Convention to abolish slavery in 1794.\"\nPortugal and Brazil.\nThe Portuguese Enlightenment was heavily marked by the rule of Prime Minister Marquis of Pombal under King Joseph I from 1756 to 1777. Following the 1755 Lisbon earthquake which destroyed a large part of Lisbon, the Marquis of Pombal implemented important economic policies to regulate commercial activity (in particular with Brazil and England), and to standardise quality throughout the country (for example by introducing the first integrated industries in Portugal). His reconstruction of Lisbon's riverside district in straight and perpendicular streets (the Lisbon Baixa), methodically organized to facilitate commerce and exchange (for example by assigning to each street a different product or service), can be seen as a direct application of the Enlightenment ideas to governance and urbanism. His urbanistic ideas, also being the first large-scale example of earthquake engineering, became collectively known as Pombaline style, and were implemented throughout the kingdom during his stay in office. His governance was as enlightened as ruthless, see for example the T\u00e1vora affair.\nIn literature, the first Enlightenment ideas in Portugal can be traced back to the diplomat, philosopher, and writer Ant\u00f3nio Vieira who spent a considerable amount of his life in colonial Brazil denouncing discriminations against New Christians and the indigenous peoples in Brazil. During the 18th century, enlightened literary movements such as the Arc\u00e1dia Lusitana (lasting from 1756 until 1776, then replaced by the Nova Arc\u00e1dia in 1790 until 1794) surfaced in the academic medium, in particular involving former students of the University of Coimbra. A distinct member of this group was the poet Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage. The physician Ant\u00f3nio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches was also an important Enlightenment figure, contributing to the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" and being part of the Russian court. The ideas of the Enlightenment influenced various economists and anti-colonial intellectuals throughout the Portuguese Empire, such as Jos\u00e9 de Azeredo Coutinho, Jos\u00e9 da Silva Lisboa, Cl\u00e1udio Manoel da Costa, and Tom\u00e1s Ant\u00f4nio Gonzaga.\nThe Napoleonic invasion of Portugal had consequences for the Portuguese monarchy. With the aid of the British navy, the Portuguese royal family was evacuated to Brazil, its most important colony. Even though Napoleon had been defeated, the royal court remained in Brazil. The Liberal Revolution of 1820 forced the return of the royal family to Portugal. The terms by which the restored king was to rule was a constitutional monarchy under the Constitution of Portugal. Brazil declared its independence from Portugal in 1822 and became a monarchy.\nSweden.\nThe existence of a Swedish Enlightenment has been debated by scholars. According to Tore Fr\u00e4ngsmyr, the Swedish Enlightenment \"never formed a truly coherent current of ideas or became a unified movement.\" As worded by Max Skj\u00f6nsberg, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Fr\u00e4ngsmyr's main arguments against a Swedish Enlightenment were that religious criticism in Sweden was reserved for foreign Catholicism rather than the domestic Lutheran Church and that the debate about freedom in the 1750s and 1760s focused on political economy and freedom to trade rather than freedom to 'philosophize'. The fact that political economy is now a much more important aspect of Enlightenment historiography, to a great degree thanks to research on the Scottish Enlightenment, is a clear example of why Fr\u00e4ngsmyr's case is in need of revision.\nBetween 1718 and 1772, the Swedish Enlightenment overlapped with the period of parliamentary rule known in Swedish history as the Age of Liberty.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, the government began to actively encourage the proliferation of arts and sciences in the mid-18th century. This era produced the first Russian university, library, theatre, public museum, and independent press. Like other enlightened despots, Catherine the Great played a key role in fostering the arts, sciences and education. She used her own interpretation of Enlightenment ideals, assisted by notable international experts such as Voltaire (by correspondence) and in residence world class scientists such as Leonhard Euler and Peter Simon Pallas. The national Enlightenment differed from its Western European counterpart in that it promoted further modernization of all aspects of Russian life and was concerned with attacking the institution of serfdom in Russia. The Russian Enlightenment centered on the individual instead of societal enlightenment and encouraged the living of an enlightened life. A powerful element was \"prosveshchenie\" which combined religious piety, erudition, and commitment to the spread of learning. However, it lacked the skeptical and critical spirit of the Western European Enlightenment.\nPoland and Lithuania.\nEnlightenment ideas (\"o\u015bwiecenie\") emerged late in Poland, as the Polish middle class was weaker and szlachta (nobility) culture (Sarmatism) together with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth political system (Golden Liberty) were in deep crisis. The political system was built on aristocratic republicanism, but was unable to defend itself against powerful neighbors Russia, Prussia, and Austria as they repeatedly sliced off regions until nothing was left of independent Poland. The Polish Enlightenment began in the 1730s\u201340s and especially in theatre and the arts peaked in the reign of King Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski (second half of the 18th century).\nWarsaw was a main centre after 1750, with an expansion of schools and educational institutions and the arts patronage held at the Royal Castle. Leaders promoted tolerance and more education. They included King Stanislaw II August and reformers Piotr Switkowski, Antoni Poplawski, Josef Niemcewicz, and J\u00f3sef Pawlinkowski, as well as Baudouin de Cortenay, a Polonized dramatist. Opponents included Florian Jaroszewicz, Gracjan Piotrowski, Karol Wyrwicz, and Wojciech Skarszewski. The movement went into decline with the Third Partition of Poland (1795) \u2013 a national tragedy inspiring a short period of sentimental writing \u2013 and ended in 1822, replaced by Romanticism.\nChina.\nEighteenth-century China experienced \"a trend towards seeing fewer dragons and miracles, not unlike the disenchantment that began to spread across the Europe of the Enlightenment.\" Furthermore, \"some of the developments that we associate with Europe's Enlightenment resemble events in China remarkably.\" During this time, ideals of Chinese society were reflected in \"the reign of the Qing emperors Kangxi and Qianlong; China was posited as the incarnation of an enlightened and meritocratic society\u2014and instrumentalized for criticisms of absolutist rule in Europe.\"\nJapan.\nFrom 1641 to 1853, the Tokugawa shogunate of Japan enforced a policy called \"kaikin.\" The policy prohibited foreign contact with most outside countries. Robert Bellah found \"origins of modern Japan in certain strands of Confucian thinking, a 'functional analogue to the Protestant Ethic' that Max Weber singled out as the driving force behind Western capitalism.\" Japanese Confucian and Enlightenment ideas were brought together, for example, in the work of the Japanese reformer Tsuda Mamichi in the 1870s, who said, \"Whenever we open our mouths...it is to speak of 'enlightenment.'\"\nIn Japan and much of East Asia, Confucian ideas were not replaced but \"ideas associated with the Enlightenment were instead fused with the existing cosmology\u2014which in turn was refashioned under conditions of global interaction.\" In Japan in particular, the term \"ri,\" which is the Confucian idea of \"order and harmony on human society\" also came to represent \"the idea of laissez-faire and the rationality of market exchange.\" By the 1880s, the slogan \"Civilization and Enlightenment\" became potent throughout Japan, China, and Korea and was employed to address challenges of globalization.\nKorea.\nDuring this time, Korea \"aimed at isolation\" and was known as the \"hermit kingdom\" but became awakened to Enlightenment ideas by the 1890s such as with the activities of the Independence Club. Korea was influenced by China and Japan but also found its own Enlightenment path with the Korean intellectual Yu Kilchun who popularized the term Enlightenment throughout Korea. The use of Enlightenment ideas was a \"response to a specific situation in Korea in the 1890s, and not a belated answer to Voltaire.\"\nIndia.\nIn 18th-century India, Tipu Sultan was an enlightened monarch, who \"was one of the founding members of the (French) Jacobin Club in Seringapatam, had planted a liberty tree, and asked to be addressed as 'Tipu Citoyen,'\" which means Citizen Tipu. In parts of India, an important movement called the \"Bengal Renaissance\" led to Enlightenment reforms beginning in the 1820s. Ram Mohan Roy was a reformer who \"fused different traditions in his project of social reform that made him a proponent of a 'religion of reason.'\"\nEgypt.\nEighteenth-century Egypt had \"a form of 'cultural revival' in the making\u2014specifically Islamic origins of modernization long before Napoleon's Egyptian campaign.\" Napoleon's expedition into Egypt further encouraged \"social transformations that harkened back to debates about inner-Islamic reform, but now were also legitimized by referring to the authority of the Enlightenment.\" A major intellectual influence on Islamic modernism and expanding the Enlightenment in Egypt, Rifa al-Tahtawi \"oversaw the publication of hundreds of European works in the Arabic language.\"\nOttoman Empire.\nThe Enlightenment began to influence the Ottoman Empire in the 1830s and continued into the late 19th century.\nThe Tanzimat was a period of reform in the Ottoman Empire that began with the G\u00fclhane Hatt-\u0131 \u015eerif in 1839 and ended with the First Constitutional Era in 1876.\nNamik Kemal, a political activist and member of the Young Ottomans, drew on major Enlightenment thinkers and \"a variety of intellectual resources in his quest for social and political reform.\" In 1893, Kemal responded to Ernest Renan, who had indicted the Islamic religion, with his own version of the Enlightenment, which \"was not a poor copy of French debates in the eighteenth century, but an original position responding to the exigencies of Ottoman society in the late nineteenth century.\"\nHistoriography.\nThe idea of the Enlightenment has always been contested territory. According to Keith Thomas, its supporters \"hail it as the source of everything that is progressive about the modern world. For them, it stands for freedom of thought, rational inquiry, critical thinking, religious tolerance, political liberty, scientific achievement, the pursuit of happiness, and hope for the future.\" Thomas adds that its detractors accuse it of shallow rationalism, na\u00efve optimism, unrealistic universalism, and moral darkness. From the start, conservative and clerical defenders of traditional religion attacked materialism and skepticism as evil forces that encouraged immorality. By 1794, they pointed to the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution as confirmation of their predictions.\nRomantic philosophers argued that the Enlightenment's excessive dependence on reason was a mistake that it perpetuated, disregarding the bonds of history, myth, faith, and tradition that were necessary to hold society together. Ritchie Robertson portrays it as a grand intellectual and political program, offering a \"science\" of society modeled on the powerful physical laws of Newton. \"Social science\" was seen as the instrument of human improvement. It would expose truth and expand human happiness.\nThe rights of women and nonwhite people were generally overlooked in Enlightenment philosophy, which is often explicitly Eurocentric. Scientific racism first emerged at this time, bringing together traditional racism and new research methods. During the Enlightenment, concepts of monogenism and polygenism became popular, though they would only be systematized epistemologically during the 19th century. Monogenism contends that all races have a single origin, while polygenism is the idea that each race has a separate origin. Until the 18th century, the words \"race\" and \"species\" were interchangeable. The classification of non-European peoples as sub-human and irrational served to justify European dominance.\nDefinition.\nThe term \"Enlightenment\" emerged in English in the latter part of the 19th century, with particular reference to French philosophy, as the equivalent of the French term \"Lumi\u00e8res\" (used first by Jean-Baptiste Dubos in 1733 and already well established by 1751). From Kant's 1784 essay \"Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufkl\u00e4rung?\" (\"Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?\"), the German term became \"Aufkl\u00e4run\"g (\"aufkl\u00e4ren\"=to illuminate; \"sich aufkl\u00e4ren\"=to clear up). However, scholars have never agreed on a definition of the Enlightenment or on its chronological or geographical extent. Terms like \"les Lumi\u00e8res\" (French), \"illuminism\"o (Italian), \"ilustraci\u00f3n\" (Spanish) and \"Aufkl\u00e4rung\" (German) referred to partly overlapping movements. Not until the late 19th century did English scholars agree they were talking about \"the Enlightenment.\"\nEnlightenment historiography began in the period itself, from what Enlightenment figures said about their work. A dominant element was the intellectual angle they took. Jean le Rond d'Alembert's \"Preliminary Discourse\" of \"l'Encyclop\u00e9die\" provides a history of the Enlightenment which comprises a chronological list of developments in the realm of knowledge\u2014of which the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" forms the pinnacle. In 1783, Mendelssohn referred to Enlightenment as a process by which man was educated in the use of reason. Kant called Enlightenment \"man's release from his self-incurred tutelage,\" tutelage being \"man's inability to make use of his understanding without direction from another.\" \"For Kant, Enlightenment was mankind's final coming of age, the emancipation of the human consciousness from an immature state of ignorance.\" The German scholar Ernst Cassirer called the Enlightenment \"a part and a special phase of that whole intellectual development through which modern philosophic thought gained its characteristic self-confidence and self-consciousness.\" According to historian Roy Porter, the liberation of the human mind from a dogmatic state of ignorance, is the epitome of what the Age of Enlightenment was trying to capture.\nBertrand Russell saw the Enlightenment as a phase in a progressive development which began in antiquity and that reason and challenges to the established order were constant ideals throughout that time. Russell said that the Enlightenment was ultimately born out of the Protestant reaction against the Catholic Counter-Reformation and that philosophical views such as affinity for democracy against monarchy originated among 16th-century Protestants to justify their desire to break away from the Catholic Church. Although many of these philosophical ideals were picked up by Catholics, Russell argues that by the 18th century the Enlightenment was the principal manifestation of the schism that began with Martin Luther.\nJonathan Israel rejects the attempts of postmodern and Marxian historians to understand the revolutionary ideas of the period purely as by-products of social and economic transformations. He instead focuses on the history of ideas in the period from 1650 to the end of the 18th century and claims that it was the ideas themselves that caused the change that eventually led to the revolutions of the latter half of the 18th century and the early 19th century. Israel argues that until the 1650s Western civilization \"was based on a largely shared core of faith, tradition, and authority.\"\nTime span.\nThere is little consensus on the beginning of the Age of Enlightenment, though several historians and philosophers argue that it was marked by Descartes' 1637 philosophy of \"Cogito, ergo sum\" (\"I think, therefore I am\"), which shifted the epistemological basis from external authority to internal certainty. In France, many cited the publication of Newton's \"Principia Mathematica\" (1687), which built upon the work of earlier scientists and formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation. French historians usually place the \"Si\u00e8cle des Lumi\u00e8res\" (\"Century of Enlightenments\") between 1715 and 1789: from the beginning of the reign of Louis XV until the French Revolution. Most scholars use the last years of the century, often choosing the French Revolution or the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars (1804) as a convenient point in time with which to date the end of the Enlightenment.\nIn recent years, scholars have expanded the time span and global perspective of the Enlightenment by examining: (1) how European intellectuals did not work alone and other people helped spread and adapt Enlightenment ideas, (2) how Enlightenment ideas were \"a response to cross-border interaction and global integration,\" and (3) how the Enlightenment \"continued throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.\" The Enlightenment \"was not merely a history of diffusion\" and \"was the work of historical actors around the world... who invoked the term... for their own specific purposes.\"\nModern study.\nIn their 1947 book \"Dialectic of Enlightenment,\" Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, both wartime exiles from Nazi Germany, critiqued the supposed rational basis of the modern world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExtending Horkheimer and Adorno's argument, intellectual historian Jason Josephson Storm argues that any idea of the Age of Enlightenment as a clearly defined period that is separate from the earlier Renaissance and later Romanticism or Counter-Enlightenment constitutes a myth. Storm points out that there are vastly different and mutually contradictory periodizations of the Enlightenment depending on nation, field of study, and school of thought; that the term and category of \"Enlightenment\" referring to the Scientific Revolution was actually applied after the fact; that the Enlightenment did not see an increase in disenchantment or the dominance of the mechanistic worldview; and that a blur in the early modern ideas of the humanities and natural sciences makes it hard to circumscribe a Scientific Revolution. Storm defends his categorization of the Enlightenment as \"myth\" by noting the regulative role ideas of a period of Enlightenment and disenchantment play in modern Western culture, such that belief in magic, spiritualism, and even religion appears somewhat taboo in intellectual strata.\nIn the 1970s, study of the Enlightenment expanded to include the ways Enlightenment ideas spread to European colonies and how they interacted with indigenous cultures and how the Enlightenment took place in formerly unstudied areas such as Italy, Greece, the Balkans, Poland, Hungary, and Russia. Intellectuals such as Robert Darnton and J\u00fcrgen Habermas have focused on the social conditions of the Enlightenment. Habermas described the creation of the \"bourgeois public sphere\" in 18th-century Europe, containing the new venues and modes of communication allowing for rational exchange. Habermas said that the public sphere was bourgeois, egalitarian, rational, and independent from the state, making it the ideal venue for intellectuals to critically examine contemporary politics and society, away from the interference of established authority. While the public sphere is generally an integral component of the social study of the Enlightenment, other historians have questioned whether the public sphere had these characteristics.\nSociety and culture.\nIn contrast to the intellectual historiographical approach of the Enlightenment, which examines the various currents or discourses of intellectual thought within the European context during the 17th and 18th centuries, the cultural (or social) approach examines the changes that occurred in European society and culture. This approach studies the process of changing sociabilities and cultural practices during the Enlightenment.\nOne of the primary elements of the culture of the Enlightenment was the rise of the public sphere, a \"realm of communication marked by new arenas of debate, more open and accessible forms of urban public space and sociability, and an explosion of print culture,\" in the late 17th century and 18th century. Elements of the public sphere included that it was egalitarian, that it discussed the domain of \"common concern,\" and that argument was founded on reason. Habermas uses the term \"common concern\" to describe those areas of political/social knowledge and discussion that were previously the exclusive territory of the state and religious authorities, now open to critical examination by the public sphere. The values of this bourgeois public sphere included holding reason to be supreme, considering everything to be open to criticism (the public sphere is critical), and the opposition of secrecy of all sorts.\nThe creation of the public sphere has been associated with two long-term historical trends: the rise of the modern nation state and the rise of capitalism. The modern nation state in its consolidation of public power created by counterpoint a private realm of society independent of the state, which allowed for the public sphere. Capitalism also increased society's autonomy and self-awareness, as well as an increasing need for the exchange of information. As the nascent public sphere expanded, it embraced a large variety of institutions, and the most commonly cited were coffee houses and caf\u00e9s, salons and the literary public sphere, figuratively localized in the Republic of Letters. In France, the creation of the public sphere was helped by the aristocracy's move from the king's palace at Versailles to Paris in about 1720, since their rich spending stimulated the trade in luxuries and artistic creations, especially fine paintings.\nThe context for the rise of the public sphere was the economic and social change commonly associated with the Industrial Revolution: \"Economic expansion, increasing urbanization, rising population and improving communications in comparison to the stagnation of the previous century.\" Rising efficiency in production techniques and communication lowered the prices of consumer goods and increased the amount and variety of goods available to consumers (including the literature essential to the public sphere). Meanwhile, the colonial experience (most European states had colonial empires in the 18th century) began to expose European society to extremely heterogeneous cultures, leading to the breaking down of \"barriers between cultural systems, religious divides, gender differences and geographical areas.\"\nThe word \"public\" implies the highest level of inclusivity\u2014the public sphere by definition should be open to all. However, this sphere was only public to relative degrees. Enlightenment thinkers frequently contrasted their conception of the \"public\" with that of the people: Condorcet contrasted \"opinion\" with populace, Marmontel \"the opinion of men of letters\" with \"the opinion of the multitude\" and d'Alembert the \"truly enlightened public\" with \"the blind and noisy multitude.\" Additionally, most institutions of the public sphere excluded both women and the lower classes. Cross-class influences occurred through noble and lower class participation in areas such as the coffeehouses and the Masonic lodges.\nImplications in the arts.\nBecause of the focus on reason over superstition, the Enlightenment cultivated the arts. Emphasis on learning, art, and music became more widespread, especially with the growing middle class. Areas of study such as literature, philosophy, science, and the fine arts increasingly explored subject matter to which the general public, in addition to the previously more segregated professionals and patrons, could relate.\nAs musicians depended more on public support, public concerts became increasingly popular and helped supplement performers' and composers' incomes. The concerts also helped them to reach a wider audience. Handel, for example, epitomized this with his highly public musical activities in London. He gained considerable fame there with performances of his operas and oratorios. The music of Haydn and Mozart, with their Viennese Classical styles, are usually regarded as being the most in line with the Enlightenment ideals.\nThe desire to explore, record, and systematize knowledge had a meaningful impact on music publications. Rousseau's \"Dictionnaire de musique\" (published 1767 in Geneva and 1768 in Paris) was a leading text in the late 18th century. This widely available dictionary gave short definitions of words like genius and taste and was clearly influenced by the Enlightenment movement. Another text influenced by Enlightenment values was Charles Burney's \"A General History of Music: From the Earliest Ages to the Present Period\" (1776), which was a historical survey and an attempt to rationalize elements in music systematically over time. Recently, musicologists have shown renewed interest in the ideas and consequences of the Enlightenment. For example, Rose Rosengard Subotnik's \"Deconstructive Variations\" (subtitled \"Music and Reason in Western Society\") compares Mozart's \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" (1791) using the Enlightenment and Romantic perspectives and concludes that the work is \"an ideal musical representation of the Enlightenment.\"\nAs the economy and the middle class expanded, there was an increasing number of amateur musicians. One manifestation of this involved women, who became more involved with music on a social level. Women were already engaged in professional roles as singers and increased their presence in the amateur performers' scene, especially with keyboard music. Music publishers began to print music that amateurs could understand and play. The majority of the works that were published were for keyboard, voice and keyboard, and chamber ensemble. After these initial genres were popularized, from the mid-century on, amateur groups sang choral music, which then became a new trend for publishers to capitalize on. The increasing study of the fine arts, as well as access to amateur-friendly published works, led to more people becoming interested in reading and discussing music. Music magazines, reviews, and critical works which suited amateurs as well as connoisseurs began to surface.\nDissemination of ideas.\nThe \"philosophes\" spent a great deal of energy disseminating their ideas among educated men and women in cosmopolitan cities. They used many venues, some of them quite new.\nRepublic of Letters.\nThe term \"Republic of Letters\" was coined in 1664 by Pierre Bayle in his journal \"Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres.\" Towards the end of the 18th century, the editor of \"Histoire de la R\u00e9publique des Lettres en France,\" a literary survey, described the Republic of Letters as being: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the midst of all the governments that decide the fate of men; in the bosom of so many states, the majority of them despotic\u00a0... there exists a certain realm which holds sway only over the mind\u00a0... that we honor with the name Republic, because it preserves a measure of independence, and because it is almost its essence to be free. It is the realm of talent and of thought.\nThe Republic of Letters was the sum of a number of Enlightenment ideals: an egalitarian realm governed by knowledge that could act across political boundaries and rival state power. It was a forum that supported \"free public examination of questions regarding religion or legislation.\" Kant considered written communication essential to his conception of the public sphere; once everyone was a part of the \"reading public,\" then society could be said to be enlightened. The people who participated in the Republic of Letters, such as Diderot and Voltaire, are frequently known today as important Enlightenment figures. Indeed, the men who wrote Diderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" arguably formed a microcosm of the larger \"republic.\"\nMany women played an essential part in the French Enlightenment because of the role they played as \"salonni\u00e8res\" in Parisian salons, as the contrast to the male \"philosophes.\" The salon was the principal social institution of the republic and \"became the civil working spaces of the project of Enlightenment.\" Women, as salonni\u00e8res, were \"the legitimate governors of [the] potentially unruly discourse\" that took place within. While women were marginalized in the public culture of the Old Regime, the French Revolution destroyed the old cultural and economic restraints of patronage and corporatism (medieval guilds), opening French society to female participation, particularly in the literary sphere.\nIn France, the established men of letters (\"gens de lettres\") had fused with the elites (\"les grands\") of French society by the mid-18th century. This led to the creation of an oppositional literary sphere, Grub Street, the domain of a \"multitude of versifiers and would-be authors.\" These men came to London to become authors only to discover that the literary market could not support large numbers of writers, who in any case were very poorly remunerated by the publishing-bookselling guilds.\nThe writers of Grub Street, the Grub Street Hacks, were left feeling bitter about the relative success of the men of letters and found an outlet for their literature which was typified by the \"libelle.\" Written mostly in the form of pamphlets, the \"libelles\" \"slandered the court, the Church, the aristocracy, the academies, the salons, everything elevated and respectable, including the monarchy itself.\" \"Le Gazetier cuirass\u00e9\" by Charles Th\u00e9veneau de Morande was a prototype of the genre. It was Grub Street literature that was most read by the public during the Enlightenment. According to Darnton, more importantly the Grub Street hacks inherited the \"revolutionary spirit\" once displayed by the \"philosophes\" and paved the way for the French Revolution by desacralizing figures of political, moral, and religious authority in France.\nBook industry.\nThe increased consumption of reading materials of all sorts was one of the key features of the \"social\" Enlightenment. Developments in the Industrial Revolution allowed consumer goods to be produced in greater quantities at lower prices, encouraging the spread of books, pamphlets, newspapers, and journals \u2013 \"media of the transmission of ideas and attitudes.\" Commercial development likewise increased the demand for information, along with rising populations and increased urbanisation. However, demand for reading material extended outside of the realm of the commercial and outside the realm of the upper and middle classes, as evidenced by the biblioth\u00e8que bleue. Literacy rates are difficult to gauge, but in France the rates doubled over the course of the 18th century. Reflecting the decreasing influence of religion, the number of books about science and art published in Paris doubled from 1720 to 1780, while the number of books about religion dropped to just one-tenth of the total.\nReading underwent serious changes in the 18th century. In particular, Rolf Engelsing has argued for the existence of a \"reading revolution.\" Until 1750, reading was done intensively: people tended to own a small number of books and read them repeatedly, often to small audience. After 1750, people began to read \"extensively,\" finding as many books as they could, increasingly reading them alone. This is supported by increasing literacy rates, particularly among women.\nThe vast majority of the reading public could not afford to own a private library, and while most of the state-run \"universal libraries\" set up in the 17th and 18th centuries were open to the public, they were not the only sources of reading material. On one end of the spectrum was the \"biblioth\u00e8que bleue,\" a collection of cheaply produced books published in Troyes, France. Intended for a largely rural and semi-literate audience these books included almanacs, retellings of medieval romances and condensed versions of popular novels, among other things. While some historians have argued against the Enlightenment's penetration into the lower classes, the \"biblioth\u00e8que bleue\" represents at least a desire to participate in Enlightenment sociability. Moving up the classes, a variety of institutions offered readers access to material without needing to buy anything. Libraries that lent out their material for a small price started to appear, and occasionally bookstores would offer a small lending library to their patrons. Coffee houses commonly offered books, journals, and sometimes even popular novels to their customers. \"Tatler\" and \"The Spectator,\" two influential periodicals sold from 1709 to 1714, were closely associated with coffee house culture in London, being both read and produced in various establishments in the city. This is an example of the triple or even quadruple function of the coffee house: reading material was often obtained, read, discussed, and even produced on the premises.\nIt is difficult to determine what people actually read during the Enlightenment. For example, examining the catalogs of private libraries gives an image skewed in favor of the classes wealthy enough to afford libraries and also ignores censored works unlikely to be publicly acknowledged. For this reason, a study of publishing would be much more fruitful for discerning reading habits. Across continental Europe, but in France especially, booksellers and publishers had to negotiate censorship laws of varying strictness. For example, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" narrowly escaped seizure and had to be saved by Malesherbes, the man in charge of the French censor. Indeed, many publishing companies were conveniently located outside France so as to avoid overzealous French censors. They would smuggle their merchandise across the border, where it would then be transported to clandestine booksellers or small-time peddlers. The records of clandestine booksellers may give a better representation of what literate Frenchmen might have truly read, since their clandestine nature provided a less restrictive product choice. In one case, political books were the most popular category, primarily libels and pamphlets. Readers were more interested in sensationalist stories about criminals and political corruption than they were in political theory itself. The second most popular category, \"general works\" (those books \"that did not have a dominant motif and that contained something to offend almost everyone in authority\"), demonstrated a high demand for generally low-brow subversive literature. However, these works never became part of literary canon and are largely forgotten today as a result.\nA healthy, legal publishing industry existed throughout Europe, although established publishers and book sellers occasionally ran afoul of the law. For example, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", condemned by both the King and Clement XII, nevertheless found its way into print with the help of the aforementioned Malesherbes and creative use of French censorship law. However, many works were sold without running into any legal trouble at all. Borrowing records from libraries in England, Germany, and North America indicate that more than 70% of books borrowed were novels. Less than 1% of the books were of a religious nature, indicating the general trend of declining religiosity.\nNatural history.\nA genre that greatly rose in importance was that of scientific literature. Natural history in particular became increasingly popular among the upper classes. Works of natural history include Ren\u00e9-Antoine Ferchault de R\u00e9aumur's \"Histoire naturelle des insectes\" and Jacques Gautier d'Agoty's \"La Myologie compl\u00e8te, ou description de tous les muscles du corps humain\" (1746). Outside Ancien R\u00e9gime France, natural history was an important part of medicine and industry, encompassing the fields of botany, zoology, meteorology, hydrology, and mineralogy. Students in Enlightenment universities and academies were taught these subjects to prepare them for careers as diverse as medicine and theology. As shown by Matthew Daniel Eddy, natural history in this context was a very middle class pursuit and operated as a fertile trading zone for the interdisciplinary exchange of diverse scientific ideas.\nThe target audience of natural history was French upper class, evidenced more by the specific discourse of the genre than by the generally high prices of its works. Naturalists catered to upper class desire for erudition: many texts had an explicit instructive purpose. However, natural history was often a political affair. As Emma Spary writes, the classifications used by naturalists \"slipped between the natural world and the social\u00a0... to establish not only the expertise of the naturalists over the natural, but also the dominance of the natural over the social.\" The idea of taste (\"le go\u00fbt\") was a social indicator: to truly be able to categorize nature, one had to have the proper taste, an ability of discretion shared by all members of the upper class. In this way, natural history spread many of the scientific developments of the time but also provided a new source of legitimacy for the dominant class. From this basis, naturalists could then develop their own social ideals based on their scientific works.\nScientific and literary journals.\nThe first scientific and literary journals were established during the Enlightenment. The first journal, the Parisian , appeared in 1665. However, it was not until 1682 that periodicals began to be more widely produced. French and Latin were the dominant languages of publication, but there was also a steady demand for material in German and Dutch. There was generally low demand for English publications on the continent, which was echoed by England's similar lack of desire for French works. Languages commanding less of an international market\u2014such as Danish, Spanish, and Portuguese\u2014found journal success more difficult, and a more international language was used instead. French slowly took over Latin's status as the \"lingua franca\" of learned circles. This in turn gave precedence to the publishing industry in Holland, where the vast majority of these French language periodicals were produced.\nJonathan Israel called the journals the most influential cultural innovation of European intellectual culture. They shifted the attention of the \"cultivated public\" away from established authorities to novelty and innovation, and instead promoted the Enlightened ideals of toleration and intellectual objectivity. Being a source of knowledge derived from science and reason, they were an implicit critique of existing notions of universal truth monopolized by monarchies, parliaments, and religious authorities. They also advanced Christian Enlightenment that upheld \"the legitimacy of God-ordained authority\"\u2014the Bible\u2014in which there had to be agreement between the biblical and natural theories.\nEncyclopedias and dictionaries.\nAlthough the existence of dictionaries and encyclopedias spanned into ancient times, the texts changed from defining words in a long running list to far more detailed discussions of those words in 18th-century encyclopedic dictionaries. The works were part of an Enlightenment movement to systematize knowledge and provide education to a wider audience than the elite. As the 18th century progressed, the content of encyclopedias also changed according to readers' tastes. Volumes tended to focus more strongly on secular affairs, particularly science and technology, rather than matters of theology.\nAlong with secular matters, readers also favoured an alphabetical ordering scheme over cumbersome works arranged along thematic lines. Commenting on alphabetization, the historian Charles Porset has said that \"as the zero degree of taxonomy, alphabetical order authorizes all reading strategies; in this respect it could be considered an emblem of the Enlightenment.\" For Porset, the avoidance of thematic and hierarchical systems thus allows free interpretation of the works and becomes an example of egalitarianism. Encyclopedias and dictionaries also became more popular during the Age of Enlightenment as the number of educated consumers who could afford such texts began to multiply. In the latter half of the 18th century, the number of dictionaries and encyclopedias published by decade increased from 63 between 1760 and 1769 to approximately 148 in the decade proceeding the French Revolution. Along with growth in numbers, dictionaries and encyclopedias also grew in length, often having multiple print runs that sometimes included in supplemented editions.\nThe first technical dictionary was drafted by John Harris and entitled \"Lexicon Technicum: Or, An Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences.\" Harris' book avoids theological and biographical entries and instead concentrates on science and technology. Published in 1704, the \"Lexicon Technicum\" was the first book to be written in English that took a methodical approach to describing mathematics and commercial arithmetic along with the physical sciences and navigation. Other technical dictionaries followed Harris' model, including Ephraim Chambers' \"Cyclopaedia\" (1728), which included five editions and is a substantially larger work than Harris'. The folio edition of the work even included foldout engravings. The \"Cyclopaedia\" emphasized Newtonian theories, Lockean philosophy and contained thorough examinations of technologies, such as engraving, brewing, and dyeing.\n In Germany, practical reference works intended for the uneducated majority became popular in the 18th century. The \"Marperger Curieuses Natur-, Kunst-, Berg-, Gewerk- und Handlungs-Lexicon\" (1712) explained terms that usefully described the trades and scientific and commercial education. \"Jablonksi Allgemeines Lexicon\" (1721) was better known than the \"Handlungs-Lexicon\" and underscored technical subjects rather than scientific theory. For example, over five columns of text were dedicated to wine while geometry and logic were allocated only twenty-two and seventeen lines, respectively. The first edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (1771) was modelled along the same lines as the German lexicons.\nHowever, the prime example of reference works that systematized scientific knowledge in the Age of Enlightenment were universal encyclopedias rather than technical dictionaries. It was the goal of universal encyclopedias to record all human knowledge in a comprehensive reference work. The most well-known of these works is Diderot and d'Alembert's \"Encyclop\u00e9die, ou dictionnaire raisonn\u00e9 des sciences, des arts et des m\u00e9tiers.\" The work, which began publication in 1751, was composed of 35 volumes and over 71,000 separate entries. A great number of the entries were dedicated to describing the sciences and crafts in detail and provided intellectuals across Europe with a high-quality survey of human knowledge. In d'Alembert's \"Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot,\" the work's goal to record the extent of human knowledge in the arts and sciences is outlined:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As an Encyclop\u00e9die, it is to set forth as well as possible the order and connection of the parts of human knowledge. As a Reasoned Dictionary of the Sciences, Arts, and Trades, it is to contain the general principles that form the basis of each science and each art, liberal or mechanical, and the most essential facts that make up the body and substance of each.\nThe massive work was arranged according to a \"tree of knowledge.\" The tree reflected the marked division between the arts and sciences, which was largely a result of the rise of empiricism. Both areas of knowledge were united by philosophy, or the trunk of the tree of knowledge. The Enlightenment's desacrilization of religion was pronounced in the tree's design, particularly where theology accounted for a peripheral branch, with black magic as a close neighbour. As the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" gained popularity, it was published in quarto and octavo editions after 1777. The quarto and octavo editions were much less expensive than previous editions, making the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" more accessible to the non-elite. Robert Darnton estimates that there were approximately 25,000 copies of the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" in circulation throughout France and Europe before the French Revolution. The extensive yet affordable encyclopedia came to represent the transmission of Enlightenment and scientific education to an expanding audience.\nPopularization of science.\nOne of the most important developments that the Enlightenment era brought to the discipline of science was its popularization. An increasingly literate population seeking knowledge and education in both the arts and the sciences drove the expansion of print culture and the dissemination of scientific learning. The new literate population was precipitated by a high rise in the availability of food; this enabled many people to rise out of poverty, and instead of paying more for food, they had money for education. Popularization was generally part of an overarching Enlightenment ideal that endeavoured \"to make information available to the greatest number of people.\" As public interest in natural philosophy grew during the 18th century, public lecture courses and the publication of popular texts opened up new roads to money and fame for amateurs and scientists who remained on the periphery of universities and academies. More formal works included explanations of scientific theories for individuals lacking the educational background to comprehend the original scientific text. Newton's celebrated \"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" was published in Latin and remained inaccessible to readers without education in the classics until Enlightenment writers began to translate and analyze the text in the vernacular.\nThe first significant work that expressed scientific theory and knowledge expressly for the laity, in the vernacular and with the entertainment of readers in mind, was Bernard de Fontenelle's \"Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds\" (1686). The book was produced specifically for women with an interest in scientific writing and inspired a variety of similar works. These popular works were written in a discursive style, which was laid out much more clearly for the reader than the complicated articles, treatises, and books published by the academies and scientists. Charles Leadbetter's \"Astronomy\" (1727) was advertised as \"a Work entirely New\" that would include \"short and easie [\"sic\"] Rules and Astronomical Tables.\"\nThe first French introduction to Newtonianism and the \"Principia\" was \"El\u00e9ments de la philosophie de Newton,\" published by Voltaire in 1738. \u00c9milie du Ch\u00e2telet's translation of the \"Principia,\" published after her death in 1756, also helped to spread Newton's theories beyond scientific academies and the university. Writing for a growing female audience, Francesco Algarotti published \"Il Newtonianism per le dame,\" which was a tremendously popular work and was translated from Italian into English by Elizabeth Carter. A similar introduction to Newtonianism for women was produced by Henry Pemberton. His \"A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy\" was published by subscription. Extant records of subscribers show that women from a wide range of social standings purchased the book, indicating the growing number of scientifically inclined female readers among the middling class. During the Enlightenment, women also began producing popular scientific works. Sarah Trimmer wrote a successful natural history textbook for children titled \"The Easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature\" (1782), which was published for many years in eleven editions.\nSchools and universities.\nMost work on the Enlightenment emphasizes the ideals discussed by intellectuals, rather than the actual state of education at the time. Leading educational theorists like England's John Locke and Switzerland's Jean Jacques Rousseau both emphasized the importance of shaping young minds early. By the late Enlightenment, there was a rising demand for a more universal approach to education, particularly after the American Revolution and the French Revolution.\nThe predominant educational psychology from the 1750s onward, especially in northern European countries, was associationism: the notion that the mind associates or dissociates ideas through repeated routines. In addition to being conducive to Enlightenment ideologies of liberty, self-determination, and personal responsibility, it offered a practical theory of the mind that allowed teachers to transform longstanding forms of print and manuscript culture into effective graphic tools of learning for the lower and middle orders of society. Children were taught to memorize facts through oral and graphic methods that originated during the Renaissance.\nMany of the leading universities associated with Enlightenment progressive principles were located in northern Europe, with the most renowned being the universities of Leiden, G\u00f6ttingen, Halle, Montpellier, Uppsala, and Edinburgh. These universities, especially Edinburgh, produced professors whose ideas had a significant impact on Britain's North American colonies and later the American Republic. Within the natural sciences, Edinburgh's medical school also led the way in chemistry, anatomy, and pharmacology. In other parts of Europe, the universities and schools of France and most of Europe were bastions of traditionalism and were not hospitable to the Enlightenment. In France, the major exception was the medical university at Montpellier.\nLearned academies.\nThe history of Academies in France during the Enlightenment begins with the Academy of Science, founded in 1666 in Paris. It was closely tied to the French state, acting as an extension of a government seriously lacking in scientists. It helped promote and organize new disciplines and it trained new scientists. It also contributed to the enhancement of scientists' social status, considering them to be the \"most useful of all citizens.\" Academies demonstrate the rising interest in science along with its increasing secularization, as evidenced by the small number of clerics who were members (13%). The presence of the French academies in the public sphere cannot be attributed to their membership, as although the majority of their members were bourgeois, the exclusive institution was only open to elite Parisian scholars. They perceived themselves as \"interpreters of the sciences for the people.\" For example, it was with this in mind that academicians took it upon themselves to disprove the popular pseudo-science of mesmerism.\nThe strongest contribution of the French Academies to the public sphere comes from the \"concours acad\u00e9miques\" (roughly translated as \"academic contests\") they sponsored throughout France. These academic contests were perhaps the most public of any institution during the Enlightenment. The practice of contests dated back to the Middle Ages and was revived in the mid-17th century. The subject matter had previously been generally religious and/or monarchical, featuring essays, poetry, and painting. However, by roughly 1725 this subject matter had radically expanded and diversified, including \"royal propaganda, philosophical battles, and critical ruminations on the social and political institutions of the Old Regime.\" Topics of public controversy were also discussed such as the theories of Newton and Descartes, the slave trade, women's education, and justice in France. More importantly, the contests were open to all, and the enforced anonymity of each submission guaranteed that neither gender nor social rank would determine the judging. Indeed, although the \"vast majority\" of participants belonged to the wealthier strata of society (\"the liberal arts, the clergy, the judiciary and the medical profession\"), there were some cases of the popular classes submitting essays and even winning. Similarly, a significant number of women participated\u2014and won\u2014the competitions. Of a total of 2,300 prize competitions offered in France, women won 49\u2014perhaps a small number by modern standards but very significant in an age in which very few women had any academic training. Indeed, the majority of the winning entries were for poetry competitions, a genre commonly stressed in women's education.\nIn England, the Royal Society of London played a significant role in the public sphere and the spread of Enlightenment ideas. It was founded by a group of independent scientists and given a royal charter in 1662. The society played a large role in spreading Robert Boyle's experimental philosophy around Europe and acted as a clearinghouse for intellectual correspondence and exchange. Boyle was \"a founder of the experimental world in which scientists now live and operate\" and his method based knowledge on experimentation, which had to be witnessed to provide proper empirical legitimacy. This is where the Royal Society came into play: witnessing had to be a \"collective act\" and the Royal Society's assembly rooms were ideal locations for relatively public demonstrations. However, not just any witness was considered to be credible: \"Oxford professors were accounted more reliable witnesses than Oxfordshire peasants.\" Two factors were taken into account: a witness's knowledge in the area and a witness's \"moral constitution.\" In other words, only civil society were considered for Boyle's public.\nSalons.\nSalons were places where \"philosophes\" were reunited and discussed old, actual, or new ideas. This led to salons being the birthplace of intellectual and enlightened ideas.\nCoffeehouses.\nCoffeehouses were especially important to the spread of knowledge during the Enlightenment because they created a unique environment in which people from many different walks of life gathered and shared ideas. They were frequently criticized by nobles who feared the possibility of an environment in which class and its accompanying titles and privileges were disregarded. Such an environment was especially intimidating to monarchs who derived much of their power from the disparity between classes of people. If the different classes joined together under the influence of Enlightenment thinking, they might recognize the all-encompassing oppression and abuses of their monarchs and because of the numbers of their members might be able to successfully revolt. Monarchs also resented the idea of their subjects convening as one to discuss political matters, especially matters of foreign affairs. Rulers thought political affairs were their business only, a result of their divine right to rule.\nCoffeeshops became homes away from home for many who sought to engage in discourse with their neighbors and discuss intriguing and thought-provoking matters, from philosophy to politics. Coffeehouses were essential to the Enlightenment, for they were centers of free-thinking and self-discovery. Although many coffeehouse patrons were scholars, many were not. Coffeehouses attracted a diverse set of people, including the educated wealthy and bourgeois as well as the lower classes. Patrons, being doctors, lawyers, merchants, represented almost all classes, so the coffeeshop environment sparked fear in those who wanted to preserve class distinction. One of the most popular critiques of the coffeehouse said that it \"allowed promiscuous association among people from different rungs of the social ladder, from the artisan to the aristocrat\" and was therefore compared to Noah's Ark, receiving all types of animals, clean and unclean. This unique culture served as a catalyst for journalism, when Joseph Addison and Richard Steele recognized its potential as an audience. Together, Steele and Addison published \"The Spectator (1711),\" a daily publication which aimed, through fictional narrator Mr. Spectator, to both entertain and provoke discussion on serious philosophical matters.\nThe first English coffeehouse opened in Oxford in 1650. Brian Cowan said that Oxford coffeehouses developed into \"penny universities,\" offering a locus of learning that was less formal than at structured institutions. These penny universities occupied a significant position in Oxford academic life, as they were frequented by those consequently referred to as the \"virtuosi,\" who conducted their research on some of the premises. According to Cowan, \"the coffeehouse was a place for like-minded scholars to congregate, to read, as well as learn from and to debate with each other, but was emphatically not a university institution, and the discourse there was of a far different order than any university tutorial.\"\nThe Caf\u00e9 Procope was established in Paris in 1686, and by the 1720s there were around 400 caf\u00e9s in the city. The Caf\u00e9 Procope in particular became a center of Enlightenment, welcoming such celebrities as Voltaire and Rousseau. The Caf\u00e9 Procope was where Diderot and D'Alembert decided to create the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". The caf\u00e9s were one of the various \"nerve centers\" for \"bruits publics,\" public noise or rumour. These \"bruits\" were allegedly a much better source of information than were the actual newspapers available at the time.\nDebating societies.\nThe debating societies are an example of the public sphere during the Enlightenment. Their origins include:\nIn the late 1770s, popular debating societies began to move into more \"genteel\" rooms, a change which helped establish a new standard of sociability. The backdrop to these developments was \"an explosion of interest in the theory and practice of public elocution.\" The debating societies were commercial enterprises that responded to this demand, sometimes very successfully. Some societies welcomed from 800 to 1,200 spectators per night.\nThe debating societies discussed an extremely wide range of topics. Before the Enlightenment, most intellectual debates revolved around \"confessional\"\u2014that is, Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed (Calvinist) or Anglican issues, debated primarily to establish which bloc of faith ought to have the \"monopoly of truth and a God-given title to authority.\" After Enlightenment, everything that previously had been rooted in tradition was questioned, and often replaced by new concepts. After the second half of the 17th century and during the 18th century, a \"general process of rationalization and secularization set in\" and confessional disputes were reduced to a secondary status in favor of the \"escalating contest between faith and incredulity.\"\nIn addition to debates on religion, societies discussed issues such as politics and the role of women. However, the critical subject matter of these debates did not necessarily translate into opposition to the government; the results of the debate quite frequently upheld the \"status quo\". From a historical standpoint, one of the most important features of the debating society was their openness to the public, as women attended and even participated in almost every debating society, which were likewise open to all classes providing they could pay the entrance fee. Once inside, spectators were able to participate in a largely egalitarian form of sociability that helped spread Enlightenment ideas.\nMasonic lodges.\nHistorians have debated the extent to which the secret network of Freemasonry was a main factor in the Enlightenment. Leaders of the Enlightenment included Freemasons such as Diderot, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Lessing, Pope, Horace Walpole, Robert Walpole, Mozart, Goethe, Frederick the Great, Benjamin Franklin and George Washington. Norman Davies said Freemasonry was a powerful force on behalf of liberalism in Europe from about 1700 to the twentieth century. It expanded during the Enlightenment, reaching practically every country in Europe. It was especially attractive to powerful aristocrats and politicians as well as intellectuals, artists, and political activists.\nDuring the Enlightenment, Freemasons comprised an international network of like-minded men, often meeting in secret in ritualistic programs at their lodges. They promoted the ideals of the Enlightenment and helped diffuse these values across Britain, France, and other places. Freemasonry as a systematic creed with its own myths, values, and rituals originated in Scotland c.\u20091600 and spread to England and then across the Continent in the 18th century. They fostered new codes of conduct\u2014including a communal understanding of liberty and equality inherited from guild sociability\u2014\"liberty, fraternity, and equality.\" Scottish soldiers and Jacobite Scots brought to the Continent ideals of fraternity, which reflected not the local system of Scottish customs, but the institutions and ideals originating in the English Revolution against royal absolutism. Freemasonry was particularly prevalent in France\u2014by 1789, there were perhaps as many as 100,000 French Masons, making Freemasonry the most popular of all Enlightenment associations. The Freemasons displayed a passion for secrecy and created new degrees and ceremonies. Similar societies, partially imitating Freemasonry, emerged in France, Germany, Sweden, and Russia. One example was the Illuminati, founded in Bavaria in 1776, which was copied after the Freemasons, but was never part of the movement. The name itself translates to \"enlightened,\" chosen to reflect their original intent to promote the values of the movement. The Illuminati was an overtly political group, which most Masonic lodges decidedly were not.\nMasonic lodges created a private model for public affairs. They \"reconstituted the polity and established a constitutional form of self-government, complete with constitutions and laws, elections, and representatives.\" In other words, the micro-society set up within the lodges constituted a normative model for society as a whole. This was especially true on the continent: when the first lodges began to appear in the 1730s, their embodiment of British values was often seen as threatening by state authorities. For example, the Parisian lodge that met in the mid 1720s was composed of English Jacobite exiles. Furthermore, freemasons across Europe explicitly linked themselves to the Enlightenment as a whole. For example, in French lodges the line \"As the means to be enlightened I search for the enlightened\" was a part of their initiation rites. British lodges assigned themselves the duty to \"initiate the unenlightened.\" This did not necessarily link lodges to the irreligious, but neither did this exclude them from the occasional heresy. In fact, many lodges praised the Grand Architect, the masonic terminology for the deistic divine being who created a scientifically ordered universe.\nGerman historian Reinhart Koselleck claimed: \"On the Continent there were two social structures that left a decisive imprint on the Age of Enlightenment: the Republic of Letters and the Masonic lodges.\" Scottish professor Thomas Munck argues that \"although the Masons did promote international and cross-social contacts which were essentially non-religious and broadly in agreement with enlightened values, they can hardly be described as a major radical or reformist network in their own right.\" Many of the Masons values seemed to greatly appeal to Enlightenment values and thinkers. Diderot discusses the link between Freemason ideals and the enlightenment in D'Alembert's Dream, exploring masonry as a way of spreading enlightenment beliefs. Historian Margaret Jacob stresses the importance of the Masons in indirectly inspiring enlightened political thought. On the negative side, Daniel Roche contests claims that Masonry promoted egalitarianism and he argues the lodges only attracted men of similar social backgrounds. The presence of noble women in the French \"lodges of adoption\" that formed in the 1780s was largely due to the close ties shared between these lodges and aristocratic society.\nThe major opponent of Freemasonry was the Catholic Church so in countries with a large Catholic element, such as France, Italy, Spain, and Mexico, much of the ferocity of the political battles involve the confrontation between what Davies calls the reactionary Church and enlightened Freemasonry. Even in France, Masons did not act as a group. American historians, while noting that Benjamin Franklin and George Washington were indeed active Masons, have downplayed the importance of Freemasonry in causing the American Revolution because the Masonic order was non-political and included both Patriots and their enemy the Loyalists.\nArt.\nAt the same time, the Classical art of Greece and Rome became interesting to people again, since archaeological teams discovered Pompeii and Herculaneum.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nReference and surveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpecialty studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30761", "revid": "50432073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30761", "title": "The Hunt for Red October", "text": "1984 thriller novel by Tom Clancy\nThe Hunt for Red October is the debut novel by American author Tom Clancy, first published on October 1, 1984, by the Naval Institute Press. It depicts Soviet submarine captain Marko Ramius as he seemingly goes rogue with his country's cutting-edge ballistic missile submarine \"Red October\", and marks the first appearance of Clancy's most popular fictional character, Jack Ryan, an analyst working for the Central Intelligence Agency, as he must prove his theory that Ramius plans to defect to the United States.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\" launched Clancy's career as a novelist, especially after US President Ronald Reagan remarked that he had enjoyed reading the book. A film adaptation was released on March 2, 1990, and several computer and video games based on the book have been developed. The book was instrumental in bringing the book genre of techno-thriller into the mainstream.\nPlot.\nDuring the Cold War, Soviet Navy submarine commander Marko Ramius plans to defect to the United States with the ballistic missile submarine \"Red October\". It is equipped with a \"caterpillar drive\", a cutting-edge silent propulsion system that makes audio detection by passive sonar difficult and enables the submarine to sneak its way into American territorial waters and launch nuclear missiles with little to no warning. As the sub leaves the shipyard at Polyarny, Ramius kills his political officer to ensure that he will not interfere. Ramius was ordered to conduct military exercises with Soviet attack submarine \"V. K. Konovalov\", commanded by his former student Viktor Tupolev, to test the effectiveness of the caterpillar drive. Instead, he plots a course for the North American coast, falsely informing the crew that they will be proceeding undetected to Cuba. Before sailing, Ramius sends a letter to Admiral Yuri Padorin stating his intention to defect to the United States and to give them the \"Red October\"; the Soviet Northern Fleet then sails out to sink \"Red October\" under the pretext of a search and rescue mission.\n\"Red October\" passes near , a under the command of Bart Mancuso, which is patrolling the entrance of a route used by Soviet submarines in the Reykjanes Ridge off Iceland. \"Dallas\"'s sonar operator hears the sound of the stealth drive, and, though he does not initially identify it as a submarine, works to realize that it is the sound of a new propulsion system. After losing the \"Red October\" in the underwater route, the \"Dallas\" heads to the end of the route in hopes of reacquiring the ship when it emerges.\nAt the same time, Jack Ryan, an analyst with the Central Intelligence Agency working in London as the CIA's liaison with the British Secret Intelligence Service, returns to the United States to deliver secret photos of the new submarine. After conferring with submarine expert Skip Tyler, Ryan determines that the submarine's new construction variations house a stealth drive. Soon thereafter, the CIA's leadership receives word from a highly-placed Soviet agent CARDINAL informing them of Ramius' letter to Padorin and his intention to hand the \"Red October\" over to the US. Due to a limited number of aircraft carriers in the northern Atlantic Ocean at that time, the United States enlists the aid of the Royal Navy in the search for the \"Red October\", and Ryan is sent to the carrier to coordinate their efforts.\nWith the Soviet fleet stretched out along the American coast searching for the \"Red October\", tensions between the US/UK and USSR fleets begin to mount. An Alfa-class submarine is lost when it sinks following a reactor meltdown while racing to the American coast, while two US F-14 Tomcats' attempt to scare a squadron of Soviet fighter jets with sonic booms results in the Soviets accidentally firing missiles at the American aircraft. On board the \"Red October\", tension also begins to mount with the crew after evidence is found of a saboteur damaging the reactor and vital safety equipment. Ramius and his senior officers blame the sabotage on American spies who must have boarded the ship while it was in port. In Washington, D.C., the Soviet ambassador makes repeated trips to the White House to consult with the president of the United States about his fleet's search for their \"missing\" submarine, while one of the deputy directors of the CIA meets with a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who is inquiring about the Soviet presence. The deputy director falsely tells the senator the CIA has received classified information from Israel that states covert Polish intelligence agents operating at the Polyarny shipyards replaced the original orders onboard the ship, and faked the letter to Padorin to make it appear that Ramius was defecting. The senator repeats the story to his aide, an undercover Soviet mole who is arrested shortly after relaying the information to his handler.\nMeanwhile, Skip Tyler works with the Pentagon to develop a plan that would allow the United States to keep the \"Red October\" without the Soviet Union knowing they have it. The \"Dallas\" and \"Invincible\" locate the \"Red October\", and, after making contact, the three ships head to a designated spot to rendezvous with the decommissioned US ballistic missile submarine . A helicopter carrying Russian-speaking US military officers is dispatched to meet with Ramius and carry out the covert plan, but it crashes into the ocean, killing all onboard. As a result, Ryan, along with Owen Williams, a Russian-speaking British Lieutenant, is ordered by the president to board the \"Red October\" and execute the plan instead.\nAfter Ramius fakes a reactor accident, Ryan and the US Navy evacuate \"Red October\"'s crew using a DSRV rescue submarine. Ramius and his officers stay behind, claiming that they plan to scuttle the submarine to prevent it from getting into the hands of the Americans. With the crew removed, Ramius and his officers formally request to defect, which Igor Loginov, an undercover GRU officer disguised as a cook who has secretly remained onboard, overhears. As the \"Red October\" covertly moves out of the area and the \"Ethan Allen\" is blown up in its place, Loginov fatally shoots Soviet Captain Lieutenant Kamarov and critically wounds Williams before attempting to rig one of the ship's missiles to explode. Ryan and Ramius attempt to stop him, resulting in a firefight, with Ramius being wounded and Ryan killing Loginov. Not knowing what booby traps Loginov has set on the missile, the area is cleared, and the missile is ejected into the sea.\nWith the ship secure, Mancuso and a handful of \"Dallas\" crewmembers are brought onboard the \"Red October\", while a doctor is flown in to treat Williams and Ramius. Mancuso has a depth gauge from the control panel removed from the ship, and the \"Red October\" is escorted by \"Dallas\" and another submarine to hide in Pamlico Sound off North Carolina. The Soviet ambassador is informed by the White House that the \"Red October\" had been found and most of the crew removed before it was unfortunately destroyed in a reactor meltdown. A Soviet agent is dispatched to board a US salvage craft to inspect the wreckage, where it \"finds\" the removed depth gauge as well as the ejected missile. Convinced the \"Red October\" has been destroyed, the majority of the Soviet fleet is ordered home, with several Alfa-class submarines ordered to secretly remain behind to gather intelligence by spying on the American fleet.\nIn the Soviet Union, the Politburo is informed that their American spy had learned the letter sent to Padorin was fake and the orders onboard the ship were changed without his knowledge, and the KGB is tasked to investigate whether Marko Ramius was a true defector or a loyal patriot. Several agents are sent on the flight to retrieve the rescued crew members, all of whom report when questioned that Ramius was a loyal Soviet captain who was outraged by the sabotage done to their ship and adamant he would not let the Americans have the \"Red October\".\nAfter waiting two days for the Soviet fleet to clear the area, \"Dallas\" and the other American submarine begin escorting the \"Red October\" to Norfolk, Virginia. The \"Konovalov\", having been ordered to remain behind, happens upon them and begins to monitor them, initially believing it to be an American . Based on its acoustic signature, Tupolev realizes that it is the \"Red October,\" and orders to attack it, damaging it with a successful torpedo strike. The rules of engagement prevent the American submarines from firing on the Soviets unless they are fired upon first, leaving the \"Red October\" to fight off the enemy submarine on its own despite having no torpedomen onboard. After blocking another torpedo attack by deliberately running into the torpedo before it had time to arm, the \"Red October\" sinks the \"Konovalov\" by ramming into it, killing Tupolev and his crew.\nThe Americans escort \"Red October\" into dry dock in Norfolk, Virginia, where it is analyzed by US military intelligence. Ramius and his crew are taken to a CIA safehouse and are given new identities, beginning their settlement into American lives. Ryan is commended and debriefed by his superiors and returns to his posting in London.\nThemes.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\" introduced Tom Clancy's writing style, which included technical details about weaponry, submarines, espionage, and the military. The accurate nature of Clancy's writing was well known among the American military such that Clancy remarked in a 1986 interview: \"When I met Navy Secretary John Lehman last year, the first thing he asked me about the book was, 'Who the hell cleared it?'\"\nThe novel shares elements with James Clavell's works, particularly \"Sh\u014dgun\" (1975) and \"Noble House\" (1981), where political power is used instead of physical confrontation with an enemy. Clancy portrays the Soviets, especially Captain Ramius, sympathetically, and most characters are understandable in their actions and fears, while at the same time comparing and contrasting their philosophies and values against their American counterparts, who in turn are shown as more competent in their profession, this being explained by the US Navy being better equipped and trained than the Soviet sailors who are mostly conscripts.\nIn the novel, the US and its service personnel are unmistakably the \"good guys\". The central theme of the US being flawed, but ultimately a force for good and hope in the world is something the author would explore more in his later novels. However, unlike \"The Hunt For Red October\", these later novels often include negative American characters, motivated by power or greed.\nIn addition, \"The Hunt for Red October\" is considered a coming-of-age story regarding the main character Jack Ryan. However, instead of running away from responsibilities, a theme common in contemporary American literature, Clancy subverts the convention by having Ryan rushing toward the burdens of the adult world. Moreover, the book introduced Jack Ryan as a new archetype of the American hero \u2013 an everyman who uses his prior knowledge instead of physical power in solving a particular crisis.\nDevelopment.\nFrom a young age, Clancy was an avid reader of naval history and sea exploration but was later rejected from serving in the military because of his poor eyesight. Since graduating from high school and eventually earning an English major, he had always wanted to write a novel. He eventually worked as an insurance agent for a small business owned by his then-wife's family.\nIn his spare time, Clancy started working on \"The Hunt for Red October\" on November 11, 1982, and finished it four months later on February 23, 1983. Contrary to popular belief that Clancy had access to top-secret intelligence in researching for the novel, he consulted technical manuals, discussions with former submariners and books like Norman Polmar's \"Guide to the Soviet Navy\" and \"Combat Fleets of the World\" in order to maintain accuracy in describing Soviet submarines.\nHe then submitted the first draft of the novel to the Naval Institute Press, where he previously wrote an article on the MX missile for their magazine \"Proceedings of the U.S. Naval Institute\". Three weeks later, the publication company returned his manuscript, along with a request to cut about a hundred pages' worth of numerous technical details. After fixing his work, Clancy then sold \"The Hunt for Red October\" to the Naval Institute Press for a modest sum of $5,000.\nHaving recently decided to publish fiction, the publication company made Clancy's work their first published novel. Editor Deborah Grosvenor later recalled convincing the publishers: \"I think we have a potential best-seller here, and if we don't grab this thing, somebody else would.\" She believed Clancy had an \"innate storytelling ability, and his characters had this very witty dialogue\".\nReception.\nCritical.\nThe book received critical acclaim, especially from the American government. U.S. President Ronald Reagan had pronounced the book, which was given to him as a Christmas gift, as \"the perfect yarn\" and \"unputdownable\"; his endorsement eventually boosted the novel's sales and solidified Clancy's reputation as a bestselling author. Regarding the reception, Clancy remarked: \"I was thunderstruck, dumbfounded, bowled over, amazed. But I wasn't surprised.\" Many members of the White House were fans of the book.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\" was also popular among the military. On a 1985 visit to , Clancy discovered 26 copies of the novel among the crew. Reid Beddow of \"The Washington Post\" praised it as \"the most satisfactory novel of a sea chase since C.S. Forester perfected the form\" and \"a tremendously enjoyable and gripping novel of naval derring-do.\"\nCommercial.\nDue to an extensive marketing campaign by the Naval Institute Press for their first published work of fiction, which was initially aimed at the military, the book sold 45,000 copies by March 1985. Clancy said in a 1991 interview: \"I thought we'd sell maybe five thousand or ten thousand hardcovers and that would be the end of it. I never really thought about making money.\"\nAfter Reagan's endorsement, \"The Hunt for Red October\" topped the national bestseller lists, particularly \"The New York Times\". It eventually sold more than 365,000 copies in hardcover. After securing the paperback rights to Berkley Books for $49,500, the novel sold another 4.3 million copies.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nThe novel was adapted as a feature film, which was released in the United States on March 2, 1990. Captain Marko Ramius was played by Sean Connery, while Alec Baldwin played Jack Ryan. It serves as the first entry in the Jack Ryan film series, which would later follow a chronological order differing from the novels. The movie is a nearly faithful depiction of the novel even though there are many deviations, including \"Red October\" traveling up the Penobscot River in Maine to dry dock, the omission of the Royal Navy task force including Ryan's time aboard , and the \"caterpillar drive\" being described as a magnetohydrodynamic drive system, essentially, \"a jet engine for the water\", rather than a drive powered by a series of mechanical impellers inside flow tunnels. Although in both the novel and movie, the caterpillar drive was supposed to be undetectably silent.\nThe film received mainly positive reviews from critics, holding an 88% rating from Rotten Tomatoes based on 74 reviews. It was the sixth top-grossing film of the year, generating $122 million in North America and more than $200 million worldwide in box office. In a 1991 interview, Clancy remarked of the film's success: \"It was reasonably true to the spirit of the book, although the movie had a lot of technical errors in it and some changes in the story which I do not think is necessary. But you have to remember that the printed word and visual representation on the screen are two different art forms and they have very different roles.\"\nGames.\nThe novel also became the basis for three computer, video, and console games. One version, a combination of a submarine simulator and strategy game, was released in 1987 and received positive reviews. Another game based on the movie was released in 1990. The console game was released in 1991 for the Nintendo Entertainment System and later for the Game Boy and Super Nintendo Entertainment System. In addition, a board game \"The Hunt for Red October\", published in 1988 by TSR, Inc. became one of the all time bestselling wargames.\nIn late 2015, River Horse announced it had acquired the rights and intended to crowdfund another game based on the intellectual property.\nLegacy.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\" popularized the book genre of techno-thriller into the mainstream. \"Tom Clancy defined an era, not just of thrillers but of pop culture in general,\" said Jon Land, an author and marketing chair for the International Thriller Writers. \"No one encapsulated the mindset and mentality of the Reagan era more, as the Cold War was heating up for the last time and we were entering a new age of modern warfare. Clancy's books tapped into our fears and helped define our psyches, even as he reinvigorated the thriller genre by bringing millions of new readers into the fold.\"\nOn April 20, 2018, \"The Hunt for Red October\" was included in the list of 100 most-loved books in the U.S., compiled by PBS as part of their new series and multi-platform initiative \"The Great American Read\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30762", "revid": "50525755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30762", "title": "The Cardinal of the Kremlin", "text": "1988 thriller novel by Tom Clancy\nThe Cardinal of the Kremlin is a spy thriller novel, written by Tom Clancy and released on May 20, 1988. A direct sequel to \"The Hunt for Red October\" (1984), it features CIA analyst Jack Ryan as he must extract CARDINAL, the agency's highest placed asset in the Soviet military, who is being pursued by the KGB. The novel also features the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a conceptual missile-defense system developed by the United States during that time, and its Russian counterpart. The book debuted at \nnumber one on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller List.\nPlot.\nFor thirty years, Colonel Mikhail Semyonovich \"Misha\" Filitov, a personal aide to the Soviet Minister of Defense and three-time Hero of the Soviet Union, has been passing military, technical, and political intelligence to the CIA as their highest agent-in-place, codenamed CARDINAL. His latest mission concerns a Soviet anti-ballistic missile research project codenamed \"Bright Star\", based at a secret defense installation located 50\u00a0km southeast of Dushanbe, Tajikistan.\nColonel Filitov sends Colonel Gennady Bondarenko of Signal Troops to Dushanbe to evaluate the facility and unwittingly procure information that Misha will then send to his CIA contacts. Unfortunately, a minor slip-up in passing Filitov's intelligence at the Moscow subway alerts the KGB, which then aggressively pursues the couriers involved, including the daughter of a Politburo official recruited by the CIA and MI6. They become suspicious of Filitov and place him under surveillance. With the courier chain having been quickly shut down by the CIA station chief in Moscow, Edward Foley, Filitov's more important intelligence on Bright Star is delayed; however, he reveals the presence of a KGB agent infiltrating Bright Star's American counterpart Tea Clipper, which alarms the CIA.\nThe CIA then tasks Foley with extracting Filitov out of the country. However, when his wife Mary Pat, also a CIA officer, attempts to make a brush pass to Filitov at his apartment building, the two are arrested by the KGB. The Foleys are then declared \"persona non grata\", while Filitov is imprisoned and psychologically tortured until he eventually confesses to his crimes. In an effort to salvage the mission, CIA analyst Jack Ryan, who had now learned of CARDINAL's identity, concocts a plan to secure the return of Filitov and at the same time force the defection of KGB chairman Nikolai Gerasimov, who has been vying for the position of General Secretary since Filitov's arrest; Ryan tries to prevent his ascension to power due to his anti-American ideology.\nRyan, who is part of the American arms negotiation team, travels to Moscow for the arms reduction talks. There he meets Gerasimov, and blackmails him into releasing Filitov and defecting; if his demands are not met, he will reveal what happened to the Soviet ballistic missile submarine \"Red October\", which would disgrace the KGB chairman, who had used the incident to consolidate the KGB's control over the military. As counter-leverage should he refuse to defect, Gerasimov arranges for the kidnapping of Tea Clipper's top Strategic Defense Initiative scientist, Major Alan Gregory.\nGregory's kidnapping was undertaken by KGB agent Tania Bisyarina, who has been handling a mole inside Tea Clipper. The mole, a lesbian named Dr. Beatrice Taussig who is in love with Gregory's fianc\u00e9e, eventually gives up Bisyarina to the FBI out of guilt, and the Hostage Rescue Team later saves Gregory from his Soviet captors in a shabby desert safe house in New Mexico. Ryan later informs Gerasimov, who finally caves into his demands. The KGB chairman's wife and daughter are later extracted by CIA operative John Clark from Tallinn, Estonia into the submarine , which escapes into international waters with the help of former \"Red October\" commander Marko Ramius, who is now a submarine consultant.\nMeanwhile, the secret ABM facility in Dushanbe finds itself under attack by the Afghan mudjahedin, whose leader is known as the Archer due to his expertise in using surface-to-air missiles to bring down Soviet ground support aircraft. Colonel Bondarenko, who was there for a second round of evaluations, manages to repel the attackers, protecting Bright Star's scientific and engineering personnel and eventually killing the Archer.\nOn the last day of the arms negotiation talks, Gerasimov releases Filitov so that they can both proceed to Sheremetyevo Airport, joining Ryan and the American negotiation team in returning to the United States. They successfully board the American delegation's aircraft, but Ryan is left behind and captured by KGB officer Sergei Golovko, his counterpart in the arms talks and had become aware of their planned departure. A Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25 attempts to force the American delegation's plane to return to Moscow, but the delegation plane successfully escapes. Ryan is led to the private dacha of General Secretary Andrei Narmonov, where they discuss the CIA's interest in his political position and interference in the Soviet Union's internal security before Narmonov releases Ryan.\nFilitov, who was extensively debriefed by the CIA, later dies due to heart disease. He was buried at Camp David, within twenty miles of the Antietam battlefield. His funeral was attended by Ryan and the Foleys, among others, as well as a Soviet military attach\u00e9 who questions why Filitov would be buried close to American soldiers. Ryan, always working to keep the peace, explains to him, \"One way or another, we all fight for what we believe in. Doesn't that give us some common ground?\"\nThemes.\n\"The Cardinal of the Kremlin\" is considered to be Clancy's primary example of a traditional espionage novel until \"Red Rabbit\" (2002). It included \u201ca near fetishist attention to the details of the tradecraft of spying and an exploration of the individuals who take up this dangerous vocation\u201d. In addition, the book was written during the time of Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev\u2019s rule, which was considered as a crucial point in world history where Communism in the Soviet Union began its decline. Clancy affirms his opinion that with reformers in the Soviet government like Gorbachev, the country will be more likely to establish a shift in its relations between the United States, which was later made possible by the dissolution of the country three years later.\nThe book was also written at the time of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, as well as the Strategic Defense Initiative, a proposed missile defense system intended to protect the United States from attack by ballistic strategic nuclear weapons. They were both featured in the novel. It also continues elements set forth in previous novel \"The Hunt for Red October\" (1984), including Filitov and Ramius\u2019s similarities in motivation for committing treason against their own country.\nReception.\nThe book became the bestselling novel of the year, selling 1,277,000 hardcover copies. It received positive reviews. Kirkus Reviews praised the book as \"less reliant on technoblather than previous Clancy works, and awash in subplots, most of them entertaining. Plenty of action; no mushy stuff.\" In Robert Lekachman's review of the book for \"The New York Times\", he hailed it as \"by far the best of the Jack Ryan series\", adding: \"While his prose is no better than workmanlike (the genre does not, after all, attract many budding Flauberts), the unmasking of the title's secret agent, the Cardinal, is as sophisticated an exercise in the craft of espionage as I have yet to encounter.\" Bob Woodward, reviewing for \"The Washington Post\", regarded the book as \"a great spy novel\" which \"rivals Clancy's \"The Hunt for Red October\", surpasses his \"Red Storm Rising\" and runs circles around his \"Patriot Games\"\".\nAdaptations.\nVideo game.\n\"The Cardinal of the Kremlin\" is also the title of a 1991 video game based on the novel, which is a global management simulation developed for Amiga.\nFilm.\nAfter the release of \"Clear and Present Danger\" (1994), a film based on the book was planned. Writers such as John Milius, and Lee and Janet Scott Batchler were considered to write the screenplay adaptation, but it was deemed too difficult to adapt, resulting in producer Mace Neufeld purchasing the rights to \"The Sum of All Fears\". Harrison Ford was set to reprise his role as Jack Ryan, co-starring with William Shatner.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
