{"id": "32212", "revid": "44313162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32212", "title": "United States Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of the United States\nThe United States Armed Forces are the military forces of the United States. U.S. federal law names six armed forces: the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard. Since 1949, all of the armed forces, except the Coast Guard, have been permanently part of the United States Department of Defense, with the Space Force existing as a branch of the Air Force until 2019. They form six of the eight uniformed services of the United States.\nFrom their inception during the American Revolutionary War, the Army and the Navy, and later the other services, have played a decisive role in the country's history. They helped forge a sense of national unity and identity through victories in the early-19th-century First and Second Barbary Wars. They played a critical role in the territorial evolution of the U.S., including the American Civil War. The National Security Act of 1947 created the Department of Defense or DoD, (after a short period being called the National Military Establishment) headed by the secretary of defense, superior to the service secretaries. It also created both the U.S. Air Force and National Security Council; in 1949, an amendment to the act merged the cabinet-level departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force into the DoD.\nEach of the different military services is assigned a role and domain. The Army conducts land operations. The Navy and Marine Corps conduct maritime operations, the Marine Corps specializing in amphibious and maritime littoral operations primarily for supporting the Navy. The Air Force conducts air operations. The Space Force conducts space operations. The Coast Guard is unique in that it specializes in maritime operations and is also a law enforcement agency. The president of the U.S. is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces and forms military policy with the DoD and Department of Homeland Security (DHS), both federal executive departments, acting as the principal organs by which military policy is carried out. The U.S. has used military conscription, but not since 1973. The Selective Service System retains the power to conscript males, requiring the registration of all male citizens and residents of the U.S. between the ages of 18 and 25.\nThe personnel size of the six armed forces together ranks them among the world's largest state armed forces. The U.S. Armed Forces are widely considered the world's most powerful and most advanced military, especially since the end of the Cold War. The military expenditure of the U.S. was US$916\u00a0billion in 2023, the highest in the world, accounting for 37% of the world's defense expenditures. The U.S. Armed Forces has significant capabilities in both defense and power projection due to its large budget, resulting in advanced and powerful technologies which enable widespread deployment of the force globally, including around 800 military bases around the world. The U.S. Air Force is the world's largest air force, followed by the U.S. Army Aviation Branch. The U.S. Naval Air Forces is the fourth-largest air arm in the world and is the largest naval aviation service, while U.S. Marine Corps Aviation is the world's seventh-largest air arm. The U.S. Navy is the world's largest navy by tonnage. The U.S. Coast Guard is the world's 12th-largest maritime force.\nHistory.\nThe history of the U.S. Armed Forces dates back to 14 June 1775, with the creation of the Continental Army, even before the Declaration of Independence marked the establishment of the United States. The Continental Navy, established on 13 October 1775, and Continental Marines, established on 10 November 1775, were created in close succession by the Second Continental Congress in order to defend the new nation against the British Empire in the American Revolutionary War.\nThese forces demobilized in 1784 after the Treaty of Paris ended the Revolutionary War. The Congress of the Confederation created the current United States Army on 3 June 1784. The United States Congress created the current United States Navy on 27 March 1794 and the current United States Marine Corps on 11 July 1798. All three services trace their origins to their respective Continental predecessors.\nThe 1787 adoption of the Constitution gave Congress the power to \"raise and support armies,\" to \"provide and maintain a navy\", and to \"make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces\", as well as the power to declare war. The President of the United States is the United States Armed Forces' commander-in-chief.\nThe United States Coast Guard traces its origin to the formation of the Revenue Cutter Service on 4 August 1790, which merged with the United States Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915 to establish the Coast Guard.\nThe United States Air Force was established as an independent service on 18 September 1947; it traces its origin to the formation of the Aeronautical Division, U.S. Signal Corps, which was formed 1 August 1907 and was part of the Army Air Forces before being recognized as an independent service in the National Security Act of 1947.\nThe United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps was formerly considered to be a branch of the United States Armed Forces from 29 July 1945 until 3 July 1952, and is now one of the eight uniformed services of the United States. Should it be called into active duty again, it would constitute a seventh branch of the Armed Forces.\nThe United States Space Force was established as an independent service on 20 December 2019. It is the sixth branch of the U.S. military and the first new branch in 72 years. The origin of the Space Force can be traced back to the Air Force Space Command, which was formed 1 September 1982 and was a major command of the United States Air Force.\nThe U.S. Congressional Research Office annually publishes a \"List of Notable Deployments of U.S. Military Forces Overseas\" since 1798.\nStructure.\nPresidential command over the U.S. Armed Forces is established in Article II in the Constitution whereby the president is named as the \"Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States.\"\nThe United States Armed Forces are split between two cabinet departments, with the Department of Defense serving as the primary cabinet department for military affairs and the Department of Homeland Security responsible for administering the United States Coast Guard.\nThe military chain of command flows from the President of the United States to the secretary of defense (for services under the Defense Department) or secretary of homeland security (for services under the Department of Homeland Security), ensuring civilian control of the military.\nWithin the Department of Defense, the military departments (Department of the Army, Department of the Navy, and Department of the Air Force) are civilian led entities that oversee the coequal military service branches organized within each department. The military departments and services are responsible for organizing, training, and equipping forces, with the actual chain of command flowing through the unified combatant commands.\nJoint Chiefs of Staff.\nThe Joint Chiefs of Staff, although outside the operational chain of command, is the senior-most military body of the Department of Defense. It is led by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who is the military head of the armed forces and principal advisor to the president and secretary of defense on military matters. Their deputy is the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nOther members include the chief of staff of the Army, commandant of the Marine Corps, chief of naval operations, chief of staff of the Air Force, chief of space operations, and the chief of the National Guard Bureau.\nThe commandant of the Coast Guard is not an official member of the Joint Chiefs, but sometimes attends meetings as one of the military service chiefs.\nThe senior enlisted advisor to the chairman is the most senior enlisted member in the United States Armed Forces.\nThe president of the United States, the secretary of defense, the secretary of Homeland Security and chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are members of the United States National Security Council, which advises the president on national security, military, and foreign policy matters.\nThe national security advisor, the homeland security advisor, and the deputy national security advisor may also be members of the United States Armed Forces.\nThe National Security Council Deputies Committee also includes the deputy secretary of defense, deputy secretary of homeland security, and vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nMilitary leadership, including the secretary of defense, the secretary of Homeland Security, and chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also sit on the National Space Council.\nUnified combatant commands.\nUnified combatant commands are joint military commands consisting of forces from multiple military departments, with their chain of command flowing from the president, to the secretary of defense, to the commanders of the combatant commands.\nEach service organizes, trains, and equips forces that are then presented to the unified combatant commands through service component commands. Special Operations Command and Cyber Command also present theater special operations commands or joint force headquarters \u2013 cyber to other combatant commanders.\nArmy components are typically dual-hatted as the joint force land component, Navy components are typically dual-hatted as the joint force maritime component, and Air Force components are typically dual-hatted as the joint force air component, with the theater special operations command dual-hatted as the joint force special operations component, and Space Force component typically dual-hatted as the joint force space component.\nCombat support agencies.\nCombat support agencies are Department of Defense agencies with combat support missions that service operating forces planning or conducting military operations. This includes support during conflict or in the conduct of other military activities related to countering threats to U.S. national security. This mission is focused on providing support to echelons at the CCMD level and below and may not encompass the full scope of the CSA's mission.\nService branches.\nThe United States Armed Forces is composed of six coequal military service branches. Five of the branches, the United States Army, United States Marine Corps, United States Navy, United States Air Force, and United States Space Force, are part of the Department of Defense.\nThe United States Coast Guard is normally under the Department of Homeland Security, but may be transferred to the Department of Defense's Department of the Navy (which is the civilian entity that oversees the coequal U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Navy) at the direction of the President or Congress.\nWith the exception of the Coast Guard, the military services only organize, train, and equip forces. The unified combatant commands are responsible for operational control of non-service retained forces.\nEach of the different military services is assigned a role and domain. The U.S. Army conducts land operations, while the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps conduct maritime operations, with the Marine Corps specializing in amphibious and maritime littoral operations in support of the Navy. The U.S. Air Force conducts air operations, while the U.S. Space Force conducts space operations.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard is unique in that it is a military branch specializing in maritime operations and also a law enforcement agency.\nU.S. Army.\nThe United States Army (USA) is the United States Armed Forces' land force and is the largest and oldest service. Originally established in 1775 as the Continental Army, it consists of one million soldiers across the Regular Army, Army Reserve, and Army National Guard. The Army serves as the Armed Forces principal land service, responsible for conducting land warfare operations.\nThe U.S. Army is organized under the Department of the Army, which is a military department under the leadership of the secretary of the Army and under secretary of the Army. The U.S. Army itself is led by the chief of staff of the Army and vice chief of staff of the Army, both generals who are advised by the sergeant major of the Army.\nThe Army's primary responsibility is to conduct prompt and sustained land combat as part of the joint force. Army landpower focuses on destroying an enemy's armed forces, occupying its territory, and breaking the will of an adversary.\nThe five core competencies of the Army are:\nThe thirteen specified functions of the Army are:\nInfantry.\nThe Infantry Branch forms the core of the service's land combat power. U.S. Army infantry are generally equipped with the M4 carbine and M249 light machine gun, which will be replaced by the XM7 rifle and XM250.\nInfantry is a core part of the Army's Brigade Combat Teams. The most numerous variant, the Infantry Brigade Combat Team, comprises light infantry battalions who fight on foot. Infantry Brigade Combat Teams of the 82nd Airborne Division are air assault capable, with infantry soldiers being transported by U.S. Army Aviation UH-60 Black Hawk and CH-47 Chinook helicopters. Infantry Brigade Combat Teams of the 11th Airborne Division, 82nd Airborne Division, and 173rd Airborne Brigade are capable of airborne operations, in cooperation with the U.S. Air Force's transport aircraft. Finally, Infantry Brigade Combat Teams assigned to the 10th Mountain Division specialize in mountain warfare. Standard Infantry Brigade Combat Teams are assigned to the 25th Infantry Division, which offers additional training in jungle warfare.\nArmored Brigade Combat Teams comprise mechanized infantry battalions mounted in the M2 Bradley infantry fighting vehicle. Divisions with Armored Brigade Combat Teams include the 1st Infantry Division, 3rd Infantry Division, 4th Infantry Division, 1st Armored Division, and 1st Cavalry Division. Stryker Brigade Combat Teams are centered around Stryker infantry battalions operating out of the Stryker. Divisions with Stryker Brigade Combat Teams include the 2nd Infantry Division, 4th Infantry Division, 11th Airborne Division, 2nd Cavalry Regiment, and 3rd Cavalry Regiment.\nUnited States Army Rangers with the 75th Ranger Regiment are an elite special operations infantry force in the United States Army Special Operations Command, specializing in air assault and airborne infiltration methods. The three primary missions of the 75th Ranger Regiment are special operations raids, forcible entry operations, such as an airfield seizure to enable the Air Force to bring in more forces, and special reconnaissance. As a special operations force, Army Rangers are generally better equipped than standard infantry, utilizing the FN SCAR rifle.\nArmy Special Forces.\nArmy Special Forces, commonly known as Green Berets after their iconic headgear, are among the most elite soldiers in the Army. Special Forces conduct:\nArmy Special Forces are trained in military free-fall parachuting and combat diver skillsets. They are considered the most versatile special operations force in the entire world, operating as a multi-purpose force since 1952.\nArmor and Cavalry.\nThe Armor Branch traces its history back to the United States Cavalry and are responsible for tank and cavalry reconnaissance operations.\nThe U.S. Army fields the M1 Abrams main battle tank in Armored Battalions as part of Armored Brigade Combat Teams across the 1st Armored Division, 1st Cavalry Division, 1st Infantry Division, 3rd Infantry Division, and the 4th Infantry Division. Each Armored Brigade Combat Team also possesses a cavalry squadron equipped with M2 Bradleys for scouting and security. Stryker Brigade Combat Teams from the 2nd Infantry Division, 4th Infantry Division, 11th Airborne Division, 2nd Cavalry Regiment, and 3rd Cavalry Regiment have a cavalry squadron equipped with Strykers. Infantry Brigade Combat Teams from the 10th Mountain Division, 11th Airborne Division, 25th Infantry Division, 82nd Airborne Division, 101st Airborne Division, and 173rd Airborne Brigade have a cavalry squadron equipped with the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle.\nField Artillery.\nThe Field Artillery's mission is to destroy, suppress or neutralize the enemy by cannon, rocket or missile fire. Rocket systems include the M142 HIMARS and M270 multiple launch rocket system, which are corps-level assets found in field artillery brigades. Towed artillery includes the M119 howitzer in infantry brigade combat teams and the M777 howitzer found in both infantry and Stryker brigade combat teams. The M109 self-propelled howitzer is utilized in armored brigade combat teams.\nDuring the Cold War, Army field artillery was responsible for the service's ballistic missile programs, including the PGM-11 Redstone, which was the first large ballistic missile in the U.S. arsenal, the MGM-31 Pershing, and the Pershing II. In 2023, the Army is intending to field the Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon and has reestablished larger artillery formations like the 56th Artillery Command.\nAir Defense Artillery.\nThe Air Defense Artillery is responsible for defending geopolitical assets and providing maneuver forces with the freedom to move on the battlefield by deterring the enemy and destroying aerial threats, missile attacks, and surveillance platforms. Weapons employed by Air Defense Artillery include the FIM-92 Stinger man-portable air-defense system, AN/TWQ-1 Avenger for short range air defense, and the counter rocket, artillery, and mortar 20mm gun system. The Iron Dome provides air defense against rockets, artillery, mortars, missiles, and unmanned aerial vehicles. The MIM-104 Patriot is capable of defeating a wide range of threats including aircraft, helicopters, UAVs, ballistic and cruise missiles, and Weapons of Mass Destruction.\nThe Terminal High Altitude Area Defense protects strategic critical assets by conducting long-range endo-and-exo-atmospheric engagements of ballistic missiles using the world's largest air-transportable X-band radar. The Ground-Based Midcourse Defense is an anti-ballistic missile system operated by Army Space and Missile Defense Command to defend the United States homeland against an intercontinental ballistic missile attack. Major Air Defense Artillery units include the 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command and Army Space and Missile Defense Command's 100th Missile Defense Brigade.\nAir Defense Artillery has an extremely close relationship with the Air Force through its Air and Missile Defense Commands and the Space Force through Army Space and Missile Defense Command, given their shared missile defense and space roles. In 1962, Air Defense Artillery achieved the first intercept of a ballistic missile with a nuclear-tipped Nike Zeus and operated the Nike Zeus as an anti-satellite weapon after completing a successful intercept in 1963.\nArmy Aviation.\nArmy Aviation, distinct from the U.S. Air Force and its predecessors, began as part of the field artillery in 1942. Small spotter planes were used to spot for artillery and naval bombardment, as well as to perform observation. These few aircraft formed the core of Army Aviation once the U.S. Air Force gained independence. In 1983, the Army created the Aviation Branch, for the first time since the Air Force's independence consolidating aviation under a single organization.\nThe mission of Army Aviation is to find, fix and destroy any enemy through fire and maneuver and to provide combat support and combat service support in coordinated operations as an integral member of the combined arms team. Major aircraft include the AH-64 Apache, which serves as the Army's attack helicopter, the UH-60 Black Hawk, and the CH-47 Chinook for troop and cargo transport. Army Aviation also flies the MQ-1C Gray Eagle drone.\nA specialized unit within Army Aviation, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) serves as a special operations unit and operates modified variants of the MH-60 Black Hawk, MH-47 Chinook, and the MH-6 Little Bird.\nArmy commands.\nThe U.S. Army is organized into four major Army Commands, nine Army Service Component Commands which serve as the Army component and joint force land component commanders for the unified combatant commands, and thirteen direct reporting units.\nU.S. Marine Corps.\nThe United States Marine Corps (USMC) serves as the U.S. Armed Forces' naval land force, responsible for executing amphibious warfare and operating in the maritime littorals in support of the U.S. Navy. Originally established in 1775 as the Continental Marines, the Marine Corps consists of the Regular Marine Corps and the Marine Corps Reserve. The Marine Corps maintains a very close relationship with the U.S. Navy, its sister service in the Department of the Navy. Although the Marine Corps has previously operated as an independent land force alongside the Army, its primary purpose is to serve as part of a unified naval service alongside the Navy in the maritime domain.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps is organized under the Department of the Navy, which is a military department under the leadership of the secretary of the Navy and the under secretary of the Navy. The U.S. Marine Corps itself is led by the commandant of the Marine Corps and the assistant commandant of the Marine Corps, both generals who are advised by the sergeant major of the Marine Corps.\nThe Marine Corps statutory mission is outlined in \u00a0https:// and as originally introduced under the National Security Act of 1947, with its three primary areas of responsibility including:\nThe seven specified functions of the Marine Corps are:\nMarine Corps Security Force Regiment is responsible for supporting the Navy with Marine security operations, while the Marine Security Guard protects embassies and consulates of the United States Department of State.\nFleet Marine Force.\nThe combat power of the Marine Corps is centralized in the Fleet Marine Force (FMF), which itself is organized into Fleet Marine Force Atlantic, to support the U.S. Navy's Fleet Forces Command, and Fleet Marine Force Pacific, which supports the U.S. Navy's U.S. Pacific Fleet.\nThe basic Marine Corps unit for conducting operations is the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF), which combines Marine Corps and Navy land, air, sea, and cyberspace capabilities into a single command. There are three size variants of a Marine Air-Ground Task Force, but each consists of a command element, ground combat element, aviation combat element, and logistics combat element.\nA Marine ground combat element (GCE) is centered around Marine infantry, typically armed with a M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle. Unlike the Army, the Marine Corps does not train its own combat medics, relying on the Navy to provide hospital corpsmen. These infantry units are supported by Marine Corps combat engineers, who conduct engineer reconnaissance, obstacle system emplacement, and breaching operations; and Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance teams. \nWhile the Marine Corps no longer operates its own tanks, opting to request support from the Army if needed, it maintains Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalions which operate the LAV-25 amphibious armored reconnaissance vehicle. Assault Amphibian Battalions operate the Assault Amphibious Vehicle and Amphibious Combat Vehicle, which enable the ground combat element to conduct amphibious landing operations. Marine Corps artillery operates the M777 howitzer and the M142 HIMARS, both supporting the ground combat element and the Navy at sea by striking enemy ships.\nThe Marine aviation combat element (ACE) is the operational arm of Marine Corps Aviation, working to support the ground combat element. The F-35B Lightning II and AV-8B Harrier II are flown off Navy amphibious assault ships, while the F-35C Lightning II and F/A-18 Hornet are flown off Navy carriers by Marine Corps pilots. The Marine Corps also operates the KC-130J to serve as a tanker and tactical airlift platform. The UH-1Y Venom helicopter provides the Marine Corps with light transport and attack, while the AH-1Z Viper is a dedicated attack helicopter. Medium-lift squadrons fly the MV-22 Osprey, while heavy-lift squadrons use the CH-53K King Stallion. The Marine Corps has also begun flying unmanned aerial vehicles, such as the MQ-9 Reaper and MQ-8 Fire Scout. Notably, the aviation combat element also includes Low-Altitude Air Defense Battalions, which employ the FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missile.\nThe smallest MAGTF is the Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU), which is typically forward deployed on a Navy ship. Commanded by a colonel, a Marine Expeditionary Unit consist of 2,200 marines split across a battalion landing team (ground combat element), a composite helicopter squadron (aviation combat element), and a combat logistics element (logistics element). Marine Expeditionary Units are supplied for 15 days. Forward deployed Marine Expeditionary Units are often embarked on Navy amphibious assault ships as part of an amphibious ready group.\nThe mid-sized MAGTF is the Marine Expeditionary Brigade (MEB), which is organized for specific missions. Commanded by a brigadier general, Marine Expeditionary Brigades consist of 4,000 to 16,000 marines across a Regimental-sized ground combat element, a Marine Aircraft Group, and a Combat Logistics Regiment. Marine Expeditionary Brigades are supplied for 30 days and offer increased firepower and airpower over the Marine Expeditionary Unit.\nThe largest MAGTF is the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), which is the primary warfighting force for larger operations. A Marine Expeditionary Force is commanded by a lieutenant general and consists of 46,000 to 90,000 marines. Currently there are only three Marine Expeditionary Forces, each with its own Marine Division, Marine Aircraft Wing, Marine Logistics Group, and Marine Expeditionary Force Information Group. Marine Expeditionary Forces are supplied for 60 days. Certain elements are held at the Marine Expeditionary Force level, such as Force Reconnaissance. The MEF Information Group (MIG) also provides a number of functions such as the intelligence battalion; radio battalion which conducts signals intelligence, electronic warfare, and cyberspace operations; communications battalion; the MEF support battalion; and the Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company.\nWhile not a MAGTF, the Marine Corps has begun to reorganize some of its regiments into Marine Littoral Regiments (MRL), which are similar in size to a Marine Expeditionary Unit. A Marine Littoral Regiment is a self-deployable force, designed to be naval in nature and operate in the littoral region. A Marine Littoral Regiment consists of a littoral combat team, a littoral anti-air battalion, and a combat logistics battalion. Notably, the Marine Littoral Regiment has no aviation combat element, unlike a Marine Expeditionary Unit.\nAnother Marine Corps element that does not function as part of the MAGTF is the Marine Raider Regiment, functioning under United States Marine Forces Special Operations Command. Marine Raiders specialize in direct action, unconventional warfare, maritime interdiction, special reconnaissance, foreign internal defense, counterterrorism, and counterinsurgency missions.\nMarine Corps commands.\nUnder Headquarters Marine Corps, the Marine Corps is organized into the Fleet Marine Force, multiple commands, and Marine Corps service components to the unified combatant commands.\nU.S. Navy.\nThe United States Navy (USN) is the United States Armed Forces' maritime force. Originally established in 1775 as the Continental Navy, the U.S. Navy consists of the Regular Navy and the Navy Reserve. The Navy is the United States' principal maritime service, responsible for maritime warfare operations.\nThe U.S. Navy is organized under the Department of the Navy, which is a military department under the leadership of the secretary of the Navy and the under secretary of the Navy. The U.S. Navy itself is led by the chief of naval operations and the vice chief of naval operations, both admirals who are advised by the master chief petty officer of the Navy.\nThe five enduring functions of the Navy are:\nThe nine specified tasks of the Navy are:\nNaval Surface Forces.\nThe Naval Surface Forces (NAVSURFOR) is the backbone of the U.S. Navy's combat power, conducting surface warfare operations and operating its fleet of combat surface ships.\nThe Naval Surface Forces operates eleven nuclear-powered aircraft carriers (CVN), split between the \"Nimitz\"-class and the newer \"Gerald R. Ford\"-class. Aircraft carriers are the centerpiece of the U.S. Navy's combat power, forming the nucleus of its eleven carrier strike groups (CSG). Each aircraft carrier has an embarked carrier air wing from the Naval Air Forces.\nThe Naval Surface Forces also operate 116 surface combatants. These include the \"Ticonderoga\"-class guided-missile cruisers, \"Arleigh Burke-class\" guided-missile destroyers (DDG) and \"Zumwalt-class\" stealth guided-missile destroyers. Cruisers and destroyers often operate as part of larger formations, where they serve as escorts for anti-aircraft and anti-submarine operations. However, they also are able to conduct sea control and striker operations ashore with their tomahawk cruise missiles. The Navy also operates a complement of smaller \"Freedom\"-class and \"Independence\"-class littoral combat ships (LCS) that can be modularly reconfigured for specific mission sets. Having lacked a frigate since the \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class was decommissioned, the Navy is in the process of acquiring the new \"Constellation\"-class guided-missile frigates (FFG).\nFinally, the Naval Surface Forces operate 31 amphibious warfare ships to support the Fleet Marine Force and its embarked Marine Air-Ground Task Forces as part of an amphibious ready group or expeditionary strike group. This includes the \"America-class\" landing helicopter assault (LHA) ships which can carry U.S. Marine Corps F-35B Lightning II fighters and helicopters; and \"Wasp-class\" landing helicopter dock (LHD) ships, which can carry both F-35B fighters, helicopters, and landing craft. These are in addition to the San Antonio-class amphibious transport docks (LPD), and the Whidbey Island-class and \"Harpers Ferry\"-class dock landing ships.\nNaval Submarine Forces.\nThe Naval Submarine Forces (NAVSUBFOR) is often referred to as the \"silent service\", consisting of 68 commissioned submarines.\n\"Los Angeles\"-class, \"Seawolf\"-class, and \"Virginia\"-class nuclear-powered attack submarines are capable of performing sea control missions by destroying enemy submarines and surface ships, conducting surveillance and reconnaissance, performing irregular warfare, covert troop insertion, mine and anti-mine operations, and land attack missions with tomahawk cruise missiles.\n\"Ohio\"-class nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) have the sole mission of being launch platforms for the nuclear submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM). Each carries 20 UGM-133 Trident II SLBMs. The Navy is currently in the process of procuring the \"Columbia\"-class SSBNs to replace the \"Ohio\"-class. Some \"Ohio\"-class submarines have been converted to cruise-missile submarines (SSGN), capable of carrying 154 tomahawk cruise missiles and deploying 66 special operations forces personnel, such as Navy SEALs.\nNaval Air Forces.\nThe Naval Air Forces (NAVAIRFOR) is the Navy's naval aviation arm, centered around the carrier air wing. The core of the carrier air wing are the Naval Air Forces strike fighter squadrons (VFA), which fly the F-35C Lightning II stealth fighter and the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. A variant of the F/A-18, the EA-18G Growler is an electronic-warfare aircraft flown by electronic attack squadrons (VAQ) off of carriers or land bases. The E-2 Hawkeye provides carriers with airborne early warning and command-and-control, while the C-2A Greyhound keeps carriers supplied. The CMV-22B Osprey is currently in the process of replacing the C-2 Greyhound for carrier resupply.\nThe Naval Air Forces also operate the MH-60 Seahawk for anti-submarine warfare, anti-ship warfare, and search and rescue operations. The MH-53E is primarily used for anti-mine warfare but can also be used for assault support.\nAlthough primarily centered on carriers, the Naval Air Forces do operate a small number of land-based aircraft. These include the P-3C Orion and P-8A Poseidon, which conduct anti-submarine warfare operations and serve as maritime patrol aircraft, alongside the unmanned MQ-4C Triton. The E-6 Mercury is also flown by the Navy to communicate instructions to U.S. strategic forces.\nNavy commands.\nThe U.S. Navy is organized into eight navy component commands, which command operational forces and serve as joint force maritime component commands; fifteen shore commands, which support the fleets' operating forces; five systems commands, which oversee the technical requirements of the Navy; and nine type commands, which administratively manage units of a certain type.\nU.S. Air Force.\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) is the United States Armed Forces' air force. Originally established in 1947 when it gained independence from the U.S. Army, it traces its history back through the United States Army Air Forces, United States Army Air Corps, United States Army Air Service, the Division of Military Aeronautics, Aviation Section, U.S. Signal Corps, to the birth of Aeronautical Division, U.S. Signal Corps on 1 August 1907. The U.S. Air Force serves as the principal air service, responsible for aerial warfare operations. The U.S. Air Force is composed of the Regular Air Force, Air Force Reserve, and Air National Guard.\nThe U.S. Air Force is organized under the Department of the Air Force, which is a military department under the leadership of the secretary of the Air Force and under secretary of the Air Force. The U.S. Air Force itself is led by the chief of staff of the Air Force and vice chief of staff of the Air Force, both generals who are advised by the chief master sergeant of the Air Force.\nThe five core missions of the Air Force are:\nThe eight specified functions of the Air Force are:\nCombat Air Force.\nThe Combat Air Force (CAF) comprises the majority of the Air Force's combat power, consisting of its fighter, bomber, intercontinental ballistic missile, and special operations forces.\nThe Air Force's fighter forces are led by Air Combat Command's Fifteenth Air Force, with other fighter units under Pacific Air Forces and United States Air Forces in Europe. Air Force fighters are predominantly used to achieve air superiority and strike enemy ground and naval forces. The Air Force operates an expanding force of fifth-generation fighters. The F-22A Raptor stealth fighter is designed to replace the F-15C in air superiority operations carrying two AIM-9 Sidewinder and six AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles. It also has a significant air-to-ground mission, carrying two GBU-32 Joint Direct Attack Munition bombs, in addition to two AIM-9 and two AIM-120 missiles. Ultimately, the F-22 is intended to be replaced by the sixth-generation fighter, Next Generation Air Dominance program. The F-22 is complemented by the more numerous F-35A Lightning II multi-role stealth fighters, which are in the process of replacing the F-16C fighters and A-10 attack aircraft in air superiority and ground attack roles, to include the nuclear strike mission.\nThe Air Force still operates an extremely sizable force of fourth-generation fighters. The F-15C Eagle is a dedicated air superiority fighter, while the F-15E Strike Eagle has been modified to be a dual-role strike fighter, carrying both conventional and nuclear weapons. The F-15C Eagle and F-15E Strike Eagle are both being replaced by the F-15EX Eagle II, which is significantly more advanced. The F-16C Fighting Falcon is a multirole fighter that has served as the primary Air Force fighter for decades, including as a dual-capable tactical nuclear strike fighter. The A-10C Thunderbolt II attack aircraft has been the first Air Force fighter specifically designed for close air support missions, operating against enemy ground forces and light naval ships with its GAU-8 Avenger gatling cannon and array of air-to-ground munitions.\nThe Air Force's bomber forces are organized under Air Force Global Strike Command's Eighth Air Force, executing long-range strike operations. The B-2A Spirit stealth bomber is capable of conducting both conventional and nuclear strike operations flying through air defenses. The B-1B Lancer, in contrast, is a supersonic bomber that carries only conventional munitions and serves as the backbone of the bomber force. Both the B-2A Spirit and the B-1B Lancer are being replaced by the B-21 Raider stealth bomber, which can be equipped with both conventional and nuclear munitions. The B-52H Stratofortress is a long-range, heavy bomber that the Air Force has flown since the 1950s and operates a variety of conventional and nuclear munitions, including the AGM-86 air-launched cruise missile.\nThe Air Force's intercontinental ballistic missile forces are organized under Air Force Global Strike Command's Twentieth Air Force, serving as the land component of the nuclear triad. The LGM-30G Minuteman III serves as the only ballistic missile operated by the Air Force, with 400 stationed in hardened silos. The LGM-30G will be replaced by the LGM-35A Sentinel intercontinental ballistic missile.\nThe Air Force's special operations forces are organized under Air Force Special Operations Command, consisting of both special operations aviation and Air Force special tactics airmen on the ground. The AC-130J Ghostrider gunships have the primary mission of close air support and air interdiction, using cannons and precision guided munitions. The MC-130J Commando II, also a variant of the C-130 Hercules, fly exfiltration and resupply operations for special operations forces, alongside conducting air-to-air refueling for helicopters. The CV-22 Osprey is a tiltrotor aircraft used for the infiltration and exfiltration of special operations forces. While not under Air Force Special Operations Command, rescue operations are supported by the HC-130J Combat King II and HH-60W Jolly Green II combat rescue aircraft. The MQ-9 Reaper also serves as a remotely piloted intelligence and strike aircraft, serving under Air Force Special Operations Command and Air Combat Command.\nAir Force Special Tactics are the ground special warfare force of the U.S. Air Force, integrating air-ground operations. Special Tactics conduct four core missions. Global access teams assess and open airfields, ranging from international airports to dirt strips, in permissive or hostile locations to facilitate the landing and operation of air forces. Precision strike teams are trained to direct aircraft and other forces to conduct kinetic and non-kinetic strikes, as well as humanitarian aid drops. Special Tactics teams also conduct personnel recovery missions, possessing significant medical and rescue experience. Finally, Special Operations Surgical Teams conduct surgery and medical operations in battlefield operations in support of special operations.\nThe Air Force also operates a wide array of reconnaissance aircraft under Air Combat Command's Sixteenth Air Force, including the RQ-4 Global Hawk drone, U-2 Dragon Lady, and RC-135 Rivet Joint. Air Force operations are typically supported by command and control aircraft, such as the E-3 Sentry airborne warning and control system. The E-3 Sentry is in the process of being replaced by the E-7A Wedgetail.\nMobility Air Force.\nThe Mobility Air Force (MAF) is organized under Air Mobility Command and comprises the Air Force's airlift, air refueling, and aeromedical evacuation forces.\nThe airlift forces operate three different major aircraft. The C-5M Super Galaxy is the largest aircraft in the Air Force, serving as a strategic transport aircraft. The C-17A Globemaster III is the airlift force's most flexible aircraft, conducting both strategic and tactical airlift operations. It is also capable of conducting airborne operations for the Army and aerial resupply through airdropping cargo. Finally, the C-130J Super Hercules is a tactical airlifter, conducting both cargo airlift and supporting Army airborne operations. Other major airlift platforms include the VC-25, which serves as the personal plane of the president of the United States, better known as Air Force One.\nThe Air Force also operates three major aerial refueling tankers. The KC-46A Pegasus is its most modern tanker, replacing the aging KC-10A Extenders. The remaining tanker is the KC-135 Stratotanker, which has flown since the 1950s. Tankers are also capable of conducting limited airlift operations.\nAir Force commands.\nThe U.S. Air Force is organized into nine major commands, which conduct the majority of the service's organize, train, and equip functions. It commands forces attached to the combatant commands as joint force air component commands.\nU.S. Space Force.\nThe United States Space Force (USSF) is the United States Armed Forces' space force and is the newest military branch. Originally established in 2019, it traces its history through Air Force Space Command and the Western Development Division to 1954. The United States Space Force is the principal space service, responsible for space warfare operations. The U.S. Space Force is composed of the Regular Space Force, not yet having organized a reserve component outside of the Air Force.\nThe U.S. Space Force is organized under the Department of the Air Force, which is a military department under the leadership of the secretary of the Air Force and under secretary of the Air Force. The U.S. Space Force itself is led by the chief of space operations and vice chief of space operations, both generals who are advised by the chief master sergeant of the Space Force.\nThe five core competencies of the Space Force are:\nThe five specified functions of the Space Force are:\nOrbital warfare and space electromagnetic warfare.\nThe Space Force's combat power is centered around Space Delta 3, which conducts space electromagnetic warfare and Space Delta 9, which conducts orbital warfare.\nCombat power projection operations ensure freedom of action in space for the U.S. and its allies and denies an adversary freedom of action in space. These are divided into offensive and defensive space operations. Defensive operations preserve and protect U.S. and allied space capabilities, which are further sub-divided into active and passive actions. Offensive operations target a U.S. adversary's space and counterspace capabilities, achieving space superiority.\nOrbital warfare forces conduct protect-and-defend operations and provide U.S. national decision authorities with response options to deter and, when necessary, defeat orbital threats. The space electromagnetic warfare forces conduct offensive and defensive space control operations. Space Force cyber forces conduct defensive cyber operations to protect space assets.\nCyber operations and Satellite Control Network.\nAlthough the U.S. Space Force is not a cyber force, it does conduct extensive cyber operations under Space Delta 6. The primary focus of Space Force cyber operations is defending U.S. Space Force networks and ensuring the operations of its spacecraft, which are controlled remotely from ground stations. All space operations units have cyber squadrons assigned to defend them and incorporate offensive cyber operations.\nAdditionally, Space Delta 6 is responsible for managing the Satellite Control Network, a global network of antennas used to communicate with the service's spacecraft. The 22nd Space Operations Squadron is responsible for overall operations, with the 21st Space Operations Squadron and 23rd Space Operations Squadron managing the ground station sites at Vandenberg Space Force Base, New Boston Space Force Station, Kaena Point Space Force Station, Diego Garcia, Guam, Greenland, and the United Kingdom.\nSpace domain awareness.\nThe Space Force's Space Delta 2 operates the United States Space Surveillance Network, tracking 47,000 objects in space as of 2022. Space domain awareness encompasses the identification, characterization, and understanding of any factor associated with the space domain that could affect space operations.\nSpace Delta 2 sensors include the AN/FPS-85 phased array radar at Eglin Air Force Base and the Space Fence radar at Kwajalein Atoll operated by the 20th Space Surveillance Squadron; and a global network of three Ground-based Electro-Optical Deep Space Surveillance telescopes operated by the 15th Space Surveillance Squadron.\nThe 18th Space Defense Squadron, collocated with the Combined Space Operations Center, executes command and control of the Space Surveillance Network and manages the Space Catalog of all objects in Earth orbit. The 19th Space Defense Squadron focuses on objects further in cislunar space, beyond geosynchronous orbit, with a specific focus on supporting NASA's Artemis program and other human spaceflight operations.\nMissile warning.\nThe Space Force's Space Delta 4 uses orbital spacecraft and ground-based radars to conduct theater and strategic missile warnings for the United States and its international partners. This includes the network of Upgraded Early Warning Radars at Beale Air Force Base, Clear Space Force Station, Cape Cod Space Force Station, Pituffik Space Base, and RAF Fylingdales, alongside the AN/FPQ-16 PARCS radar at Cavalier Space Force Station. Currently, the Space Force is working with the Missile Defense Agency to acquire the Long Range Discrimination Radar at Clear Space Force Station in Alaska. These ground-based radars also contribute to the Space Surveillance Network.\nSpace-based missile warning systems include the Defense Support Program and Space-Based Infrared System (SIBRS) spacecraft, which use infrared sensors to conduct missile defense and missile warning. SIBRS also has a battlespace awareness and technical intelligence mission. The Defense Support Program spacecraft are also capable of detecting nuclear detonations, in addition to space and missile launches.\nGlobal Positioning System and military satellite communications.\nThe Space Force's Space Delta 8 is the operator of the Global Positioning System and the military's array of communications spacecraft.\nThe Global Positioning System is operated by the 2nd Space Operations Squadron, providing positioning, navigation, and timing information for civilian and military users across the entire world. The Space Force's GPS system has become an integral element of the global information infrastructure, being used in virtually all sectors of the economy, including agriculture, aviation, marine transportation, surveying and mapping, and transit navigation. Its timing signal is used to synchronize global communication systems, electrical power grids, and financial networks. The Global Positioning System also has a secondary mission of carrying nuclear detonation detection sensors.\nMilitary satellite communication systems include the Fleet Satellite Communications System, UHF Follow-On satellite, and Mobile User Objective System, operated by the 10th Space Operations Squadron and inherited from the U.S. Navy. The payloads on the Wideband Global SATCOM and Defense Satellite Communications System are operated by the 53rd Space Operations Squadron, a role inherited from the U.S. Army. Finally, spacecraft operations for the Wideband Global SATCOM and Defense Satellite Communications System are conducted by the 4th Space Operations Squadron, in addition to the Milstar and Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellites, which both additionally support command and control of strategic nuclear forces.\nSpace launch.\nThe Space Force's space launch enterprise is organized under Space Systems Command, with Space Launch Delta 30 managing the Western Range from Vandenberg Space Force Base and Space Launch Delta 45 managing the Eastern Range from Cape Canaveral Space Force Station.\nThe Space Force does not just manage military space launches, but also supports NASA and commercial space launches. Major space launch vehicles flown or scheduled to fly off of Space Force launch ranges include NASA's Space Launch System, SpaceX's Starship, Falcon Heavy, and Falcon 9, and United Launch Alliance's Vulcan, which will replace the Atlas V and Delta IV Heavy. Currently, vehicles for the National Security Space Launch program include the Vulcan, Atlas V, Falcon Heavy, and Falcon 9 rockets.\nAn experimental Air Force Research Laboratory vanguard program that the Space Force leads, Rocket Cargo, is exploring using rockets to supplement naval and air transport to rapidly deliver supplies to forces across the Earth. The SpaceX Starship rocket is one such system currently being explored.\nSpace Force commands.\nThe Space Force is organized into three field commands and multiple component field commands, which serve as joint force space component commands for the unified combatant commands.\nU.S. Coast Guard.\nThe United States Coast Guard (USCG) is the United States Armed Forces' maritime security, maritime search and rescue, and maritime law enforcement force. It was first established in 1790 as the United States Revenue-Marine and consists of the Regular Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Reserve.\nAlthough it has always been one of the six military branches, the Coast Guard is organized under the Department of Homeland Security under the leadership of the secretary of Homeland Security and the deputy secretary of Homeland Security. During times of war, the U.S. Coast Guard can be transferred to the Department of the Navy The Coast Guard itself is led by the commandant of the Coast Guard and vice commandant of the Coast Guard, both admirals advised by the master chief petty officer of the Coast Guard.\nThe Coast Guard has six major operational mission programs, through which it executes its 11 statutory missions:\nMaritime law enforcement operations focus on protecting the United States maritime borders and assuring its maritime sovereignty. The Coast Guard conducts operations to suppress violations of U.S. law at sea, including counter-illegal migration and transnational organized crime operations. Codified missions executed under the maritime law enforcement program include drug interdiction, migrant interdiction, living marine resources, and other law enforcement.\nMaritime response operations see the Coast Guard conducting search-and-rescue operations and rescuing mariners responding to maritime disasters. Codified missions include search and rescue and marine environmental protection (response activities).\nMaritime prevention operations prevent marine casualties and property losses, minimize security risks, and protect the marine environment. The Coast Guard does so by developing and enforcing federal regulations, conducting safety and security inspections, and analyzing port security risk assessments. Codified missions include ports, waterways, and coastal security, marine safety, and marine environmental protection (protection activities).\nMaritime transport system management ensures a safe, secure, and environmentally sound waterways system. Codified missions include maintaining aids to navigation and ice operations.\nMaritime security operations include activities to detect, deter, prevent, and disrupt terrorist attacks, and other criminal acts in the U.S. maritime domain. This includes the execution of anti-terrorism, response, and select recovery operations. This mission performs the operational element of the Coast Guard's Ports, Waterways, and Coastal Security mission and complements its Maritime Response and Prevention efforts. Codified missions include ports, waterways, and coastal security (response activities).\nCoast Guard Defense Operations deploy the Coast Guard globally under the Department of Defense's unified combatant commands, where it operates under the joint force maritime component commands. Codified missions include defense readiness.\nCoast Guard commands.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard is organized into two area commands that cover the entire globe.\nModernization and budget.\nBudget.\nThe United States manages the world's largest military budget, followed by the People's Republic of China, India, United Kingdom, and Russia.\nThe James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 established the topline defense budget as $857.9 billion, with the Department of Defense receiving $816.7 billion and the Department of Energy's national security programs receiving $30.3 billion, an 8% increase from Fiscal Year 2022.\nThe Department of the Air Force budget, unlike the Department of the Army or Department of the Navy has a sizable portion of \"pass-through.\" This is money not controlled or used by the Air Force, but is instead passed to other Department of Defense agencies and can be up to 17% of the department's budget. This pass-through allocation gives the impression that the Air Force is the highest funded military department. It is actually the least funded.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArmy modernization.\nThe Army's modernization efforts, led by Army Futures Command, are centralized into six priorities. Each priority is led by a Cross Functional Team.\nLong Range Precision Fires is the land service's top modernization priority, focusing on rebuilding its Field Artillery Branch in response to longer range Russian and Chinese artillery systems. The Extended Range Cannon Artillery program is developing a cannon artillery piece that can accurately fire at targets 70 kilometers away, an increase from the 30 kilometer distance of current cannon artillery. The Precision Strike Missile is a surface-to-surface guided missile intended to be fired from the current M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System and M142 HIMARS, replacing their current missiles and doubling the rate of fire. The Army is also working with the Missile Defense Agency, U.S. Navy, and U.S. Air Force to develop a common hypersonic glide body, which the Army will employ as part of the mobile ground launched Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon program. Finally, the Army is working to modify the U.S. Navy's RIM-174 Standard ERAM and UGM-109 Tomahawk land attack cruise missile for ground launch to provide the Army with mid-range artillery capability.\nThe Next Generation Combat Vehicle program is developing a family of fighting vehicles for the Armor Branch to increase firepower, speed, and survivability. The Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle is intended to replace the M2 Bradley, while the Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle will replace the M113 armored personnel carriers, which have been used since the Vietnam War. The three variants of the Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle are general purpose, mission command, and medical treatment. The Mobile Protected Firepower is designed to be a light tank for Infantry Brigade Combat Teams. Finally, the Robotic Combat Vehicles are intended to come in light, medium, and heavy variants that will serve as scouts and escorts for crewed combat vehicles.\nThe Future Vertical Lift program is intended to replace the current helicopter fleet flown by the Army Aviation Branch.\nThe Future Long-Range Assault Aircraft is intended to replace the UH-60 Black Hawk and the Marine Corps UH-1Y Venom, with the Army selecting the Bell V-280 Valor tiltrotor aircraft as the winner. The Future Attack Reconnaissance Aircraft is intended to replace the AH-64 Apache in the attack and reconnaissance roles.\nThe Army is working to modernize its communication networks for the Army Signal Corps, including developing a Unified Network consisting of an integrated tactical network, an integrated enterprise network, and unified network-enabling capabilities. Other sub-efforts include developing a common operating environment, ensuring the network is interoperable with the other services and allied countries, and increasing the mobility and reducing the signature of its command posts. Efforts also include modernizing Global Positioning System technology to provide assured positioning, navigation, and timing, and working with the United States Intelligence Community and commercial space companies to increase the Army's access to space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities.\nRecognizing that the United States is unlikely to have uncontested air superiority, the Army is undergoing a mass revitalization of its air and missile defense enterprise through the Air Defense Artillery Branch.\nThe first layer of defense is the Ballistic Low-Altitude Drone Engagement, which will be mounted on the Common Remotely Operated Weapon Station and is designed to engage small unmanned aerial vehicles. The second layer is the Multi-Mission High Energy Laser, which will intercept small drones and munitions. The third and fourth layers comprise the Maneuver Air Defense Technology and Next-Generation Fires Radar, which will be integrated into short range air defense systems. The fifth layer puts a High-Energy Laser Tactical Vehicle Demonstrator onto a Medium Tactical Vehicle, while the sixth layer encompasses the Low-Cost Extended-Range Air Defense to supplement the MIM-104 Patriot missiles.\nFinally, the Army is looking to improve the equipment of its soldiers in the Infantry Branch with the Next Generation Squad Weapon, the Integrated Visual Augmentation System, and the Synthetic Training Environment. In 2022, the Army selected the SIG Sauer's XM7 rifle and XM250 light machine gun to replace the M4 carbine and the M249 light machine gun through the Next Generation Squad Weapon program.\nMarine Corps modernization.\nThe Marine Corps modernization is being executed under the aegis of Force Design 2030, which is intended to return the service to its naval and amphibious roots serving as a \"stand-in\" force within contested areas of the maritime littorals. As part of this effort, the Marine Corps has begun establishing naval-focused Marine Littoral Regiments, consisting of a Littoral Combat Team, Littoral Anti-Air Battalion, and a Combat Logistics Battalion. The Littoral Combat Team is organized around an infantry battalion with an anti-ship missile battery, focused on conducting sea denial operations in support of the Navy.\nThe Marine Corps is in the process of acquiring the Amphibious Combat Vehicle, which is slated to replace the aging Assault Amphibious Vehicle. The Amphibious Combat Vehicle is intended to support the Marines during amphibious assaults and once they have reached shore. The Marine Corps has also adopted the Naval Strike Missile which is fielded from a modified Joint Light Tactical Vehicle as part of the Marines' artillery battalions. The concept is that small mobile units of Marines would move around different islands and shorelines with these weapons to fire on adversary ships.\nMarine Corps aviation is also in the process of acquiring the CH-53K King Stallion helicopter for heavy lift, replacing the current CH-53E Super Stallion in the role. The Marine Corps is also looking to replace its UH-1Y Venom helicopters through the Future Vertical Lift program and is in the process of acquiring a significant number of unmanned aerial vehicles, such as the MQ-9 Reaper.\nNavy modernization.\nLike the Marine Corps, the Navy is in the process of overhauling and modernizing its fleet with a renewed focus. While the Navy is continuing to purchase \"Arleigh Burke\"-class destroyers, it is embarking on the DDG(X) program of guided missile destroyers to replace them and the \"Ticonderoga\"-class cruisers. The DDG(X) will include directed energy weapons and potentially hypersonic weapons.\nThe \"Constellation\"-class frigates will be the first frigates in the U.S. Navy since the \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates were retired. The \"Constellation\"-class frigates are based on the Italian FREMM multipurpose frigates and will replace the littoral combat ships.\nThe Navy is starting development on the SSN(X) attack submarines, intended to replace the \"Virginia\"-class and \"Seawolf\"-class submarines. The \"Columbia\"-class submarines will begin replacing the \"Ohio\"-class ballistic missile submarines. The acquisition of the \"Columbia\"-class submarines is the first priority of the Navy.\nWith Naval Aviation, the service is continuing to procure additional \"Gerald R. Ford\"-class aircraft carriers and F-35C Lightning II stealth fighters. Ultimately, the F/A-XX program is intended to produce a sixth-generation fighter to replace the legacy F/A-18E/F Super Hornets as part of the Carrier Air Wing and is using the Future Vertical Lift program to replace its fleet of SH-60 Seahawk helicopters.\nThe service is also investing heavily in unmanned platforms, such as unmanned surface vehicles, using the Ghost Fleet Overlord to test the concept. It is also fielding unmanned aerial vehicles, such as the land-based MQ-4C Triton for maritime patrol and the carrier-based MQ-25A Stingray for aerial refueling, replacing the F/A-18F in the role.\nAir Force modernization.\nThe B-21 Raider stealth bomber is the first new Air Force bomber since the B-2A Spirit. The B-21 will replace the B-2 and the B-1B Lancer, flying alongside the B-52 Stratofortress. The development of the B-21 Raider was led by the Department of the Air Force Rapid Capabilities Office. The service is also developing the LGM-35 Sentinel intercontinental ballistic missile to replace the LGM-30G Minuteman IIIs.\nThe U.S. Air Force is also in the process of developing the Next Generation Air Dominance program, which will produce a sixth generation fighter to replace the F-22 Raptor. The service is also procuring the fourth generation F-15EX Eagle II to replace the aging F-15C Eagle and F-15E Strike Eagle. It is procuring the T-7A Red Hawk trainer jet to replace the 1950s-era T-38 Talon.\nWhile not an aircraft, the Air Force is investing in developing the AIM-260 Joint Advanced Tactical Missile to replace or supplement the AIM-120 AMRAAM for its fighter forces. It is also procuring the AGM-181 Long Range Stand Off Weapon to replace the AGM-86 ALCM as a nuclear air-launched cruise missile for the B-21 Raider and the B-52 Stratofortress. The air service is investing in hypersonic weapons, with the AGM-183 Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon, the Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept, and the Hypersonic Attack Cruise Missile in development.\nSpace Force modernization.\nThe U.S. Space Force is undergoing intensive modernization efforts. The Deep Space Advanced Radar Capability (DARC) is intended to track objects in geosynchronous orbit with three sites, one in the United States, one in the Indo-Pacific, and one in Europe.\nOracle, a spacecraft developed by the Air Force Research Laboratory for the Space Force, will demonstrate technologies that the space service needs for cislunar domain awareness \u2013 tracking objects outside of geosynchronous orbit and between Earth and the Moon. The spacecraft itself will launch to an area of gravitational stability between the Earth and the Moon to conduct operations, using a wide-field sensor and a more sensitive narrow-field sensor to discover and maintain custody of objects operating in this region. Oracle will directly support NASA's Artemis program as it returns to the Moon and track potentially hazardous near-Earth objects in support of planetary defense operations.\nAlso an Air Force Research Laboratory program for the Space Force, Arachne is the keystone experiment in the Space Solar Power Incremental Demonstrations and Research Project, which aims to prove and mature essential technologies for a prototype space-based solar power transmission system capable of powering a forward operating base. Arachne will specifically demonstrate and mature technologies related to more efficient energy generation, radio frequency forming, and radio frequency beaming. Current forward operation bases rely on significant logistics convoys to transport fuel for power \u2013 space-based solar power would move these supply lines to space, where they cannot be easily attacked. Space Force provided space-based solar power may transition to civilian use in the same vein as GPS. Other space-based power beaming demonstrations include the Space Power InfraRed Regulation and Analysis of Lifetime (SPIRRAL) and Space Power INcremental DepLoyable Experiment (SPINDLE) experiments.\nThe Navigation Technology Satellite-3 (NTS-3), building on the Space Force's Global Positioning System constellation, is an Air Force Research Laboratory spacecraft that will operate in geosynchronous orbit to test advanced techniques and technologies to detect and mitigate interference to positioning, navigation, and timing capabilities and increase system resiliency for military, civil, and commercial users. NTS-3 is a Vanguard program, described as aiming to deliver potentially game changing capabilities.\nThe Space Force's Rocket Cargo program is another Air Force Research Laboratory Vanguard program, focused on leasing space launch services to quickly transport military materiel to ports across the globe. If proven viable, the Space Force's Space Systems Command will be responsible for transitioning it to a program of record. United States Transportation Command would be the primary user of this capability, rapidly launching up to 100 tons of cargo anywhere in the world.\nPersonnel.\nThe U.S. Armed Forces is the world's third largest military by active personnel, after the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the Indian Armed Forces, consisting of 1,359,685 servicemembers in the regular armed forces with an additional 799,845 servicemembers in the reserves as of 28 February 2019.\nWhile the United States Armed Forces is an all-volunteer military, conscription through the Selective Service System can be enacted at the president's request and Congress' approval, with all males ages 18 through 25 living in the United States required to register with the Selective Service. Although the constitutionality of registering only males for Selective Service was challenged by federal district court in 2019, its legality was upheld by a federal appeals court in 2020.\nAs in most militaries, members of the U.S. Armed Forces hold a rank, either that of officer, warrant officer or enlisted, to determine seniority and eligibility for promotion. Those who have served are known as veterans.\nRank names may be different between services, but they are matched to each other by their corresponding paygrade. Officers who hold the same rank or paygrade are distinguished by their date of rank to determine seniority. Officers who serve in certain positions of office of importance set by law, outrank all other officers on active duty of the same rank and paygrade, regardless of their date of rank.\nPersonnel by service.\nTotal number of authorized personnel in FY23. \nRank structure.\nRank in the United States Armed Forces is split into three distinct categories: officers, warrant officers, and enlisted personnel.\nOfficers are the leadership of the military, holding commissions from the president of the United States and confirmed to their rank by the Senate.\nWarrant officers hold a warrant from the secretaries of the military departments, serving as specialists in certain military technologies and capabilities. Upon promotion to chief warrant officer 2, they gain a commission from the president of the United States.\nEnlisted personnel constitute the majority of the armed forces, serving as specialists and tactical-level leaders until they become senior non-commissioned officers or senior petty officers.\nMilitary ranks across the services can be compared by U.S. Uniformed Services pay grade or NATO rank code.\nOfficer corps.\nOfficers represent the top 18% of the armed forces, serving in leadership and command roles. Officers are divided into three categories:\nOfficers are typically commissioned as second lieutenants or ensigns with a bachelor's degree after several years of training and education or directly commissioned from civilian life into a specific specialty, such as a medical professional, lawyer, chaplain, or cyber specialist.\nOfficers are commissioned through the United States service academies, Reserve Officer Training Corps programs, and the Officer Candidate and Officer Training Schools. During a time of war, officers may be promoted to five-star ranks, with general of the Army, fleet admiral, and general of the Air Force the only five-star ranks currently authorized.\nWarrant officer corps.\nWarrant officers are specialists, accounting for only 8% of the officer corps. Warrant officers hold warrants from their service secretary and are specialists and experts in certain military technologies or capabilities. The lowest-ranking warrant officers serve under a warrant, but they receive commissions from the president upon promotion to chief warrant officer 2. They derive their authority from the same source as commissioned officers but remain specialists, in contrast to commissioned officers, who are generalists. There are no warrant officers in the Air Force or Space Force.\nWarrant officers are typically non-commissioned officers before being selected, with the exception of Army Aviation where any enlisted grade can apply for a warrant. Army warrant officers attend the Army Warrant Officer Candidate School.\nEnlisted corps.\nEnlisted personnel comprise 82% of the armed forces, serving as specialists and tactical leaders. Enlisted personnel are divided into three categories:\nThe rank of senior enlisted advisor is the highest rank in each service, serving as the primary advisor to its service secretary and service chief on enlisted matters.\nPrior to entering service, enlisted personnel must complete their service's basic training. In the Army, after completing Basic Combat Training, recruits then go to advanced individual training for their military occupational specialty. Upon completion of Marine Corps Recruit Training, Infantry Marines attend the School of Infantry. Non-infantry Marines complete Marine Combat Training before advancing to technical schools for their Military Occupational Specialty. In the Navy, after completing Recruit Training, sailors advance to their \"A\" schools to complete training for their rating. In the Air Force and Space Force, recruits complete combined Basic Military Training before going to technical training for their Air Force Specialty Codes. In the Coast Guard, after completing Recruit Training, sailors advance to their \"A\" schools to complete training for their rating.\nWomen in the armed forces.\nWomen such as Deborah Sampson disguised themselves as men to join the military during the Revolutionary War and War of 1812. Some historians estimate that as many as 400 women disguised themselves as men to enlist during the Civil War. The first woman doctor in the Army, Mary Edwards Walker, was commissioned in 1864. In 1901, the United States Army Nurse Corps was established as a quasi-military auxiliary, followed by the United States Navy Nurse Corps in 1908.\nWomen were not accepted in the armed forces outside of medical roles until World War I, when they were allowed to enlist to perform clerical roles. Women were accepted into the Naval Reserve Force in 1917, and the Marine Corps Reserves and Coast Guard in 1918. The War Department forbid Army and National Guard posts from employing any women except as nurses,13 but the need for telephone operators overseas during World War I became urgent and hundreds of \"Hello Girls\" were recruited. These members of the Army Signal Corps wore military uniforms and took the Army oath, but were classified as civilian employees until 1977 when their military service was officially recognized.\nAfter the Armistice of 11 November 1918 was signed, enlisted women were demobilized and the nurse corps returned to peacetime strength. The Naval Reserve Act of 1916, which authorized the Navy to enlist \"citizens\", was changed in 1925 to specify \"male citizens\".\nDuring World War II, all branches of the U.S. military enlisted women. The Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC) was established by the Army in 1942 with auxiliary status, and converted to the Women's Army Corps (WAC) in June, 1943. Also formed during this time were the Women's Airforce Service Pilots (WASPs), the Navy's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Services (WAVES), the Marine Corps Women's Reserve, and the Coast Guard Women's Reserve (SPARS).\nWomen experienced combat as nurses in the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, before the U.S. officially entered the war. In 1944, WACs arrived in the Pacific and in Normandy. During the war, 67 Army nurses and 16 Navy nurses were captured and spent three years as Japanese prisoners of war. There were 350,000 American women who served during World War II, and 432 were killed in the line of service. In total, they gained more than 1,500 medals, citations, and commendations.\nAfter World War II, demobilization led to the vast majority of serving women being returned to civilian life. By 1946, the Coast Guard had demobilized all of its women members, while the other branches retained some.105 Law 625, The Women's Armed Services Act of 1948, was signed by President Harry S. Truman, allowing women to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces in fully integrated units during peace time, albeit with limits that did not apply to men. The intent of Congress was that women should be noncombatants only, but because of the difficulty in defining restrictions for the Army in the law, it was left up to the service secretaries to comply with that intent, although the law did prohibit women from serving aboard ships and on aircraft that engaged in combat missions. The Army retained a separate corps for women (WAC), while the other services integrated women into their organizational structure.121 In 1951, Executive Order 10240 was issued, authorizing the services to discharge women who became pregnant or had minor children in the home (including stepchildren, foster children, and siblings).125\nDuring the Korean War of 1950\u20131953, many women served in the Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals. A recruiting project started in 1951 aimed to increase the number of women in the military from 40,000 to 112,000 by July 1952, but it only achieved 46,000. Some of the reasons were the lack of public support for involvement in Korea; public disapproval of women in the military; fewer women in the right age group due to the low birthrate during the Depression; and the higher standards required for women enlistees.\nIn the 1960s, recruiting and training focused on the attractiveness and femininity of women enlistees. Outside of the medical fields, women were mostly assigned to clerical, administrative, and protocol-related jobs. Women who were previously in technical positions were retrained for the few jobs now permitted for women. Of the 61 non-combat occupational groups, only 36 were open to women by 1965. Beginning in 1965, efforts to increase the number of women in the armed forces accompanied concern about the expiration of the Selective Service Act and reduction in enlistment standards to ensure sufficient troops to support the Vietnam War. Public Law 90-130, signed on 8 November 1967, removed the restrictions on female officers in the armed forces and in 1970, two women Army officers were promoted to brigadier general.\nDuring the Vietnam War, 600 women served in the country as part of the Air Force, alongside 500 members of the WAC and more than 6,000 medical personnel and support staff.\nThe end of conscription in the early 1970s was a major driver of the expansion of the roles of women in the armed forces. The number of enlisted and commissioned women in the military hit 110,000 by June 1977. The Army Ordnance Corps began accepting female missile technicians in 1974. Female crewmembers and officers were accepted into Field Artillery missile units. The services opened up their Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) programs to women, and in 1976, women were admitted to the service academies.\nIn 1974, the first six female naval aviators earned their wings as Navy pilots. The Combat Exclusion Policy that prohibited women in combat placed limitations on the pilots' advancement, but at least two retired as captains.\nThe role of women in the U.S. Armed Forces received global media attention during the 1991 Gulf War, though their perception in media was skewed during this time period as little media attention was given to the situations where women faced combat.\nIn 1991, women were permitted to fly military aircraft. Since 1994, women have been permitted to serve on U.S. combat ships. In 2010, the ban on women serving on submarines was lifted.\nOn 3 December 2015, U.S. defense secretary Ashton Carter announced that all military combat positions would become available to women. This gave women access to the roughly 10% of military jobs which were previously closed to them. The various military services were given until January 2016 to provide plans on how they would enforce the policy change. Many women believed this would allow them to improve their positions in the military, since most high-ranking officers start in combat positions.\nDraft registration for females was recommended by the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service and has been proposed, but never implemented.\nNo woman has ever become a Navy SEAL. In July 2021, the first woman graduated from the Naval Special Warfare (NSW) training program to become a Special Warfare Combatant craft Crewman (SWCC). The SWCC directly supports the SEALs and other special forces units, and are experts in covert insertion and extraction special operation tactics.\nDespite concerns of a gender gap, all personnel both men and women, at the same rank and time of service, are compensated the same across all branches. On 1 June 2022, ADM Linda L. Fagan assumed command of the U.S. Coast Guard, becoming not only the first woman to serve as Commandant of the Coast Guard, but also the first woman in American history to serve as a service chief in the U.S. Military.\nA study conducted by the RAND Corporation suggests that women who make the military their careers experience improved rates of promotion.\nAs per the DoD's report on sexual assault within the U.S. Army for fiscal year 2019, 7,825 cases had been reported. This represented a 3% increase relative to the 2018 report.\nAs of 2022, there are 228,966 women in the military, representing 17.5% of the total active duty force. Since 2021, the percentage of women on active duty service has increased slightly, by 0.3%. Since 2005, the population of active duty women has increased by 2.9%.\nRestrictions on political activity.\nIt has been a long-standing policy in the armed forces to limit the political activity by active duty members to voting and making personal campaign donations. However, all other political activities, such as campaigning for a candidate (even outside military facilities), endorsing candidates, soliciting contributions, marching in a partisan parade or wearing the uniform to a partisan event, are prohibited.\nOrder of precedence.\nUnder Department of Defense regulation, the various components of the U.S. Armed Forces have a set order of precedence that is based on founding dates.This order is used for the display of service flags as well as the placement of soldiers, marines, sailors, airmen, guardians, and coast guardsmen in formations and parades.\nWhile the original founding date of a U.S. Navy was earlier than that of the Marine Corps, the Marine Corps takes precedence due to previous inconsistencies in the Navy's birth date. The Marine Corps has recognized its observed birth date on a more consistent basis. \nThe Second Continental Congress is considered to have established the Navy on 13 October 1775 by authorizing the purchase of ships, but the \"Rules for the Regulation of the Navy of the United Colonies\" were not established until 27 November 1775, and the Navy also lost funding and was temporarily discontinued in 1785. The Marine Corps was established by an act of the Second Continental Congress on 10 November 1775. The Navy did not officially recognize 13 October 1775 as its birth date until 1972, when then\u2013chief of naval operations Admiral Elmo Zumwalt authorized it to be observed as such.\nThe Coast Guard is normally situated after the Space Force, but if it is moved to the Department of the Navy, then its place in the order of precedence would change to being situated after the Navy and before the Air Force.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32214", "revid": "34553183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32214", "title": "UU", "text": "UU or uu may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32215", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32215", "title": "Urban car", "text": ""}
{"id": "32216", "revid": "14448901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32216", "title": "Unitarian", "text": "Unitarian or Unitarianism may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChristian and Christian-derived theologies.\nA Unitarian is a follower of, or a member of an organisation that follows, any of several theologies referred to as Unitarianism:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32217", "revid": "1300110673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32217", "title": "USS George Washington", "text": "Four ships of the United States Navy have been named USS \"George Washington\" in honor of George Washington.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32218", "revid": "45872085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32218", "title": "USAF", "text": ""}
{"id": "32219", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32219", "title": "USMC", "text": ""}
{"id": "32220", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32220", "title": "USS Cole", "text": "USS \"Cole\" is the name of two ships of the United States Navy;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32221", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32221", "title": "Urban myth", "text": ""}
{"id": "32222", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32222", "title": "US constitution", "text": ""}
{"id": "32223", "revid": "34059819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32223", "title": "United States Coast Guard", "text": "Maritime law enforcement and rescue service branch of the U.S. military\nMilitary unit\nThe United States Coast Guard (USCG) is the maritime security, search and rescue, and law enforcement service branch of the United States Armed Forces. It is one of the country's eight uniformed services. The service is a maritime, military, multi-mission service unique among the United States military branches for having a maritime law enforcement mission with jurisdiction in both domestic and international waters and a federal regulatory agency mission as part of its duties. It is the largest coast guard in the world. \nThe U.S. Coast Guard protects the United States' borders and economic and security interests abroad; and defends its sovereignty by safeguarding sea lines of communication and commerce across U.S. territorial waters and its Exclusive Economic Zone. Due to ever-expanding risk imposed by transnational threats through the maritime and cyber domains, the U.S. Coast Guard is at any given time deployed to and operating on all seven continents and in cyberspace to enforce its mission. Like its United States Navy sibling, the U.S. Coast Guard maintains a global presence with permanently-assigned personnel throughout the world and forces routinely deploying to both littoral and blue-water regions. The U.S. Coast Guard's adaptive, multi-mission \"white hull\" fleet is leveraged as a force of both diplomatic soft power and humanitarian and security assistance over the more overtly confrontational nature of \"gray hulled\" warships. As a humanitarian service, it saves tens of thousands of lives a year at sea and in U.S. waters, and provides emergency response and disaster management for a wide range of human-made and natural catastrophic incidents in the U.S. and throughout the world.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard operates under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security during peacetime. During times of war, it can be transferred in whole or in part to the U.S. Department of the Navy under the Department of Defense by order of the U.S. president or by act of Congress. Prior to its transfer to Homeland Security, it operated under the Department of Transportation from 1967 to 2003 and the Department of the Treasury from its inception until 1967. A congressional authority transfer to the Navy has only happened once: in 1917, during World War I. By the time the U.S. entered World War II in December 1941, the U.S. Coast Guard had already been transferred to the Navy by President Franklin Roosevelt.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard was formed by a merger of the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915, under the Department of the Treasury. The Revenue Cutter Service was created by Congress as the Revenue-Marine on 4 August 1790 at the request of Alexander Hamilton, and is therefore the oldest continuously operating naval service of the United States. As secretary of the treasury, Hamilton headed the Revenue-Marine, whose original purpose was collecting customs duties at U.S. seaports. By the 1860s, the service was known as the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the term Revenue-Marine gradually fell into disuse.\nIn 1939, the U.S. Lighthouse Service was also merged into the U.S. Coast Guard. As one of the country's six armed services, the U.S. Coast Guard and its predecessor have participated in every major U.S. war since 1790, from the Quasi-War with France to the Global War on Terrorism.\nAs of December 2021, the U.S. Coast Guard's authorized force strength is 44,500 active duty personnel and 7,000 reservists. The service's force strength also includes 8,577 full-time civilian federal employees and 21,000 uniformed civilian volunteers of the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. The service maintains an extensive fleet of roughly 250 coastal and ocean-going cutters, patrol ships, buoy tenders, tugs, and icebreakers; as well as nearly 2,000 small boats and specialized craft. It also maintains an aviation division consisting of more than 200 helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. While the U.S. Coast Guard is the second smallest of the U.S. military service branches in terms of membership, the service by itself is the world's 12th largest naval force.\nMission.\nRole.\nThe Coast Guard carries out three basic roles, which are further subdivided into eleven statutory missions. The three roles are:\nWith a decentralized organization and much responsibility placed on even the most junior personnel, the Coast Guard is frequently lauded for its quick responsiveness and adaptability in a broad range of emergencies. In a 2005 article in \"Time\" magazine following Hurricane Katrina, the author wrote, \"the Coast Guard's most valuable contribution to [a military effort when catastrophe hits] may be as a model of flexibility, and most of all, spirit.\" Wil Milam, a rescue swimmer from Alaska told the magazine, \"In the Navy, it was all about the mission. Practicing for war, training for war. In the Coast Guard, it was, take care of our people and the mission will take care of itself.\"\nMissions.\nThe eleven statutory missions as defined by law are divided into homeland security missions and non-homeland security missions:\nSearch and rescue.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue (CG-SAR) is one of the Coast Guard's best-known operations. The \"National Search and Rescue Plan\" designates the Coast Guard as the federal agency responsible for maritime SAR operations, and the United States Air Force as the federal agency responsible for inland SAR. Both agencies maintain rescue coordination centers to coordinate this effort, and have responsibility for both military and civilian search and rescue. The two services jointly provide instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue School that trains SAR mission planners and coordinators. Previously located on Governors Island, New York, the school is now located at Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown at Yorktown, Virginia.\nNational Response Center.\nOperated by the Coast Guard, the National Response Center (NRC) is the sole U.S. Government point of contact for reporting all oil, chemical, radiological, biological, and etiological spills and discharges into the environment, anywhere in the United States and its territories. In addition to gathering and distributing spill/incident information for Federal On Scene Coordinators and serving as the communications and operations center for the National Response Team, the NRC maintains agreements with a variety of federal entities to make additional notifications regarding incidents meeting established trigger criteria. The NRC also takes Maritime Suspicious Activity and Security Breach Reports. Details on the NRC organization and specific responsibilities can be found in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. The Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) database system is managed and used by the Coast Guard for tracking pollution and safety incidents in the nation's ports.\nNational Maritime Center.\nThe National Maritime Center (NMC) is the merchant mariner credentialing authority for the USCG under the auspices of the Department of Homeland Security. To ensure a safe, secure, and environmentally sound marine transportation system, the mission of the NMC is to issue credentials to fully qualified mariners in the United States maritime jurisdiction.\nAuthority as an armed service.\nTitle 10 of the U.S. Code says that \"[t]he term \"armed forces\" means the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard.\"\nThe Coast Guard is further defined by Title 14 of the United States Code: \"The Coast Guard as established January 28, 1915, shall be a military service and a branch of the armed forces of the United States at all times. The Coast Guard shall be a service in the Department of Homeland Security, except when operating as a service in the Navy.\"\nCoast Guard organization and operation is as set forth in Title 33 of the Code of Federal Regulations.\nOn 25 November 2002, the Homeland Security Act was signed into law by U.S. President George W. Bush, designating the Coast Guard to be placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The transfer of administrative control from the U.S. Department of Transportation to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security was completed the following year, on 1 March 2003.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard reports directly to the civilian secretary of homeland security. However, under \u00a0https:// as amended by section 211 of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006, upon the declaration of war and when Congress so directs in the declaration, or when the president directs, the Coast Guard operates under the Department of Defense as a service in the Department of the Navy.\nAs members of the military, coast guardsmen on active and reserve service are subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and receive the same pay and allowances as members of the same pay grades in the other uniformed services.\nThe service has participated in every major U.S. conflict from 1790 through today, including landing troops on D-Day and on the Pacific Islands in World War II, in extensive patrols and shore bombardment during the Vietnam War, and multiple roles in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Maritime interception operations, coastal security, transportation security, and law enforcement detachments have been its major roles in recent conflicts in Iraq.\nOn 17 October 2007, the Coast Guard joined with the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps to adopt a new maritime strategy called \"A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower\" that raised the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war. This new strategy charted a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring, or reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the United States. During the launch of the new U.S. maritime strategy at the International Seapower Symposium at the U.S. Naval War College in 2007, Coast Guard commandant admiral Thad Allen said the new maritime strategy reinforced the time-honored missions the service has carried out in the United States since 1790. \"It reinforces the Coast Guard maritime strategy of safety, security and stewardship, and it reflects not only the global reach of our maritime services but the need to integrate and synchronize and act with our coalition and international partners to not only win wars ... but to prevent wars,\" Allen said.\nAuthority as a law enforcement agency.\n\u00a0https:// authorizes the Coast Guard to enforce U.S. federal laws. This authority is further defined in \u00a0https://, which gives law enforcement powers to all Coast Guard commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers. Unlike the other armed forces branches, which are prevented from acting in a law enforcement capacity by \u00a0https://, the Posse Comitatus Act, and Department of Defense policy, the Coast Guard is exempt from and not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act.\nFurther law enforcement authority is given by \u00a0https:// and \u00a0https://, which empower U.S. Coast Guard active and reserve commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers as federal customs officers. This places them under \u00a0https://, which grants customs officers general federal law enforcement authority, including the authority to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\n(1) carry a firearm;\n(2) execute and serve any order, warrant, subpoena, summons, or other process issued under the authority of the United States;\n(3) make an arrest without a warrant for any offense against the United States committed in the officer's presence or for a felony, cognizable under the laws of the United States committed outside the officer's presence if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing a felony; and\n(4) perform any other law enforcement duty that the Secretary of Homeland Security may designate.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to the House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary on its 2006 Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities, identified the Coast Guard as one of 104 federal components that employed law enforcement officers. The report also included a summary table of the authorities of the Coast Guard's 192 special agents and 3,780 maritime law enforcement boarding officers.\nCoast Guardsmen have the legal authority to carry their service-issued firearms on and off base. This is rarely done in practice, however; at many Coast Guard stations, commanders prefer to have all service-issued weapons in armories when not in use. Still, one court has held in the case of \"People v. Booth\" that Coast Guard boarding officers are qualified law enforcement officers authorized to carry personal firearms off-duty for self-defense.\nHistory.\nThe Coast Guard traced its roots to the small fleet of vessels maintained by the United States Department of the Treasury beginning in the 1790s to enforce tariffs (an important source of revenue for the new nation). Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton lobbied Congress to fund the construction of ten cutters, which it did on 4 August 1790 (now celebrated as the Coast Guard's official birthday). Until the re-establishment of the Navy in 1798, these \"revenue cutters\" were the only naval force of the early United States. As such, the cutters and their crews frequently took on additional duties, including combating piracy, rescuing mariners in distress, ferrying government officials, and even carrying mail. Initially not an organized federal agency at all, merely a \"system of cutters,\" each ship operated under the direction of the customs officials in the port to which it was assigned. Several names, including \"Revenue-Marine,\" were used as the service gradually becoming more organized. Eventually it was officially organized as the United States Revenue Cutter Service. In addition to its regular law enforcement and customs duties, revenue cutters and their crews were used to support and supplement the Navy in various armed conflicts including the American Civil War.\nA separate federal agency, the U.S. Life-Saving Service, developed alongside the Revenue-Marine. Prior to 1848, there were various charitable efforts at creating systems to provide assistance to shipwrecked mariners from shore-based stations, notably by the Massachusetts Humane Society. The federal government began funding lifesaving stations in 1848 but funding was inconsistent and the system still relied on all-volunteer crews. In 1871, Sumner Increase Kimball was appointed chief of the Treasury Department's newly created Revenue Marine Division, and began the process of organizing the Revenue-Marine cutters into a centralized agency. Kimball also pushed for more funding lifesaving stations and eventually secured approval to create the Lifesaving Service as a separate federal agency, also within the Treasury Department, with fulltime paid crews.\nIn 1915 these two agencies, the Revenue Cutter Service and the Lifesaving Service, were merged to create the modern United States Coast Guard. The Lighthouse Service and the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation were absorbed by the Coast Guard 1939 and 1942 respectively.\nIn 1967, the Coast Guard moved from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to the newly formed U.S. Department of Transportation, an arrangement that lasted until it was placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2003 as part of legislation designed to more efficiently protect American interests following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.\nIn times of war, the Coast Guard or individual components of it can operate as a service of the Department of the Navy. This arrangement has a broad historical basis, as the Coast Guard has been involved in wars as diverse as the War of 1812, the Mexican\u2013American War, and the American Civil War, in which the cutter \"Harriet Lane\" fired the first naval shots attempting to relieve besieged Fort Sumter. The last time the Coast Guard operated as a whole within the Navy was in World War II, in all some 250,000 served in the Coast Guard during World War II. A major fixture of the Coast Guard during WWII were the Beach Patrol units, responsible for patrolling the shorelines of the United States on-foot and horseback.\nCoast Guard Squadron One, was a combat unit formed by the United States Coast Guard in 1965 for service during the Vietnam War. Placed under the operational control of the United States Navy, it was assigned duties in Operation Market Time. Its formation marked the first time since World War II that Coast Guard personnel were used extensively in a combat environment. The squadron operated divisions in three separate areas during the period of 1965 to 1970. Twenty-six Point-class cutters with their crews and a squadron support staff were assigned to the U.S. Navy with the mission of interdicting the movement of arms and supplies from the South China Sea into South Vietnam by Viet Cong and North Vietnam junk and trawler operators. The squadron also provided 81mm mortar naval gunfire support to nearby friendly units operating along the South Vietnamese coastline and assisted the U.S. Navy during Operation Sealords.\nCoast Guard Squadron Three, was a combat unit formed by the United States Coast Guard in 1967 for service during the Vietnam War. Placed under the operational control of the United States Navy and based in Pearl Harbor. It consisted of five USCG High Endurance Cutters operating on revolving six-month deployments. A total of 35 High Endurance Cutters took part in operations from May 1967 to December 1971, most notably using their 5-inch guns to provide naval gunfire support missions.\nOften units within the Coast Guard operate under Department of the Navy operational control while other Coast Guard units remain under the Department of Homeland Security.\nDeployable Operations Group/Deployable Specialized Forces.\nThe Deployable Operations Group (DOG) was a Coast Guard command established in July 2007. The DOG established a single command authority to rapidly provide the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Defense, Department of Justice and other interagency operational commanders adaptive force packages drawn from the Coast Guard's deployable specialized force units. The DOG was disestablished on 22 April 2013 and reorganized into Deployable Specialized Forces (DSF) units that were placed under the control of the Atlantic and Pacific Area Commanders.\nThe planning for the unit began after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and culminated with its formation on 20 July 2007. Its missions included maritime law enforcement, anti-terrorism, port security, pollution response, and diving operations.\nThere were over 25 specialized units within the Deployable Operations Group including the Maritime Security Response Team, Maritime Safety and Security Teams, Law Enforcement Detachments, Port Security Units, the National Strike Force, and Regional Dive Lockers. The DOG also managed Coast Guard personnel assigned to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command and was involved in the selection of Coast Guard candidates to attend Navy BUD/S and serve with Navy SEAL Teams.\nOrganization.\nThe new Department of Homeland Security headquarters complex is on the grounds of the former St. Elizabeths Hospital in the Anacostia section of Southeast Washington, across the Anacostia River from former Coast Guard headquarters.\nThe fiscal year 2016 budget request for the U.S. Coast Guard was $9.96 billion.\nDistricts and units.\nThe Coast Guard's current district organization is divided into 9 districts which were previously numbered, they were renamed in 2025 for clarity and memorability using geographic area names. Their designations, district office and area of responsibility are as follows:\nFormer U.S. Coast Guard Districts.\nPreviously the U.S. Coast Guard had two additional districts, the 15th and 16th, which have since been decommissioned. The 15th district previously encompassed the waters around the Panama Canal Zone, as well as the canal itself. The 16th district was formerly the Philippines.\nShore establishments.\nShore establishment commands exist to support and facilitate the mission of the sea and air assets and Coastal defense. U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters is located in Southeast Washington, D.C. Examples of other shore establishment types are Coast Guard Sectors (which may include Coast Guard Bases), Surface Forces Logistics Center (SFLC), Coast Guard Stations, Coast Guard Air Stations, and the United States Coast Guard Yard. Training centers are included in the shore establishment commands. The military college for the USCG is called the United States Coast Guard Academy which trains both new officers through a four year program and enlisted personnel joining the ranks of officers through a 17 week program called Officer Candidate School (OCS). Abbreviated TRACEN, the other Training Centers include Training Center Cape May for enlisted bootcamp, Training Center Petaluma and Training Center Yorktown for enlisted \"A\" schools and \"C\" schools, and Coast Guard Aviation Technical Training Center and Coast Guard Aviation Training Center Mobile for aviation enlisted \"A\" school, \"C\" schools, and pilot officer training.\nPersonnel.\nThe Coast Guard has a total workforce of 87,569. The formal name for a uniformed member of the Coast Guard is \"coast guardsman\", irrespective of gender. \"Coastie\" is an informal term commonly used to refer to current or former Coast Guard personnel. In 2008, the term \"guardian\" was introduced as an alternative but was later dropped. Admiral Robert J. Papp Jr. stated that it was his belief that no Commandant had the authority to change what members of the Coast Guard are called as the term coast guardsman is found in Title 14 USC, which established the Coast Guard in 1915. \"Team Coast Guard\" refers to the four components of the Coast Guard as a whole: Regular, Reserve, Auxiliary, and Coast Guard civilian employees.\nCommissioned officers.\nCommissioned officers in the Coast Guard hold pay grades ranging from O-1 to O-10 and have the same rank structure as the Navy. Officers holding the rank of ensign (O-1) through lieutenant commander (O-4) are considered junior officers, commanders (O-5) and captains (O-6) are considered senior officers, and rear admirals (O-7) through admirals (O-10) are considered flag officers. The commandant of the Coast Guard and the vice commandant of the Coast Guard are the only members of the Coast Guard authorized to hold the rank of admiral.\nThe Coast Guard does not have medical officers or chaplains of its own. Instead, chaplains from the U.S. Navy, as well as officers from the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are assigned to the Coast Guard to perform chaplain-related functions and medical-related functions, respectively. These officers wear Coast Guard uniforms but replace the Coast Guard insignia with that of their own service.\nThe Navy and Coast Guard share identical officer rank insignia except that Coast Guard officers wear a gold Coast Guard Shield in lieu of a line star or staff corps officer insignia.\nWarrant officers.\nHighly qualified enlisted personnel in pay grades E-6 through E-9 with a minimum of eight years' experience can compete each year for appointment as warrant officers (WO). Successful candidates are chosen by a board and then commissioned as chief warrant officer two (CWO2) in one of twenty-one specialties. Over time, chief warrant officers may be promoted to chief warrant officer three (CWO3) and chief warrant officer four (CWO4). The ranks of warrant officer (WO1) and chief warrant officer five (CWO5) are not currently used in the Coast Guard. Chief warrant officers may also compete for the Chief Warrant Officer to Lieutenant Program. If selected, the warrant officer will be promoted to lieutenant (O-3E). The \"E\" designates over four years' active duty service as a warrant officer or enlisted member and entitles the member to a higher rate of pay than other lieutenants.\nEnlisted personnel.\nEnlisted members of the Coast Guard have pay grades from E-1 to E-9 and also follow the same rank structure as the Navy. Enlisted members in pay grades of E-4 and higher are considered \"petty officers\" and follow career development paths very similar to those of Navy petty officers.\nPetty officers in pay grade E-7 and higher are \"chief petty officers\" and must attend the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officer Academy, or an equivalent Department of Defense school, in order to be advanced to pay grade E-8. The basic themes of the school are:\nEnlisted rank insignia is also nearly identical to Navy enlisted insignia. The Coast Guard shield replacing the petty officer's eagle on collar and cap devices for petty officers or enlisted rating insignia for seamen qualified as a \"designated striker\". Group Rate marks (stripes) for junior enlisted members (E-3 and below) also follow Navy convention with white for seaman, red for fireman, and green for airman. In a departure from the Navy conventions, all petty officers E-6 and below wear red chevrons and all chief petty officers wear gold.\nTraining.\nOfficer training.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard Academy is a four-year service academy located in New London, Connecticut. Approximately 200 cadets graduate each year, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as an ensign in the Coast Guard. Graduates are obligated to serve a minimum of five years on active duty. Most graduates are assigned to duty aboard Coast Guard cutters immediately after graduation, either as Deck Watch Officers (DWOs) or as Engineer Officers in Training (EOITs). Smaller numbers are assigned directly to flight training at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida or to shore duty at Coast Guard Sector, District, or Area headquarters units.\nIn addition to the Academy, prospective officers, who already hold a college degree, may enter the Coast Guard through Officer Candidate School (OCS), also located at the Coast Guard Academy. OCS is a 17-week course of instruction that prepares candidates to serve effectively as officers in the Coast Guard. In addition to indoctrinating students into a military lifestyle, OCS provides a wide range of highly technical information necessary to perform the duties of a Coast Guard officer.\nGraduates of OCS are usually commissioned as ensigns, but some with advanced graduate degrees may enter as lieutenants (junior grade) or lieutenants. Graduating OCS officers entering active duty are required to serve a minimum of three years, while graduating reserve officers are required to serve four years. Graduates may be assigned to a cutter, flight training, a staff job, or an operations ashore billet. OCS is the primary channel through which the Coast Guard enlisted grades ascend to the commissioned officer corps. Unlike the other military services, the Coast Guard does not have a Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program. However, the Coast Guard Auxiliary offers the Coast Guard Auxiliary University Programs (AUP), which provides college students with leadership training and experience in Coast Guard activities, though participation does not guarantee a commission. The Coast Guard also operates the Select Reserve Direct Commission program, for prospective candidates interested serving as a Coast Guard Reserve Officer.\nLawyers, engineers, intelligence officers, military aviators holding commissions in other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces requesting interservice transfers to the Coast Guard, graduates of maritime academies, and certain other individuals may also receive an officer's commission in the Coast Guard through the Direct Commission Officer (DCO) program. Depending on the specific program and the background of the individual, the course is three, four or five weeks long. The first week of the five-week course is an indoctrination week. The DCO program is designed to commission officers with highly specialized professional training or certain kinds of previous military experience.\nRecruit training.\nNewly enlisted personnel are sent to eight weeks of recruit training at Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey. New recruits arrive at Sexton Hall and remain there for three days of initial processing which includes haircuts, vaccinations, uniform issue, and other necessary entrance procedures. During this initial processing period, the new recruits are led by temporary company commanders. These temporary company commanders are tasked with teaching the new recruits how to march and preparing them to enter into their designated company. The temporary company commanders typically do not enforce any physical activity such as push ups or crunches. When the initial processing is complete, the new seaman recruits are introduced to their permanent company commanders who will remain with them until the end of training. There is typically a designated lead company commander and two support company commanders. The balance of the eight-week boot camp is spent in learning teamwork and developing physical skills. An introduction of how the Coast Guard operates with special emphasis on the Coast Guard's core values is an important part of the training.\nThe current nine Recruit Training Objectives are:\nService schools.\nFollowing graduation from recruit training, most members are sent to their first unit while they await orders to attend advanced training in Class \"A\" Schools. At \"A\" schools, Coast Guard enlisted personnel are trained in their chosen rating; rating is a Coast Guard and Navy term for enlisted skills synonymous with the Army's and Marine Corps' military occupation codes (MOS) and Air Force's Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC). Members who earned high ASVAB scores or who were otherwise guaranteed an \"A\" School of choice while enlisting may go directly to their \"A\" School upon graduation from Boot Camp.\nCivilian personnel.\nThe Coast Guard employs over 8,577 civilians in over two hundred different job types including Coast Guard Investigative Service special agents, lawyers, engineers, technicians, administrative personnel, tradesmen, and federal firefighters. Civilian employees work at various levels in the Coast Guard to support its various missions.\nEquipment.\nCutters.\nThe Coast Guard operates 243 cutters, defined as any vessel more than long, that has a permanently assigned crew and accommodations for the extended support of that crew.\nBoats.\nThe Coast Guard operates about 1,650 boats, defined as any vessel less than long, which generally operate near shore and on inland waterways.\nThe Coast Guard boat fleet includes:\nAircraft.\nThe Coast Guard operates approximately 201 fixed and rotary wing aircraft from 24 Coast Guard Air Stations throughout the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Most of these air stations are tenant activities at civilian airports, several of which are former Air Force Bases and Naval Air Stations, although several are also independent military facilities. Coast Guard Air Stations are also located on active Naval Air Stations, Air National Guard bases, and Army Air Fields.\nCoast Guard aviators receive Primary (fixed-wing) and Advanced (fixed or rotary-wing) flight training with their Navy and Marine Corps counterparts at NAS Whiting Field, Florida, and NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, and are considered Naval Aviators. After receiving Naval Aviator Wings, Coast Guard pilots, with the exception of those slated to fly the HC-130, report to U.S. Coast Guard Aviation Training Center, Mobile, Alabama to receive 6\u201312 weeks of specialized training in the Coast Guard fleet aircraft they will operate. HC-130 pilots report to Little Rock AFB, Arkansas, for joint C-130 training under the auspices of the 314th Airlift Wing of the U.S. Air Force.\nFixed-wing aircraft operate from Air Stations on long-duration missions. Helicopters operate from Air Stations and can deploy on a number of different cutters. Helicopters can rescue people or intercept vessels smuggling migrants or narcotics. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the Coast Guard has developed a more prominent role in national security and now has armed helicopters operating in high-risk areas for the purpose of maritime law enforcement and anti-terrorism.\nThe Coast Guard is now developing an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) program that will utilize the MQ-9 Reaper platform for homeland security and search/rescue operations. To support this endeavor, the Coast Guard has partnered with the Navy and U.S. Customs and Border Protection to study existing/emerging unmanned aerial system (UAS) capabilities within their respective organizations. As these systems mature, research and operational experience gleaned from this joint effort will enable the Coast Guard to develop its own cutter and land-based UAS capabilities.\nWeapons.\nNaval guns.\nMost Coast Guard Cutters have one or more naval gun systems installed, including:\nSmall arms and light weapons.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard uses a wide variety of small arms and light weapons that include:\nSymbols.\nCore values.\nThe Coast Guard, like the other armed services of the United States, has a set of core values that serve as basic ethical guidelines for all Coast Guard active duty, reservists, auxiliarists, and civilians. The Coast Guard Core Values are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Honor: Integrity is our standard. We demonstrate uncompromising ethical conduct and moral behavior in all of our personal actions. We are loyal and accountable to the public trust.\nRespect: We value our diverse workforce. We treat each other with fairness, dignity, and compassion. We encourage individual opportunity and growth. We encourage creativity through empowerment. We work as a team.\nDevotion to Duty: We are professionals, military and civilian, who seek responsibility, accept accountability, and are committed to the successful achievement of our organizational goals. We exist to serve. We serve with pride.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe Guardian Ethos.\nIn 2008, the Coast Guard introduced the Guardian Ethos. As the commandant, Admiral Allen noted in a message to all members of the Coast Guard: [The Ethos] \"defines the essence of the Coast Guard,\" and is the \"contract the Coast Guard and its members make with the nation and its citizens.\"\nThe Coast Guard Ethos.\nIn an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral Papp, directed that the language of \"Guardian Ethos\" be superseded by the \"Coast Guard Ethos\" in an effort to use terminology that would help with the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard. The term \"coast guardsman\" is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically. This changed the line in the Guardian Ethos \"I am a Guardian.\" to become \"I am a Coast Guardsman.\"\nThe Ethos is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;In Service to our Nation \nWith Honor, Respect, and Devotion to Duty \nWe protect \nWe defend \nWe save \nWe are Semper Paratus \nWe are the United States Coast Guard&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nCreed of the United States Coast Guardsman.\nThe \"Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman\" was written by Vice Admiral Harry G. Hamlet, who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard from 1932 to 1936.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;I am proud to be a United States Coast Guardsman.\nI revere that long line of expert seamen who by their devotion to duty and sacrifice of self have made it possible for me to be a member of a service honored and respected, in peace and in war, throughout the world.\nI never, by word or deed, will bring reproach upon the fair name of my service, nor permit others to do so unchallenged.\nI will cheerfully and willingly obey all lawful orders.\nI will always be on time to relieve, and shall endeavor to do more, rather than less, than my share.\nI will always be at my station, alert and attending to my duties.\nI shall, so far as I am able, bring to my seniors solutions, not problems.\nI shall live joyously, but always with due regard for the rights and privileges of others.\nI shall endeavor to be a model citizen in the community in which I live.\nI shall sell life dearly to an enemy of my country, but give it freely to rescue those in peril.\nWith God's help, I shall endeavor to be one of His noblest Works...\nA UNITED STATES COAST GUARDSMAN.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\n\"You have to go out, but you don't have to come back!\".\nThis unofficial motto of the Coast Guard dates to an 1899 United States Lifesaving Service regulation, which states in part: \"In attempting a rescue, ... he will not desist from his efforts until by actual trial, the impossibility of effecting a rescue is demonstrated. The statement of the keeper that he did not try to use the boat because the sea or surf was too heavy will not be accepted, unless attempts to launch it were actually made and failed.\"\nCoast Guard ensign.\nThe Coast Guard ensign (flag) was first flown by the Revenue Cutter Service in 1799 to distinguish revenue cutters from merchant ships. A 1 August 1799 order issued by Secretary of the Treasury Oliver Wolcott Jr. specified that the Ensign would be \"sixteen perpendicular stripes (for the number of states in the United States at the time), alternate red and white, the union of the ensign to be the arms of the United States in a dark blue on a white field.\"\nThis ensign became familiar in American waters and served as the sign of authority for the Revenue Cutter Service until the early 20th century. The ensign was originally intended to be flown only on revenue cutters and boats connected with the Customs Service but over the years it was found flying atop custom houses as well, and the practice became a requirement in 1874. On 7 June 1910, President William Howard Taft issued an executive order adding an emblem to (or \"defacing\") the ensign flown by the Revenue cutters to distinguish it from what is now called the flown from the custom houses. The emblem was changed to the official seal of the Coast Guard in 1927.\nThe purpose of the ensign is to allow ship captains to easily recognize those vessels having legal authority to stop and board them. It is flown only as a symbol of law enforcement authority and is never carried as a parade standard.\nCoast Guard standard.\nThe Coast Guard standard is used in parades and carries the battle honors of the Coast Guard. It was derived from the jack of the Coast Guard ensign which was flown by revenue cutters. The emblem is a blue eagle from the coat of arms of the United States on a white field. Above the eagle are the words \"United States Coast Guard\" below the eagle is the motto, \"Semper Paratus\" and the inscription \"1790.\"\nService Mark (\"Racing Stripe\").\nThe Racing Stripe, officially known as the Service Mark, was designed in 1964 by the industrial design office of Raymond Loewy Associates to give the Coast Guard a distinctive, modern image. Loewy had designed the colors for the Air Force One fleet for Jackie Kennedy. President Kennedy was so impressed with his work, he suggested that the entire Federal Government needed his make-over and suggested that he start with the Coast Guard. The stripes are canted at a 64-degree angle, coincidentally the year the Racing Stripe was designed.\nThe racing stripe is borne by Coast Guard cutters, aircraft, and many boats. First used and placed into official usage as of 6 April 1967, it consists of a narrow blue stripe, a narrow white stripe between, and a broad CG red bar with the Coast Guard shield centered. Red-hulled icebreaker cutters and most HH-65/MH-65 helicopters (i.e., those with a red fuselage) bear a narrow blue stripe, a narrow empty stripe the color of the fuselage (an implied red stripe), and broad white bar, with the Coast Guard shield centered. Conversely, black-hulled cutters (such as buoy tenders and inland construction tenders) use the standard racing stripe. Auxiliary vessels maintained by the Coast Guard also carry the Racing Stripe, but in inverted colors (i.e., broad blue stripe with narrow white and CG red stripes) and the Auxiliary shield. Similar racing stripe designs have been adopted for the use of other coast guards and maritime authorities and many other law enforcement and rescue agencies.\nUniforms.\nFor most of the Coast Guard's history, its uniforms largely mirrored the style of U.S. Navy uniforms, distinguishable only by their insignia. In 1974, under the leadership of Admiral Chester R. Bender, the initial versions of the current Coast Guard Service Dress Blue and Tropical uniforms were introduced. This represented a major departure from many common conventions in naval and maritime uniforms. Notably, \"Bender's Blues\" was a common service dress uniform for all ranks, dispensing with the sailor suit and sailor cap formerly worn by enlisted members. Rank insignia remained consistent with the naval pattern and some distinctly-nautical items such as the pea coat, officer's sword, and dress white uniforms remained.\nToday, the Coast Guard's uniforms remain among the simplest of any branch of the armed forces, with fewer total uniforms and uniform variants than the other armed services. There are only three uniforms that typically serve as standard uniforms of the day\u2014the Operational Dress Uniform, Tropical Blue, and Service Dress Blue (Bravo).\nCoast Guard Reserve.\nThe United States Coast Guard Reserve is the reserve military force of the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard Reserve was founded on 19 February 1941. The Coast Guard has 8700 reservists who normally drill two days a month and an additional 12 days of active duty each year, although many perform additional drill and active duty periods, to include those mobilized to extended active duty. Coast Guard reservists possess the same training and qualifications as their active duty counterparts, and as such, can be found augmenting active duty Coast Guard units every day.\nDuring the Vietnam War and shortly thereafter, the Coast Guard considered abandoning the reserve program, but the force was instead reoriented into force augmentation, where its principal focus was not just reserve operations, but to add to the readiness and mission execution of every-day active duty personnel.\nSince 11 September 2001, reservists have been activated and served on tours of active duty, to include deployments to the Persian Gulf and also as parts of Department of Defense combatant commands such as the U.S. Northern and Central Commands. Coast Guard Port Security Units are entirely staffed with reservists, except for five to seven active duty personnel. Additionally, most of the staffing the Coast Guard provides to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command are reservists.\nThe Reserve is managed by the Assistant Commandant for Reserve, Rear Admiral James M. Kelly, USCG.\nWomen in the Coast Guard.\nThere have been women in the United States Coast Guard since 1918, and women continue to serve in it today.\nDuring World War I, in January 1918, radio and telegraph operator Myrtle Hazard enlisted as an electrician. She was the only woman to serve during the war and she is the namesake of USCGC \"Myrtle Hazard\" . While some newspapers reported that twin sisters Genevieve and Lucille Baker were the first women to serve in the Coast Guard, their attempt to enlist was rejected.\nCoast Guard Auxiliary.\nThe United States Coast Guard Auxiliary is the uniformed, civilian volunteer component of the United States Coast Guard, created on 23 June 1939 by an act of Congress. Although it is a civilian organization, it was originally named the \"United States Coast Guard Reserve\" and was later re-named the \"United States Coast Guard Auxiliary\" on 19 February 1941 when a military reserve force for the Coast Guard was created. As part of \"Team Coast Guard\" (the term used to collectively describe all active, reserve, auxiliary, and civilian employees), the auxiliary carries out, or assists in, nearly all of the Coast Guard's noncombatant and non-law enforcement missions. Auxiliarists are subject to direction from the commandant of the Coast Guard. As of 2022, there were approximately 26,000 members of the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary.\nCoast Guard policy has assigned many of its duties related to recreational boating safety to the Auxiliary, including public boating safety education and outreach. This includes offering boating skills courses, liaising with marine-related businesses at the local level, and providing voluntary Vessel Safety Checks (formerly called Courtesy Examinations) to the public. Additionally, Auxiliarists use their own vessels, boats, and aircraft (once registered as Coast Guard facilities) to provide operational support to the Coast Guard by conducting safety patrols, assisting in search and rescue missions, inspecting aids to navigation, and performing other tasks on behalf of the Coast Guard.\nPrior to 1997, Auxiliarists were largely limited to activities supporting recreational boating safety. In 1997, however, new legislation authorized the Auxiliary to participate in any and all Coast Guard missions except direct military and direct law enforcement. Auxiliarists may directly augment active duty Coast Guard personnel in non-combat, non-law enforcement roles (e.g. radio communications watch stander, interpreter, cook, etc.) and may assist active duty personnel in inspecting commercial vessels and maintaining aids-to-navigation. Auxiliarists may support the law enforcement and homeland security missions of the Coast Guard but may not directly participate (make arrests, etc.), and Auxiliarists are not permitted to carry a weapon while serving in any Auxiliary capacity.\nMedals and honors.\nOne coast guardsman, Douglas Albert Munro, has earned the Medal of Honor, the highest military award of the United States. Fifty-five coast guardsmen have earned the Navy Cross and numerous men and women have earned the Distinguished Flying Cross.\nThe highest peacetime decoration awarded within the Coast Guard is the Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal; prior to the transfer of the Coast Guard to the Department of Homeland Security, the highest peacetime decoration was the Department of Transportation Distinguished Service Medal. The highest unit award available is the Presidential Unit Citation.\nIn wartime, members of the Coast Guard are eligible to receive the Navy version of the Medal of Honor. A Coast Guard Medal of Honor is authorized but has not yet been developed or issued.\nIn May 2006, at the Change of Command ceremony when Admiral Thad Allen took over as Commandant, President George W. Bush awarded the entire Coast Guard, including the Coast Guard Auxiliary, the Coast Guard Presidential Unit Citation with hurricane device, for its efforts during and after Hurricane Katrina and Tropical Storm Rita.\nNotable coast guardsmen.\nNumerous celebrities have served in the Coast Guard including tennis player Jack Kramer, golfer Arnold Palmer, All Star baseball player Sid Gordon, boxer Jack Dempsey; surfer and inventor Tom Blake; musicians Kai Winding, Rudy Vallee, Derroll Adams, and Tom Waits; actors Buddy Ebsen, Sid Caesar, Victor Mature, Richard Cromwell, Alan Hale Jr., William Hopper, Beau Bridges, Jeff Bridges, Cesar Romero; author Alex Haley; and Senator Claiborne Pell.\nVice Admiral Thad Allen in 2005 was named Principal Federal Officer to oversee recovery efforts in the Gulf Region after Hurricane Katrina. After promotion to Admiral, on the eve of his retirement as Commandant, Allen again received national visibility after being named National Incident Commander overseeing the response efforts of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill.\nFormer Coast Guard officers have been appointed to numerous civilian government offices. After retiring as Commandant of the Coast Guard in 2002, Admiral James Loy went on to serve as United States deputy secretary of homeland security. After their respective Coast Guard careers, Carlton Skinner served as the first civilian governor of Guam; G. William Miller, 65th secretary of the treasury, and retired vice admiral Harvey E. Johnson Jr. served as Deputy Administrator and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) under President George W. Bush. Rear Admiral Stephen W. Rochon was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as the director of the executive residence and White House chief usher, beginning service on 12 March 2007, and continued to serve in the same capacity under President Barack Obama.\nTwo Coast Guard aviators, Commander Bruce E. Melnick and Captain Daniel C. Burbank, have served as NASA astronauts. Coast Guard Reserve commander Andre Douglas was selected in 2021 to join NASA Astronaut Group 23.\nSignalman First Class Douglas Albert Munro was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously, and is the only coast guardsman to ever receive this honor.\nAssociations.\nCoast Guard Aviation Association.\nThose who have piloted or flown in Coast Guard aircraft under official flight orders may join the Coast Guard Aviation Association which was formerly known as the \"Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl\" (\"Flying Since the World was Flat\"). The Ancient Albatross Award is presented to the active duty USCG member who qualified as an aviator earlier than any other person who is still serving. Separate enlisted and officer awards are given.\nCoast Guard CW Operators Association.\nThe Coast Guard CW Operators Association (CGCWOA) is a membership organization comprising primarily former members of the United States Coast Guard who held the enlisted rating of Radioman (RM) or Telecommunications Specialist (TC), and who employed International Morse Code (CW) in their routine communications duties on Coast Guard cutters and at shore stations.\nUSCG Chief Petty Officers Association.\nMembers of this organization unite to assist members and dependents in need, assist with Coast Guard recruiting efforts, support the aims and goals of the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Academy, keep informed on Coast Guard matters, and assemble for social amenities; and include Chief, Senior Chief, and Master Chief Petty Officers, active, reserve and retired. Membership is also open to all Chief Warrant Officers and Officers who have served as a Chief Petty Officer.\nUSCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association (CWOA).\nEstablished in 1929, the Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association, United States Coast Guard (CWOA) represents Coast Guard warrant and chief warrant officers (active, reserve and retired) to the Congress, White House and the Department of Homeland Security. Additionally, the association communicates with the Coast Guard leadership on matters of concern to Coast Guard chief warrant officers.\nIn popular culture.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard maintains a Motion Picture and Television Office (MOPIC) in Hollywood, California, along with its sister services at the Department of Defense dedicated to enhancing public awareness and understanding of the Coast Guard, its people, and its missions through a cooperative effort with the entertainment industry.\nOn television.\nThe Coast Guard has been featured in several television series, including:\nSee also.\nU.S. Coast Guard.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32224", "revid": "16909869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32224", "title": "United Religions Initiative", "text": "Global grassroots interfaith network\nThe United Religions Initiative (URI) is a global grassroots interfaith network.\nIt has local and global initiatives through more than 1100 member groups and organizations, called Cooperation Circles, to engage in community action such as conflict resolution and reconciliation, environmental sustainability, education, women's and youth programs, and advocacy for human rights.\nThe organization was founded by William E. Swing, along with David Cooperrider and Diana Whitney. The URI Charter was signed by more than 200 people present, and hundreds more joining over the Internet, at a ceremony in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, US, on June 26, 2000.\nURI also holds consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).\nActivities.\nBefore the formal charter signing in 2000, URI supporters around the world participated together in a project called \"72 Hours for Peace\", in which more than 250 local organizations united in projects promoting peace and justice during the turn of the millennium.\nExamples of global and member initiatives documented in the public record:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32225", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32225", "title": "Unidad de Valor Constante", "text": "The Unidad de Valor Constante (UVC) was a currency created by the \"Ley de Valores\" of Ecuador in 1993, and abolished with dollarization in the presidency of Jamil Mahuad on January 9, 2000. It was meant to help deal with the high levels of inflation experienced under the sucre. The 1 UVC was specified at its introduction (May 28, 1993) to equal 10,000 sucres. Its value was adjusted daily by the \"Instituto Nacional de Estad\u00edsticas y Censos\" (INEC) in line with the rate of inflation.\nIt had the ISO 4217 currency code ECV.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32226", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32226", "title": "USS City of Corpus Christi", "text": "Los Angeles-class nuclear-powered attack submarine of the US Navy\nUSS \"City of Corpus Christi\" (SSN-705), a , was the second ship of the United States Navy to be named for Corpus Christi, Texas. The Navy originally planned to use the name \"USS \"Corpus Christi\".\"\nEtymology.\nThe \"City of\" prefix was added before its 1983 commissioning to clarify that the ship is meant to honor the city, in response to Catholic politicians who protested against naming a warship using Latin words which translate to \"Body of Christ.\"\nHistory.\nThe contract to build her was awarded to the Electric Boat Division of General Dynamics Corporation in Groton, Connecticut on 31 October 1973 and her keel was laid down on 4 September 1979. She was launched on 25 April 1981 sponsored by Mrs. John Tower, and commissioned on 8 January 1983. The ship's patch was chosen by the crew based on entries to an art contest sponsored by the Corpus Christi, Texas city government.\nDuring the naval Exercise Malabar, between the navies of India, the United States and Japan, in a simulated battle, the Indian Navy's reportedly scored a kill against \"City of Corpus Christi\". \"Sindhudhvaj\" is a Soviet-built , but upgraded with the Indian USHUS sonar.\nThe ship is currently berthed at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington, having moved there after being deactivated on 30 May 2016.\nReferences.\nThis article includes information collected from the Naval Vessel Register and various press releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32227", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32227", "title": "USS Memphis", "text": "USS \"Memphis\" may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32230", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32230", "title": "USS Tecumseh", "text": "Four ships of the United States Navy have borne the name USS \"Tecumseh\", in honor of Tecumseh (ca. 1768\u20131813), a Shawnee Indian chief.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32231", "revid": "39397998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32231", "title": "Urdu", "text": "Indo-Aryan language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nUrdu () is an Indo-Aryan language spoken primarily in South Asia. It is the national language and \"lingua franca\" of Pakistan. It is also an official Eighth Schedule language in India, the status and cultural heritage of which are recognised by the Constitution of India. It also has an official status in several Indian states.\nUrdu and Hindi share a common, predominantly Sanskrit- and Prakrit-derived, vocabulary base, phonology, syntax, and grammar, making them mutually intelligible during colloquial communication. The common base of the two languages is sometimes referred to as the Hindi\u2013Urdu or Hindustani language, and Urdu has been described as a Persianised standard register of the Hindustani language. While formal Urdu draws literary, political, and technical vocabulary from Persian, formal Hindi draws these aspects from Sanskrit; consequently, the two languages' mutual intelligibility effectively decreases as the factor of formality increases.\nUrdu originated geographically in the upper Ganga-Yamuna doab, in and around the Delhi region, where Khari Boli was spoken. Urdu shared a grammatical foundation with Khari Boli, but was written in a revised Perso-Arabic script and included vocabulary borrowed from Persian and Arabic, which retained its original grammatical structure in those languages. In 1837, Urdu became an official language of the British East India Company, replacing Persian across northern India during Company rule; Persian had until this point served as the court language of various Indo-Islamic empires. \nAccording to 2022 estimates by \"Ethnologue\" and the CIA's \"The World Factbook\", Urdu is the 10th-most widely spoken language in the world, with million total speakers, including those who speak it as a second language.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Urdu\" was first used by the poet Ghulam Hamadani Mushafi around 1780 for the language, even though he himself also used \"Hindavi\" term in his poetry to define the language. \"Ordu\" means army in the Turkic languages. In late 18th century, it was known as \"Zaban-e-Urdu-e-Mualla\" \"\" means \"language of the exalted camp\". It was previously known by several terms such as Hindvi, Hindi, Hindustani and Rekhta.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nUrdu is a part of the Hindi\u2013Urdu linguistic continuum, which is commonly referred to as Hindustani in contemporary usage. Some linguists have suggested that the earliest forms of Urdu evolved from the medieval (6th to 13th century) Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba register of the preceding Shauraseni language, a Middle Indo-Aryan language that is also the ancestor of other modern Indo-Aryan languages. In the Delhi region of India, the native language was Khariboli, whose earliest form is known as Old Hindi (or Hindavi). It belongs to the Western Hindi group of the Central Indo-Aryan languages. The contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures during the period of Islamic conquests in the Indian subcontinent (12th to 16th centuries) led to the development of Hindustani as a product of a composite Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb.\nIn cities such as Delhi, the ancient language Old Hindi began to acquire many Persian loanwords and continued to be called \"Hindi\" and later, also \"Hindustani\". An early literary tradition of Hindavi was founded by Amir Khusrau in the late 13th century, who has been called \"the father of Urdu literature\". After the conquest of the Deccan, and a subsequent immigration of noble Muslim families into the south, a form of the language flourished in medieval India as a vehicle of poetry, (especially under the Bahmanids), and is known as Dakhini, which contains loanwords from Telugu and Marathi.\nFrom the 13th century until the end of the 18th century; the language now known as Urdu was called \"Hindi\", \"Hindavi\", \"Hindustani\", \"Dehlavi\", \"Dihlawi\", \"Lahori\", and \"Lashkari\". The Delhi Sultanate established Persian as its official language in India, a policy continued by the Mughal Empire, which extended over most of northern South Asia from the 16th to 18th centuries and cemented Persian influence on Hindustani. Urdu was patronised by the Nawab of Awadh and in Lucknow, the language was refined, being not only spoken in the court, but by the common people in the city\u2014both Hindus and Muslims; the city of Lucknow gave birth to Urdu prose literature, with a notable novel being \"Umrao Jaan Ada\".\nAccording to the Navadirul Alfaz by Khan-i Arzu, the \"Zaban-e Urdu-e Shahi\" [language of the Imperial Camp] had attained special importance in the time of Alamgir\". By the end of the reign of Aurangzeb in the early 1700s, the common language around Delhi began to be referred to as \"Zaban-e-Urdu\", a name derived from the Turkic word \"ordu\" (army) or \"orda\" and is said to have arisen as the \"language of the camp\", or \"\"Zaban-i-Ordu\" means \"Language of High camps\"\" or natively \"\"Lashkari Zaban\" means \"Language\" \"of\" \"Army\"\" even though term Urdu held different meanings at that time. It is recorded that Aurangzeb spoke in Hindvi, which was most likely Persianised, as there are substantial evidence that Hindvi was written in the Persian script in this period.\nDuring this time period, Urdu was referred to as \"Moors\", which simply meant Muslim, by European writers. John Ovington wrote in 1689:\nThe language of the Moors is different from that of the ancient original inhabitants of India but is obliged to these Gentiles for its characters. For though the \"Moors dialect\" is peculiar to themselves, yet it is destitute of Letters to express it; and therefore, in all their Writings in their Mother Tongue, they borrow their letters from the Heathens, or from the Persians, or other Nations.\nIn 1715, a complete literary Diwan in Rekhta was written by Nawab Sadruddin Khan. An Urdu-Persian dictionary was written by Khan-i Arzu in 1751 in the reign of Ahmad Shah Bahadur. The name \"Urdu\" was first introduced by the poet Ghulam Hamadani Mushafi around 1780. As a literary language, Urdu took shape in courtly, elite settings. While Urdu retained the grammar and core Indo-Aryan vocabulary of the local Indian dialect Khariboli, it adopted the Perso-Arab writing system, written in the Nastaleeq style. \u2013 which was developed as a style of Persian calligraphy.\nOther historical names.\nThroughout the history of the language, Urdu has been referred to by several other names: Hindi, Hindavi, Rekhta, Urdu-e-Muallah, Dakhini, Moors and Dehlavi.\nIn 1773, the Swiss French soldier Antoine Polier notes that the English liked to use the name \"Moors\" for Urdu:\nI have a deep knowledge [\"je poss\u00e8de \u00e0 fond\"] of the common tongue of India, called \"Moors\" by the English, and \"Ourdouzebain\" by the natives of the land.\nSeveral works of Sufi writers like Ashraf Jahangir Semnani used similar names for the Urdu language. Shah Abdul Qadir Raipuri was the first person who translated The Quran into Urdu.\nDuring Shahjahan's time, the Capital was relocated to Delhi and named Shahjahanabad and the Bazar of the town was named Urdu e Muallah.\nIn the Akbar era, the word Rekhta was used to describe Urdu for the first time. It was originally a Persian word that meant \"to create a mixture\". Amir Khusrau was the first person to use the same word for Poetry.\nColonial period.\nBefore the standardisation of Urdu into colonial administration, British officers often referred to the language as \"Moors\" or \"Moorish jargon\". John Gilchrist was the first in British India to begin a systematic study on Urdu and began to use the term \"Hindustani\" what the majority of Europeans called \"Moors\", authoring the book \"The Strangers's East Indian Guide to the Hindoostanee or Grand Popular Language of India (improperly Called Moors)\".\nUrdu was promoted in colonial India by British policies to counter the previous emphasis on Persian, and the language also gained official status in colonial India because it was the language of the Muslim elite (such as Nawabs and Zamindars). Religious, social, and political factors arose during the European colonial period in India that advocated a distinction between Urdu and Hindi, leading to the Hindi\u2013Urdu controversy. In colonial India, ordinary Muslims and Hindus alike spoke the same language in the United Provinces in the nineteenth century, namely Hindustani, whether called by that name or whether called Hindi, Urdu, or one of the regional dialects such as Braj or Awadhi. Elites from Muslim communities, as well as a minority of Hindu elites, such as Munshis of Hindu origin, wrote the language in the Perso-Arabic script in courts and government offices, though Hindus continued to employ the Devanagari script in certain literary and religious contexts. Through the late 19th century, people did not view Urdu and Hindi as being two distinct languages, though in urban areas, the standardised Hindustani language was increasingly being referred to as Urdu and written in the Perso-Arabic script. Urdu and English replaced Persian as the official languages in northern parts of India in 1837. Hindus in northwestern India, under the Arya Samaj agitated against the sole use of the Perso-Arabic script and argued that the language should be written in the native Devanagari script, which triggered a backlash against the use of Hindi written in Devanagari by the Anjuman-e-Islamia of Lahore.\nAdvocacy for a standardised Hindi, based on Khari Boli, which would have equal official recognition did not begin until the 1860s, Proponents of Hindi over Urdu as an authorised language also had to take into account the existence of numerous provincial languages such as Awadhi, Braj Bhasha, Bhojpuri, Bundeli, and Maithili, which were considered a part of older Hindi, but which would problematise dialogues for an official, modern standard Hindi. Modern Standard Hindi did not emerge before the 20th century. The recognition of the Hindi script as an official script of courts in North India in 1900 was a key juncture in the evolution of Hindi-based language nationalism. Hindi, which was still not altogether standardised by the 1910s, and which had hitherto been considered an unrefined language was strictly patrolled to deliver a Sanskritic lexicon that did not permit influence of Urdu to be evident, Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi notably preparing the spelling, punctuation, and vocabulary of Modern Standard Hindi.\nThe Hindi-Urdu controversy in 1867, highlighted the linguistic and cultural divide between Hindus and Muslims in British India, with Urdu emerging as a symbol of the linguistic pride of Indian Muslims. This division played an important role in the political movement of Muslims, eventually leading to the formation of the All-India Muslim League in 1906, whose formation eventually resulted in the creation of Pakistan, as a separate Muslim state in the Indian subcontinent. The controversy began to emerge when certain Hindu leaders and organisations, including the Banaras Institute and the Allahabad Institute, advocated for replacing Urdu with Hindi as the official language. This firm stance contributed to prompting Sir Syed Ahmed Khan\u2014who was an advocate of the Hindu-Muslim unity, but later known as the 'Father of Two-nation theory'\u2014to advocate for the use of Urdu. He regarded Urdu as a symbol of Muslim heritage in the Indian subcontinent. Sir Syed also considered Urdu \"a common legacy of Hindus and Muslims\", and supported the use of Urdu through his writings. Under Sir Syed, the Scientific Society of Aligarh translated Western works only into Urdu. The Urdu movement, which was a sociopolitical movement aimed at making Urdu as the universal lingua-franca of the Muslims of the subcontinent was fuelled by Aligarh movement of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan. This movement strongly influenced the Muslim League and the Pakistan Movement.\nDuring the 1937 Lucknow session of the All-India Muslim League, the Raja of Mahmudabad, Mohammad Amir Ahmed Khan encouraged Urdu-speaking communities in British India to actively support and safeguard the Urdu language using all possible means.\nLiaquat Ali Khan, who was later the first prime minister of Pakistan, stated in 1939: 'We left Arabic language for this India and for the Hindus, we left Turkish language and adopted a language which came into existence and made progress in this country \u2013 a language which is not spoken anywhere else. Now, it is demanded of us that we should speak the language of Balmeek. We have taken many steps forward for the sake of Hindu-Muslim unity. We shall not now take another step forward. We are standing at the edge of our limit. Anyone who wishes to meet us should come here'. On 31 December 1939, Sayyid Sulaiman Nadvi, while delivering his presidential address at the Urdu Muslim Conference in Calcutta, said, \"In the brightness of the modern-daylight, something darkly unfair is being done and which is that every government official from top to bottom is engaged in doing his utmost in promoting the cause of Hindi. In my opinion, it is a disfavour to the Congress rather than a favour; it is reinforcing the misconception in the minds of the Muslims that it is what we can do with half the powers, what else we will do with full powers; as a result of which the country will be divided into two parts.\" A renowned Congressite, Tufail Ahmad Manglori, once acknowledged that the passage of a resolution against Urdu in the United Provinces caused deep distress among Muslims. He noted that the Hindi-Urdu controversy contributed to increasing divisions between the two communities, which continued to widen over time. Before the establishment of Pakistan, many Muslims of colonial India actively supported Urdu as their national language, and the language emerged as a symbol of unity during the Pakistan Movement by demonstrating that it possessed all the essential traits to affirm the need for a separate state for the Muslims of colonial India.\nBritish language policy played a role in shaping political developments that eventually led to the partition of colonial India into India and Pakistan. This outcome was paralleled by the linguistic divide of the Hindi-Urdu continuum, with the emergence of Sanskritised Hindi and Urdu adopting more Persian influences.\nUrdu had been used as a literary medium for British colonial Indian writers from the Bombay, Bengal, Orissa, and Hyderabad State as well.\nPost-Partition.\nBefore independence, Muslim League leader Muhammad Ali Jinnah advocated the use of Urdu, which he used as a symbol of national cohesion in Pakistan. Like other Muslim religious and political leaders, The scholar and linguist Maulvi Abdul Haq, who has been called \"Baba-e-Urdu\" (\"Father of Urdu\"), also reinforced support for Urdu as the national language of Pakistan, calling it the lingua franca and a unifying force of the country. Abdul Haq also stated: \"Urdu Language placed the first brick in the foundation of Pakistan.\"\nIn the early years of Pakistan, the finance departments, bureaucracy, and other major institutions of the country were mostly managed by Urdu-speaking population of the country. After the Bengali language movement and the separation of former East Pakistan, Urdu was recognised as the sole national language of Pakistan in 1973, although English and regional languages were also granted official recognition. When the 1972 language violence in Sindh occurred, the poet Rais Amrohvi, who played a significant role in promoting Urdu and supporting the Urdu-speaking population of Pakistan, wrote his famous poem \"Urdu ka janaza hai zara dhoom say niklay\" (It's Urdu's funeral, make it befitting!) as a tribute to the language. Following the 1979 Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan and subsequent arrival of millions of Afghan refugees who have lived in Pakistan for many decades, many Afghans, including those who moved back to Afghanistan, have also become fluent in Hindi-Urdu, an occurrence aided by exposure to the Indian media, chiefly Hindi-Urdu Bollywood films and songs.\nThere have been attempts to purge Urdu of native Prakrit and Sanskrit words, and Hindi of Persian loanwords \u2013 new vocabulary draws primarily from Persian and Arabic for Urdu and from Sanskrit for Hindi. English has exerted a heavy influence on both as a co-official language. According to Bruce (2021), Urdu has adapted English words since the eighteenth century. A movement towards the hyper-Persianisation of an Urdu emerged in Pakistan since its independence in 1947 which is \"as artificial as\" the hyper-Sanskritised Hindi that has emerged in India; hyper-Persianisation of Urdu was prompted in part by the increasing Sanskritisation of Hindi. However, the style of Urdu spoken on a day-to-day basis in Pakistan is akin to neutral Hindustani that serves as the \"lingua franca\" of the northern Indian subcontinent.\nIn India, since at least 1977, some commentators, such as journalist Khushwant Singh, have characterised Urdu as a 'dying language.' However, others, such as Indian poet and writer Gulzar\u2014who is popular in both countries and both language communities but writes only in Urdu (script) and has difficulties reading Devanagari, so he lets others transcribe his work\u2014disagree with this assessment and state that Urdu 'is the most alive language and moving ahead with times' in India. This phenomenon pertains to the decrease in relative and absolute numbers of native Urdu speakers as opposed to speakers of other languages; declining (advanced) knowledge of Urdu's Perso-Arabic script, Urdu vocabulary and grammar; the role of translation and transliteration of literature from and into Urdu; the shifting cultural image of Urdu and socio-economic status associated with Urdu speakers (which negatively impacts especially their employment opportunities in both countries), the \"de jure\" legal status and \"de facto\" political status of Urdu, how much Urdu is used as language of instruction and chosen by students in higher education, and how the maintenance and development of Urdu is financially and institutionally supported by governments and NGOs. In India, although Urdu is not and never was used exclusively by Muslims (and Hindi never exclusively by Hindus), the ongoing Hindi\u2013Urdu controversy and modern cultural association of each language with the two religions has led to fewer Hindus using Urdu. In the 20th century, Indian Muslims gradually began to collectively embrace Urdu (for example, 'post-independence Muslim politics of Bihar saw a mobilisation around the Urdu language as tool of empowerment for minorities especially coming from weaker socio-economic backgrounds'), but in the early 21st century an increasing percentage of Indian Muslims began switching to Hindi due to socio-economic factors, such as Urdu being abandoned as the language of instruction in much of India, and having limited employment opportunities compared to Hindi, English and regional languages. The number of Urdu speakers in India fell 1.5% between 2001 and 2011 (then 5.08 million Urdu speakers), especially in the most Urdu-speaking states of Uttar Pradesh (c. 8% to 5%) and Bihar (c. 11.5% to 8.5%), even though the number of Muslims in these two states grew in the same period. Although Urdu is still very prominent in early 21st-century Indian pop culture, ranging from Bollywood to social media, knowledge of the Urdu script and the publication of books in Urdu have steadily declined, while policies of the Indian government do not actively support the preservation of Urdu in professional and official spaces. Because during the partition, Urdu became the national language of Pakistan, the Indian state and some religious nationalists began in part to regard Urdu as a 'foreign' language, to be viewed with suspicion. Urdu advocates in India disagree whether it should be allowed to write Urdu in the Devanagari and Latin script (Roman Urdu) to allow its survival, or whether this will only hasten its demise and that the language can only be preserved if expressed in the Perso-Arabic script. There are some Hindu poets in India who continue to write in Urdu after the partition, including Gopi Chand Narang and Gulzar Dehlvi. Throughout India, various states have established an Urdu Academy to promote the use of Urdu and Urdu literature.\nFor Pakistan, Urdu originally had the image of a refined, elite language of the Enlightenment, progress, and emancipation, and the language contributed to the success of Pakistan's independence movement. But after the 1947 Partition, when it was chosen as the national language of Pakistan to unite all inhabitants with one linguistic identity, it faced serious competition primarily from Bengali (spoken by 56% of the total population, mostly in East Pakistan until that attained independence in 1971 as Bangladesh), and after 1971 from English. Both pro-independence elites that formed the leadership of the Muslim League in Pakistan and the Hindu-dominated Congress Party in India had been educated in English during the British colonial period, and continued to operate in English and send their children to English-medium schools as they continued dominate both countries' post-Partition politics. Although the Anglicized elite in Pakistan has made attempts at Urduisation of education with varying degrees of success, no successful attempts were ever made to Urduise politics, the legal system, the army, or the economy, all of which remained solidly Anglophone. Even the regime of general Zia-ul-Haq (1977\u20131988), who came from a middle-class Punjabi family and initially fervently supported a rapid and complete Urduisation of Pakistani society (earning him the honorary title of the 'Patron of Urdu' in 1981), failed to make significant achievements, and by 1987 had abandoned most of his efforts in favour of pro-English policies. Since the 1960s, the Urdu lobby and eventually the Urdu language in Pakistan has been associated with religious Islamism and political national conservatism (and eventually the lower and lower-middle classes, alongside regional languages such as Punjabi, Sindhi, and Balochi), while English has been associated with the internationally oriented secular and progressive left (and eventually the upper and upper-middle classes). Despite governmental attempts at Urduisation of Pakistan, the position and prestige of English only grew stronger in the meantime.\nDemographics and geographic distribution.\nThere are over 100 million native speakers of Urdu in India and Pakistan together: there were 50.8 million Urdu speakers in India (4.34% of the total population) as per the 2011 census; and approximately 22.3 million in Pakistan (9.25% of the total population) in 2023. There are several hundred thousand in the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, United States, and Bangladesh. However, Hindustani, of which Urdu is one variety, is spoken much more widely, forming the third most commonly spoken language in the world, after Mandarin and English. The syntax (grammar), morphology, and the core vocabulary of Urdu and Hindi are essentially identical \u2013 thus linguists usually count them as one single language, while some contend that they are considered as two different languages for socio-political reasons.\nOwing to interaction with other languages, Urdu has become localised wherever it is spoken, including in Pakistan. Though Urdu is spoken by many Muhajirs in its standard form. In some areas, it has borrowed words from regional languages, giving the language a peculiar regional flavor. Similarly, the Urdu spoken in India can also be distinguished into many dialects such as the Standard Urdu of Lucknow and Delhi, as well as the Dakhni (Deccan) of South India. Because of Urdu's similarity to Hindi, speakers of the two languages can easily understand one another if both sides refrain from using literary vocabulary.\nPakistan.\nAlthough Urdu is widely spoken and understood throughout all of Pakistan as the national language, only 9.25% of the population reported it as their mother tongue, according to the 2023 Pakistani census. Most of the nearly three million Afghan refugees of different ethnic origins (such as Pashtun, Tajik, Uzbek, Hazarvi, and Turkmen) who stayed in Pakistan for over twenty-five years have also become fluent in Urdu. Muhajirs since 1947 have historically formed the majority population in the city of Karachi, however. Many newspapers are published in Urdu in Pakistan, including the \"Daily Jang\", \"Nawa-i-Waqt\", and \"Millat\".\nUrdu is spoken as the first language of many people among the community known as Muhajirs (a multi-origin ethnic group of Pakistan), who left India after independence in 1947; these Muhajirs were from various parts of India, with Urdu speakers predominantly hailing from United Provinces (Uttar Pradesh), Delhi, Central Provinces (Madhya Pradesh), Bihar and Hyderabad. Other communities, most notably the Punjabi elite of Pakistan, have adopted Urdu as a mother tongue and identify with both an Urdu speaker as well as Punjabi identity. Urdu has served as a \"lingua franca\", especially among Muslims in north and northwest British India, as well as in Hyderabad State. It is written, spoken and used in all provinces/territories of Pakistan, and together with English as the main languages of instruction, although the people from differing provinces may have different native languages.\nUrdu is taught as a compulsory subject up to higher secondary school in both English and Urdu medium school systems, which has produced millions of second-language Urdu speakers among people whose native language is one of the other languages of Pakistan \u2013 which in turn has led to the absorption of vocabulary from various regional Pakistani languages, while some Urdu vocabularies has also been assimilated by Pakistan's regional languages. Some who are from a non-Urdu background now can read and write only Urdu. With such a large number of people(s) speaking Urdu, the language has acquired a peculiar regional flavor further distinguishing it from the Urdu spoken by native speakers, resulting in more diversity within the language.\nIndia.\nIn India, Urdu is spoken in places where there are large Muslim minorities or cities that were bases for Muslim empires in the past. These include parts of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra (Marathwada and Konkanis), Karnataka and cities such as Hyderabad, Lucknow, Delhi, Malerkotla, Bareilly, Meerut, Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Roorkee, Deoband, Moradabad, Azamgarh, Bijnor, Najibabad, Rampur, Aligarh, Allahabad, Gorakhpur, Agra, Firozabad, Kanpur, Badaun, Bhopal, Hyderabad, Aurangabad, Bangalore, Kolkata, Mysore, Patna, Darbhanga, Gaya, Madhubani, Samastipur, Siwan, Saharsa, Supaul, Muzaffarpur, Nalanda, Munger, Bhagalpur, Araria, Gulbarga, Parbhani, Nanded, Malegaon, Bidar, Ajmer, and Ahmedabad. In a very significant number among the nearly 800 districts of India, there is a small Urdu-speaking minority at least. In Araria district, Bihar, there is a plurality of Urdu speakers and near-plurality in Hyderabad district, Telangana (43.35% Telugu speakers and 43.24% Urdu speakers).\nSome Indian Muslim schools (Madrasa) teach Urdu as a first language and have their own syllabi and exams. In fact, the language of Bollywood films tend to contain a large number of Persian and Arabic words and thus considered to be \"Urdu\" in a sense, especially in songs.\nIndia has more than 3,000 Urdu publications, including 405 daily Urdu newspapers. Newspapers such as \"Neshat News Urdu\", \"Sahara Urdu\", \"Daily Salar\", \"Hindustan Express\", \"Daily Pasban\", \"Siasat Daily\", \"The Munsif Daily\" and \"Inqilab\" are published and distributed in Bangalore, Malegaon, Mysore, Hyderabad, and Mumbai.\nElsewhere.\nIn Nepal, Urdu is a registered regional dialect and in South Africa, it is a protected language in the constitution. It is also spoken as a minority language in Afghanistan and Bangladesh, with no official status.\nOutside South Asia, it is spoken by large numbers of migrant South Asian workers in the major urban centres of the Persian Gulf countries. Urdu is also spoken by large numbers of immigrants and their children in the major urban centres of the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, and Australia. Along with Arabic, Urdu is among the immigrant languages with the most speakers in Catalonia.\nCultural identity.\nColonial India.\nReligious and social atmospheres in early nineteenth century India played a significant role in the development of the Urdu register. Hindi became the distinct register spoken by those who sought to construct a Hindu identity in the face of colonial rule. As Hindi separated from Hindustani to create a distinct spiritual identity, Urdu was employed to create a definitive Islamic identity for the Muslim population in India. Urdu's use was not confined only to northern India \u2013 it had been used as a literary medium for Indian writers from the Bombay Presidency, Bengal, Orissa Province, and Tamil Nadu as well.\nAs Urdu and Hindi became means of religious and social construction for Muslims and Hindus respectively, each register developed its own script. According to Islamic tradition, Arabic, the language of Muhammad and the Qur'an, holds spiritual significance and power. Because Urdu was intentioned as means of unification for Muslims in Northern India and later Pakistan, it adopted a modified Perso-Arabic script.\nPakistan.\nUrdu has played a central role in shaping Pakistan\u2019s national identity, holding symbolic significance as a cultural identity in the country\u2019s formation and as a common lingua franca. Several languages and dialects spoken throughout the regions of Pakistan produced an imminent need for a uniting language. Urdu was chosen as a symbol of unity for the new Dominion of Pakistan in 1947, and it had already served as a \"lingua franca\" among Muslims in north and northwest of British Indian Empire. Urdu is also seen as a repertory for the cultural and social heritage of Pakistan.\nWhile Urdu and the Muslim identity of the Indian subcontinent together played important roles in developing the national identity of Pakistan, disputes in the 1950s (particularly those in East Pakistan, where Bengali was the dominant language), challenged the idea of Urdu as a national symbol and its practicality as the \"lingua franca\". The significance of Urdu as a national symbol was downplayed by these disputes when English and Bengali were also accepted as official languages in the former East Pakistan (now Bangladesh).\nOfficial status.\nPakistan.\nUrdu is the sole national, and one of the two official languages of Pakistan (along with English). It is spoken and understood throughout the country, whereas the state-by-state languages (languages spoken throughout various regions) are the provincial languages, although only 9.25% of Pakistanis speak Urdu as their first language. Its official status has meant that Urdu is understood and spoken widely throughout Pakistan as a second or third language. It is used in education, literature, office and court business, although in practice, English is used instead of Urdu in the higher echelons of government. Article 251(1) of the Pakistani Constitution mandates that Urdu be implemented as the sole language of government, though English continues to be the most widely used language at the higher echelons of Pakistani government.\nIndia.\nUrdu is also one of the officially recognised languages in India and also has the status of \"additional official language\" in the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Telangana and the national capital territory Delhi. Also as one of the five official languages of Jammu and Kashmir.\nIndia established the governmental Bureau for the Promotion of Urdu in 1969, although the Central Hindi Directorate was established earlier in 1960, and the promotion of Hindi is better funded and more advanced, while the status of Urdu has been undermined by the promotion of Hindi. Private Indian organisations such as the Anjuman-e-Tariqqi Urdu, Deeni Talimi Council and Urdu Mushafiz Dasta promote the use and preservation of Urdu, with the Anjuman successfully launching a campaign that reintroduced Urdu as an official language of Bihar in the 1970s. In the former Jammu and Kashmir state, section 145 of the Kashmir Constitution stated: \"The official language of the State shall be Urdu but the English language shall unless the Legislature by law otherwise provides, continue to be used for all the official purposes of the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of the Constitution.\"\nDialects.\nUrdu became a literary language in the 18th century and two similar standard forms came into existence in Delhi and Lucknow. Since the partition of India in 1947, a third standard has arisen in the Pakistani city of Karachi. Deccani, an older form used in southern India, became a court language of the Deccan sultanates by the 16th century.\nUrdu has a few recognised dialects, including Dakhni, Dhakaiya, Rekhta, and Modern Vernacular Urdu (based on the Khariboli dialect of the Delhi region). Dakhni (also known as Dakani, Deccani, Desia, Mirgan) is spoken in Deccan region of southern India. It is distinct by its mixture of vocabulary from Marathi and Konkani, as well as some vocabulary from Arabic, Persian and Chagatai that are not found in the standard dialect of Urdu. Dakhini is widely spoken in all parts of Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. Urdu is read and written as in other parts of India. A number of daily newspapers and several monthly magazines in Urdu are published in these states.\nDhakaiya Urdu is a dialect native to the city of Old Dhaka in Bangladesh, dating back to the Mughal era. However, its popularity, even among native speakers, has been gradually declining since the Bengali language movement in the 20th century. It is not officially recognised by the Government of Bangladesh. The Urdu spoken by Stranded Pakistanis in Bangladesh is different from this dialect.\nCode switching.\nMany bilingual or multi-lingual Urdu speakers, being familiar with both Urdu and English, display code-switching (referred to as \"Urdish\") in certain localities and between certain social groups. On 14 August 2015, the Government of Pakistan launched the \"Ilm\" Pakistan movement, with a uniform curriculum in Urdish. Ahsan Iqbal, Federal Minister of Pakistan, said \"Now the government is working on a new curriculum to provide a new medium to the students which will be the combination of both Urdu and English and will name it Urdish.\"\nComparison with Modern Standard Hindi.\nStandard Urdu is often compared with Standard Hindi. Both Urdu and Hindi, which are considered standard registers of the same language, Hindustani (or Hindi-Urdu), share a core vocabulary and grammar.\nApart from religious associations, the differences are largely restricted to the standard forms: Standard Urdu is conventionally written in the Nastaliq style of the Persian alphabet and relies heavily on Persian and Arabic as a source for technical and literary vocabulary, whereas Standard Hindi is conventionally written in Devan\u0101gar\u012b and draws on Sanskrit. However, both share a core vocabulary of native Sanskrit and Prakrit derived words and a significant number of Arabic and Persian loanwords, with a consensus of linguists considering them to be two standardised forms of the same language and consider the differences to be sociolinguistic; a few classify them separately. The two languages are often considered to be a single language (Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu) on a dialect continuum ranging from Persianised to Sanskritised vocabulary, but now they are more and more different in words due to politics. Old Urdu dictionaries also contain most of the Sanskrit words now present in Hindi.\nMutual intelligibility decreases in literary and specialised contexts that rely on academic or technical vocabulary. In a longer conversation, differences in formal vocabulary and pronunciation of some Urdu phonemes are noticeable, though many native Hindi speakers also pronounce these phonemes. At a phonological level, speakers of both languages are frequently aware of the Perso-Arabic or Sanskrit origins of their word choice, which affects the pronunciation of those words. Urdu speakers will often insert vowels to break up consonant clusters found in words of Sanskritic origin, but will pronounce them correctly in Arabic and Persian loanwords. As a result of religious nationalism since the partition of British India and continued communal tensions, native speakers of both Hindi and Urdu frequently assert that they are distinct languages.\nThe grammar of Hindi and Urdu is shared, though formal Urdu makes more use of the Persian \"-e-\" \"izafat\" grammatical construct (as in \"Hammam-e-Qadimi\", or \"Nishan-e-Haider\") than does Hindi.\nUrdu speakers by country.\nThe following table shows the number of Urdu speakers in some countries.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nNotes\nVowels.\nNotes\nVocabulary.\nSyed Ahmed Dehlavi, a 19th-century lexicographer who compiled the \"Farhang-e-Asifiya\" Urdu dictionary, estimated that 75% of Urdu words have their etymological roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit, and approximately 99% of Urdu verbs have their roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit. Urdu has borrowed words from Persian and to a lesser extent, Arabic through Persian, to the extent of about 25% to 30% of Urdu's vocabulary. A table illustrated by the linguist Afroz Taj of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill likewise illustrates the number of Persian loanwords to native Sanskrit-derived words in literary Urdu as comprising a 1:4 ratio.\nThe \"trend towards Persianisation\" started in the 18th century by the Delhi school of Urdu poets, though other writers, such as Meeraji, wrote in a Sanskritised form of the language. There has been a move towards hyper Persianisation in Pakistan since 1947, which has been adopted by much of the country's writers; as such, some Urdu texts can be composed of 70% Perso-Arabic loanwords just as some Persian texts can have 70% Arabic vocabulary. Some Pakistani Urdu speakers have incorporated Hindi vocabulary into their speech as a result of exposure to Indian entertainment. In India, Urdu has not diverged from Hindi as much as it has in Pakistan.\nMost borrowed words in Urdu are nouns and adjectives. Many of the words of Arabic origin have been adopted through Persian, and have different pronunciations and nuances of meaning and usage than they do in Arabic. There are also a smaller number of borrowings from Portuguese. Some examples for Portuguese words borrowed into Urdu are \"chabi\" (\"chave\": key), \"girja\" (\"igreja\": church), \"kamra\" (\"c\u00e1mara\": room), \"qam\u012bz\" (\"camisa\": shirt).\nAlthough the word \"Urdu\" is derived from the Turkic word \"ordu\" (army) or orda, from which English \"horde\" is also derived, Turkic borrowings in Urdu are minimal and Urdu is also not genetically related to the Turkic languages. Urdu words originating from Chagatai and Arabic were borrowed through Persian and hence are Persianised versions of the original words. For instance, the Arabic \"ta' marbuta\" (\u00a0\u00a0) changes to \"he\" (\u00a0\u00a0) or \"te\" (\u00a0\u00a0). Nevertheless, contrary to popular belief, Urdu did not borrow from the Turkish language, but from Chagatai, a Turkic language from Central Asia. Urdu and Turkish both borrowed from Arabic and Persian, hence the similarity in pronunciation of many Urdu and Turkish words.\nFormality.\nUrdu in its less formalised register is known as \"rekhta\" (, ); the more formal register is sometimes referred to as () or (), referring to the Imperial army or simply \"Lashkari\". The etymology of the word used in Urdu, for the most part, decides how polite or refined one's speech is. For example, Urdu speakers distinguish between and , both meaning \"water\". The former is used colloquially and has older Sanskrit origins; the latter is used formally and poetically, being of Persian origin.\nIf a word is of Persian or Arabic origin, the level of speech is considered to be more formal and grander. Similarly, if Persian or Arabic grammar constructs, such as the izafat, are used in Urdu, the level of speech is also considered more formal. If a word is inherited from Sanskrit, the level of speech is considered more colloquial and personal.\nWriting system.\nUrdu is written right-to left in an extension of the Persian alphabet, which is itself an extension of the Arabic alphabet. Urdu is associated with the Nasta\u02bfl\u012bq style of Persian calligraphy, whereas Arabic is generally written in the \"Naskh\" or \"Ruq'ah\" styles. Because of its thousands of ligatures, \"Nasta\u2019liq\" is notoriously difficult to typeset, so Urdu newspapers were hand-written by masters of calligraphy, known as \"k\u0101tib\" or \"khush-naw\u012bs\", until the late 1980s. One handwritten Urdu newspaper, \"The Musalman\", is still published daily in Chennai. InPage, a widely used desktop publishing tool for Urdu, has over 20,000 ligatures in its Nasta\u02bfliq computer fonts.\nA highly Persianised and technical form of Urdu was the \"lingua franca\" of the law courts of the British administration in Bengal and the North-West Provinces &amp; Oudh. Until the late 19th century, all proceedings and court transactions in this register of Urdu were written officially in the Persian script.\nRomanisation.\nISO 15919 Romanisation of Urdu is a scholarly transliteration system that accurately represents the pronunciation of Urdu letters using diacritics and special markers for vowels and nasal sounds.\nRoman Urdu is the writing of Urdu in the Latin script. It is the prevalent form of Urdu on social media. Pakistanis also frequently write other Pakistani languages in the Latin script online.\nThe romanised usage of Urdu dates back to 1804 in colonial India, when Romanised Urdu Bibles were published by the British and Foreign Bible Society and later, the Bible Society of India; these publications continue to be used in parts of Uttar Pradesh in present-day India.\nOther scripts used.\nIn 1880, Sir Ashley Eden, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal in colonial India abolished the use of the Persian alphabet in the law courts of Bengal and ordered the exclusive use of Kaithi, a popular script used for both Urdu and Hindi; in the Bihar Province, the court language was Urdu written in the Kaithi script. Kaithi's association with Urdu and Hindi was ultimately eliminated by the political contest between these languages and their scripts, in which the Persian script was definitively linked to Urdu.\nMore recently in India, Urdu speakers have adopted Devanagari for publishing Urdu periodicals and have innovated new strategies to mark Urdu in Devanagari as distinct from Hindi in Devanagari. Such publishers have introduced new orthographic features into Devanagari for the purpose of representing the Perso-Arabic etymology of Urdu words. One example is the use of \u0905 (Devanagari \"a\") with vowel signs to mimic contexts of \u0639 (\"\u2018ain\"), in violation of Hindi orthographic rules. For Urdu publishers, the use of Devanagari gives them a greater audience, whereas the orthographic changes help them preserve a distinct identity of Urdu.\nSome poets from Bengal, namely Qazi Nazrul Islam, have historically used the Bengali script to write Urdu poetry like \"Prem Nagar Ka Thikana Karle\" and \"Mera Beti Ki Khela\", as well as bilingual Bengali-Urdu poems like \"Alga Koro Go Kh\u00f5par B\u00e3dhon\", \"Juboker Chholona\" and \"Mera Dil Betab Kiya\". Dhakaiya Urdu is a colloquial non-standard dialect of Urdu which was typically not written. However, organisations seeking to preserve the dialect have begun transcribing the dialect in the Bengali script.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32233", "revid": "50543982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32233", "title": "Ultramontanism", "text": "Clerical political conception within the Catholic Church\nUltramontanism is a clerical-political conception within the Catholic Church that places strong emphasis on (and expresses loyalty to) the prerogatives and powers of the Pope in matters related to civil state governance. It contrasts with Gallicanism, the belief that popular civil authority\u2014often represented by the monarch's or state's authority\u2014over the Church is comparable to that of the Pope.\nHistory.\nThe term descends from the Middle Ages, when a non-Italian pope was said to be \"papa ultramontano \u2013\" a pope from beyond the mountains (the Alps). Foreign students at medieval Italian universities also were referred to as \"ultramontani\".\nAfter the Protestant Reformation in France, the concept was revived but with its directionality reversed to indicate the man \"beyond the mountains\" in Italy: the Pope. The term \"ultramontain\" was used to refer to Catholics who supported papal authority in French affairs \"\u2013\" as opposed to the Gallican and Jansenist factions, who did not \"\u2013\" and was intended as an insult implying lack of patriotism. From the 17th century, ultramontanism became closely associated with the Jesuits.\nIn the 18th century the term came to refer to supporters of the Church in any conflict between church and state. In Austria ultramontanists were opposed to Josephinism, and in Germany to Febronianism. In Great Britain and Ireland ultramontanists resisted Cisalpinism, which favored concessions to the Protestant state in order to achieve Catholic emancipation.\nIn eighteenth-century Spain, the Bourbon monarchs began implementing policies of regalism, which expanded the power of the monarchy and sought to bring the Catholic Church under its jurisdiction in all matters except the spiritual sphere. Charles III of Spain's ministers, Count of Floridablanca and the Count of Campomanes rejected the arguments of the ultramontanists that the Church had inalienable rights in the secular sphere. The regalist reforms that the Spanish crown sought to implement were not completely successful, and the resistance to them were attributed to support for the Society of Jesus, which had been expelled from the Spanish Empire in 1767, but prior to that were educators.\nIn Canada, the majority of Catholic clergy despised the French Revolution and its anti-clerical bias and looked to Rome for both spiritual and political guidance. There were many laymen and laywomen who supported these ideals as key to preserving Canadian institutions and values. For this reason they were called ultramontanists. The ultramontanes distrusted both the Protestant anglophone and francophone politicians, but the Church found it easier to deal with British governors, who appreciated the role of the Church in containing dissent, than with the francophone liberal professionals who were secularists.\nFirst Vatican Council.\nAccording to Catholic academic Jeffrey P. von Arx,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe response was a condemnation of Gallicanism as heretical:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe council also asserted papal primacy. In July 1870, it issued the Dogmatic constitution , defining four doctrines of the Catholic faith: the apostolic primacy conferred on Peter, the perpetuity of this primacy in the Roman pontiffs, the meaning and power of the papal primacy, and Papal infallibility.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]e teach and declare that, by divine ordinance, the Roman Church possesses a pre-eminence of ordinary power over every other Church, and that this jurisdictional power of the Roman Pontiff is both episcopal and immediate. Both clergy and faithful, of whatever rite and dignity, both singly and collectively, are bound to submit to this power by the duty of hierarchical subordination and true obedience, and this not only in matters concerning faith and morals, but also in those which regard the discipline and government of the Church throughout the world.\nVon Arx compares this to \"the great empires and national states of the 19th century, which used new means of communication and transportation to consolidate power, enforce unity and build bureaucracies\". \"Cardinal Henry Edward Manning in Great Britain thought unity and discipline within the church were of the utmost importance in protecting the church and advancing its interests in a liberal, democratic state, and so he was one of the strongest advocates of the ultramontane position.\" The English bishops at the council were characterized by their ultramontanism and described as \"being more Catholic than the Pope himself\".\nReaction.\nOther Christian groups outside the Catholic Church declared this as the triumph of what they termed \"the heresy of ultramontanism\". It was specifically decried in the \"Declaration of the Catholic Congress at Munich\", in the Theses of Bonn, and in the Declaration of Utrecht, which became the foundational documents of Old Catholics () who split with Rome over the declaration on infallibility and supremacy, joining the Old Episcopal Order Catholic See of Utrecht, which had been independent from Rome since 1723.\nAs with previous pronouncements by the pope, liberals across Europe were outraged by the doctrine of infallibility and many countries reacted with laws to counter the influence of the church. The term \"ultramontanism\" was revived during the French Third Republic (1870\u20131940) as a pejorative way to describe policies that went against , a concept rooted in the French Revolution. The French philosopher Jacques Maritain noted the distinction between the models found in France and the separation of church and state in the United States in the mid-twentieth century. He considered the US model of that time to be more amicable because it had both \"sharp distinction and actual cooperation\" between church and state, what he called \"an historical treasure\" and admonished the United States, \"Please to God that you keep it carefully, and do not let your concept of separation veer round to the European one.\"\nAfter Italian Unification and the abrupt (and unofficial) end of the First Vatican Council in 1870 because of the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, the ultramontanist movement and the opposing conciliarism became obsolete to a large extent. However, some very extreme tendencies of a minority of adherents to ultramontanism \u2013 especially those attributing to the Roman pontiff, even in his private opinions, absolute infallibility even in matters beyond faith and morals, and impeccability \u2013 survived and were eagerly used by opponents of the Catholic Church and papacy before the Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965) for use in their propaganda. These extreme tendencies, however, were never supported by the First Vatican Council's dogma of 1870 of papal infallibility and primacy, but were rather inspired by erroneous private opinions of some Catholic laymen who tend to identify themselves completely with the Holy See.\nAt the Second Vatican Council's Dogmatic Constitution on the Church , the Catholic Church's teaching on the authority of the pope, bishops and councils was further elaborated. The post-conciliar position of the Apostolic See did not deny any of the previous doctrines of papal infallibility or papal primacy; rather, it shifted emphasis from structural and organizational authority to doctrinal teaching authority (also known as the ). Papal , i.e. papal teaching authority, was defined in No.\u00a025 and later codified in the 1983 revision of Canon Law.\nControversy.\nSome, such as the former Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, have claimed the Catholic social teaching of subsidiarity can overrun ultramontanism and has the potential to decentralize the Catholic Church, whereas others defend it as merely a bureaucratic adjustment to give more pastoral responsibility to local bishops and priests of local parishes.\nChallenges to ultramontanism have remained strong within and outside Roman jurisdiction. Ultramontanism has particularly overshadowed ecumenical work between the Catholic Church and both Lutherans and Anglicans. The joint Anglican-Roman Catholic International Consultation published \"The Gift of Authority\" in 1999, highlights agreements and differences on these issues.\nPosition of other traditional churches.\nUltramontanism is distinct from the positions adopted by the other traditional churches, particularly the Anglican communion, Eastern Orthodox communion, the Oriental Orthodox communion, the Old Catholic Church, or the Church of the East. These churches regard the pope as having been \"primus inter pares\" when the churches were united in full communion, and generally still acknowledge that status today, albeit in an impaired form due to disunity; similarly they do not recognize the doctrines of infallibility or the pope's alleged universal jurisdiction over patriarchates and autocephalous churches other than that of Rome itself, except insofar as this is part of the concept of \"primus inter pares\".\nIn the joint agreed statement \"The Gift of Authority\" (1999) the Catholic Church and the Anglican Communion were agreed on the collegial nature of the life and work of bishops. Similarly both churches acknowledged the role of episcopal primacy within the college of bishops. On the question of the universal primacy of the Pope, the joint report found common ground, and stated that a \"particular conclusion\" of their discussions had been \"that Anglicans be open to and desire a recovery and re-reception under certain clear conditions of the exercise of universal primacy by the Bishop of Rome\"; nonetheless a clear distinction remained between the Anglican view of a universal primacy exercised within a universal collegiality, and the Catholic view of a universal primacy with actual universal jurisdiction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32235", "revid": "47285530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32235", "title": "Ural-Altaic languages", "text": "Language family\nUral-Altaic or Uralo-Altaic is a linguistic convergence zone and abandoned language-family proposal uniting the Uralic and the Altaic (in the narrow sense) languages. It is now generally agreed that even the Altaic languages do not share a common descent: the similarities between Turkic, Mongolic and Tungusic are better explained by diffusion and borrowing. Just as in Altaic, the internal structure of the Uralic family has been debated since the family was first proposed. Doubts about the validity of most or all of the proposed higher-order Uralic branchings (grouping the nine undisputed families) are becoming more common. The term continues to be used for the central Eurasian typological, grammatical and lexical convergence zone.\nIndeed, \"Ural-Altaic\" may be preferable to \"Altaic\" in this sense. For example, J. Janhunen states that \"speaking of 'Altaic' instead of 'Ural-Altaic' is a misconception, for there are no areal or typological features that are specific to 'Altaic' without Uralic.\" Originally suggested in the 18th century, the genealogical and racial hypotheses remained debated into the mid-20th century, often with disagreements exacerbated by pan-nationalist agendas.\nThe Ural-Altaic hypothesis had multiple proponents in Britain. Since the 1960s, the proposed language family has been widely rejected. A relationship between the Altaic, Indo-European and Uralic families was revived in the context of the Nostratic hypothesis, which was popular for a time, with for example Allan Bomhard treating Uralic, Altaic and Indo-European as coordinate branches. However, Nostratic too is now rejected.\nHistory as a hypothesized language family.\nThe concept of a Ural-Altaic ethnic and language family goes back to the linguistic theories of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz; in his opinion there was no better method for specifying the relationship and origin of the various peoples of the Earth, than the comparison of their languages. In his \"Brevis designatio meditationum de originibus gentium ductis potissimum ex indicio linguarum\", written in 1710, he originates every human language from one common ancestor language. Over time, this ancestor language split into two families; the Japhetic and the Aramaic. The Japhetic family split even further, into Scythian and Celtic branches. The members of the Scythian family were: the Greek language, the family of Sarmato-Slavic languages (Russian, Polish, Czech, Dalmatian, Bulgar, Slovene, Avar and Khazar), the family of Turkic languages (Turkish, Cuman, Kalmyk and Mongolian), the family of Finno-Ugric languages (Finnish, Saami, Hungarian, Estonian, Liv and Samoyed). Although his theory and grouping were far from perfect, they had a considerable effect on the development of linguistic research, especially in German-speaking countries.\nIn his book \"An historico-geographical description of the north and east parts of Europe and Asia\", published in 1730, Philip Johan von Strahlenberg, Swedish prisoner-of-war and explorer of Siberia, who accompanied Daniel Gottlieb Messerschmidt on his expeditions, described Finno-Ugric, Turkic, Samoyedic, Mongolic, Tungusic and Caucasian peoples as sharing linguistic and cultural commonalities. 20th century scholarship has on several occasions incorrectly credited him with proposing a Ural-Altaic language family, though he does not claim linguistic affinity \"between\" any of the six groups.\nDanish philologist Rasmus Christian Rask described what he called \"Scythian\" languages in 1834, which included Finno-Ugric, Turkic, Samoyedic, Eskimo, Caucasian, Basque and others.\nThe Ural-Altaic hypothesis was elaborated at least as early as 1836 by W. Schott and in 1838 by F. J. Wiedemann.\nThe \"Altaic\" hypothesis, as mentioned by Finnish linguist and explorer Matthias Castr\u00e9n by 1844, included the Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic, grouped as \"Chudic\", and Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic, grouped as \"Tataric\". Subsequently, in the latter half of the 19th century, Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic came to be referred to as Altaic languages, whereas Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic were called Uralic. The similarities between these two families led to their retention in a common grouping, named Ural\u2013Altaic.\nFriedrich Max M\u00fcller, the German Orientalist and philologist, published and proposed a new grouping of the non-Aryan and non-Semitic Asian languages in 1855. In his work \"The Languages of the Seat of War in the East\", he called these languages \"Turanian\". M\u00fcller divided this group into two subgroups, the Southern Division, and the Northern Division. In the long run, his evolutionist theory about languages' structural development, tying growing grammatical refinement to socio-economic development, and grouping languages into 'antediluvian', 'familial', 'nomadic', and 'political' developmental stages, proved unsound, but his Northern Division was renamed and re-classed as the \"Ural-Altaic languages\".\nBetween the 1850s and 1870s, there were efforts by Frederick Roehrig to including some Native American languages in a \"Turanian\" or \"Ural-Altaic\" family, and between the 1870s and 1890s, there was speculation about links with Basque.\nIn Hungary, where the national language is Uralic but with heavy historical Turkic influence\u2014a fact which by itself spurred the popularity of the \"Ural-Altaic\" hypothesis\u2014the idea of the Ural\u2013Altaic relationship remained widely implicitly accepted in the late 19th and the mid-20th century, though more out of pan-nationalist than linguistic reasons, and without much detailed research carried out. Elsewhere the notion had sooner fallen into discredit, with Ural\u2013Altaic supporters elsewhere such as the Finnish Altaicist Martti R\u00e4s\u00e4nen being in the minority. The contradiction between Hungarian linguists' convictions and the lack of clear evidence eventually provided motivation for scholars such as Aur\u00e9lien Sauvageot and Denis Sinor to carry out more detailed investigation of the hypothesis, which so far has failed to yield generally accepted results. Nicholas Poppe in his article \"The Uralo-Altaic Theory in the Light of the Soviet Linguistics\" (1940) also attempted to refute Castr\u00e9n's views by showing that the common agglutinating features may have arisen independently.\nBeginning in the 1960s, the hypothesis came to be seen even more controversial, due to the Altaic family itself also falling out universal acceptance. Today, the hypothesis that Uralic and Altaic are related more closely to one another than to any other family has almost no adherents. In his \"Altaic Etymological Dictionary\", co-authored with Anna V. Dybo and Oleg A. Mudrak, Sergei Starostin characterized the Ural\u2013Altaic hypothesis as \"an idea now completely discarded\". There are, however, a number of hypotheses that propose a larger macrofamily including Uralic, Altaic and other families. None of these hypotheses has widespread support. In Starostin's sketch of a \"Borean\" super-phylum, he puts Uralic and Altaic as daughters of an ancestral language of c. 9,000 years ago from which the Dravidian languages and the Paleo-Siberian languages, including Eskimo\u2013Aleut, are also descended. He posits that this ancestral language, together with Indo-European and Kartvelian, descends from a \"Eurasiatic\" protolanguage some 12,000 years ago, which in turn would be descended from a \"Borean\" protolanguage via Nostratic.\nIn the 1980s, Russian linguist N. D. Andreev (Nikolai Dmitrievich Andreev) proposed a \"Boreal languages\" hypothesis linking the Indo-European, Uralic, and Altaic (including Korean in his later papers) language families. Andreev also proposed 203 lexical roots for his hypothesized Boreal macrofamily. After Andreev's death in 1997, the Boreal hypothesis was further expanded by Sorin Paliga (2003, 2007).\nAngela Marcantonio (2002) argues that there is no sufficient evidence for a Finno-Ugric or Uralic group connecting the Finno-Permic and Ugric languages, and suggests that they are no more closely related to each other than either is to Turkic, thereby positing a grouping similar to Ural\u2013Altaic or indeed to Castr\u00e9n's original Altaic proposal. This thesis has been criticized by mainstream Uralic scholars.\nTypology.\nThere is general agreement on several typological similarities being widely found among the languages considered under Ural\u2013Altaic:\nSuch similarities do not constitute sufficient evidence of genetic relationship all on their own, as other explanations are possible. Juha Janhunen has argued that although Ural\u2013Altaic is to be rejected as a genealogical relationship, it remains a viable concept as a well-defined language area, which in his view has formed through the historical interaction and convergence of four core language families (Uralic, Turkic, Mongolic and Tungusic), and their influence on the more marginal Korean and Japonic.\nContrasting views on the typological situation have been presented by other researchers. Michael Fortescue has connected Uralic instead as a part of an Uralo-Siberian typological area (comprising Uralic, Yukaghir, Chukotko-Kamchatkan and Eskimo\u2013Aleut), contrasting with a more narrowly defined Altaic typological area; while Anderson has outlined a specifically Siberian language area, including within Uralic only the Ob-Ugric and Samoyedic groups; within Altaic most of the Tungusic family as well as Siberian Turkic and Buryat (Mongolic); as well as Yukaghir, Chukotko-Kamchatkan, Eskimo\u2013Aleut, Nivkh, and Yeniseian.\nRelationship between Uralic and Altaic.\nThe Altaic language family was generally accepted by linguists from the late 19th century up to the 1960s, but since then has been in dispute. For simplicity's sake, the following discussion assumes the validity of the Altaic language family.\nTwo senses should be distinguished in which Uralic and Altaic might be related.\nIn other words, showing a genetic relationship does not suffice to establish a language family, such as the proposed Ural\u2013Altaic family; it is also necessary to consider whether other languages from outside the proposed family might not be at least as closely related to the languages in that family as the latter are to each other. This distinction is often overlooked but is fundamental to the genetic classification of languages. Some linguists indeed maintain that Uralic and Altaic are related through a larger family, such as Eurasiatic or Nostratic, within which Uralic and Altaic are no more closely related to each other than either is to any other member of the proposed family, for instance than Uralic or Altaic is to Indo-European (for example Greenberg).\nShared vocabulary.\nTo demonstrate the existence of a language family, it is necessary to find cognate words that trace back to a common proto-language. Shared vocabulary alone does not show a relationship, as it may be loaned from one language to another or through the language of a third party.\nThere are shared words between, for example, Turkic and Ugric languages, or Tungusic and Samoyedic languages, which are explainable by borrowing. However, it has been difficult to find Ural\u2013Altaic words shared across all involved language families. Such words should be found in all branches of the Uralic and Altaic trees and should follow regular sound changes from the proto-language to known modern languages, and regular sound changes from Proto-Ural\u2013Altaic to give Proto-Uralic and Proto-Altaic words should be found to demonstrate the existence of a Ural\u2013Altaic vocabulary. Instead, candidates for Ural\u2013Altaic cognate sets can typically be supported by only one of the Altaic subfamilies. In contrast, about 200 Proto-Uralic word roots are known and universally accepted, and for the proto-languages of the Altaic subfamilies and the larger main groups of Uralic, on the order of 1000\u20132000 words can be recovered.\nSome linguists point out strong similarities in the personal pronouns of Uralic and Altaic languages, although the similarities also exist with the Indo-European pronouns as well.\nThe basic numerals, unlike those among the Indo-European languages (compare Proto-Indo-European numerals), are particularly divergent between all three core Altaic families and Uralic, and to a lesser extent even within Uralic.\nOne alleged Ural-Altaic similarity among this data are the Hungarian (\"h\u00e1rom\") and Mongolian (\"\u0263urban\") numerals for '3'. According to R\u00f3na-Tas (1983), elevating this similarity to a hypothesis of common origin would still require several ancillary hypotheses:\nSound correspondences.\nThe following consonant correspondences between Uralic and Altaic are asserted by Poppe (1983):\nAs a convergence zone.\nRegardless of a possible common origin or lack thereof, Uralic-Altaic languages can be spoken of as a convergence zone. Although it has not yet been possible to demonstrate a genetic relationship or a significant amount of common vocabulary between the languages other than loanwords, according to the linguist Juha Janhunen, the languages must have had a common linguistic homeland. The Turkic, Mongolic and Tungusic languages have been spoken in the Manchurian region, and there is little chance that a similar structural typology of Uralic languages could have emerged without close contact between them. The languages of Turkish and Finnish have a number of similar structures, such as vowel harmony and agglutination, and it has been suggested by Edward Vajda that Early Turkic may have loaned palatal harmony from Uralic.\nSimilarly, according to Janhunen, the common typology of the Altaic languages can be inferred as a result of mutual contacts in the past, perhaps from a few thousand years ago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32236", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32236", "title": "Urban heat island", "text": "Situation where cities are warmer than surrounding areas\nUrban areas usually experience the urban heat island (UHI) effect; that is, they are significantly warmer than surrounding rural areas. The temperature difference is usually larger at night than during the day, and is most apparent when winds are weak, under block conditions, noticeably during the summer and winter.\nThe main cause of the UHI effect is from the modification of land surfaces, while waste heat generated by energy usage is a secondary contributor. Urban areas occupy about 0.5% of the Earth's land surface but host more than half of the world's population. As a population center grows, it tends to expand its area and increase its average temperature. The term heat island is also used; the term can be used to refer to any area that is relatively hotter than the surrounding, but generally refers to human-disturbed areas.\nMonthly rainfall is greater downwind of cities, partially due to the UHI. Increases in heat within urban centers increases the length of growing seasons, decreases air quality by increasing the production of pollutants such as ozone, and decreases water quality as warmer waters flow into area streams and put stress on their ecosystems.\nNot all cities have a distinct urban heat island, and the heat island characteristics depend strongly on the background climate of the area where the city is located. The impact in a city can significantly change based on its local environment. Heat can be reduced by tree cover and green space, which act as sources of shade and promote evaporative cooling. Other options include green roofs, passive daytime radiative cooling applications, ventilation corridors, the use of lighter-colored surfaces, and less absorptive building materials. These reflect more sunlight and absorb less heat.\nClimate change is not the cause of urban heat islands, but it is causing more frequent and more intense heat waves, which in turn amplify the urban heat island effect in cities (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;). Compact and dense urban development may also increase the urban heat island effect, leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure.\nDefinition.\nA definition of \"urban heat island\" is: \"The relative warmth of a city compared with surrounding rural areas.\" This relative warmth is caused by \"heat trapping due to land use, the configuration and design of the built environment, including street layout and building size, the heat-absorbing properties of urban building materials, reduced ventilation, reduced greenery and water features, and domestic and industrial heat emissions generated directly from human activities\".\nDescription.\nDiurnal variability.\nThroughout the daytime, particularly when the skies are cloudless, urban surfaces are warmed by the absorption of solar radiation. Surfaces in the urban areas tend to warm faster than those of the surrounding rural areas. By virtue of their high heat capacities, urban surfaces act as a reservoir of heat energy. For example, concrete can hold roughly 2,000 times as much heat as an equivalent volume of air. \"This study shows that urban surfaces such as concrete absorb and store large amounts of heat during the day, confirming the high heat capacity effect described in urban heat islands.\" As a result, high daytime surface temperatures within the UHI can be easily seen via thermal remote sensing. As is often the case with daytime heating, this warming also has the effect of generating convective winds within the urban boundary layer. At night, the situation reverses. The absence of solar heating leads to the decrease of atmospheric convection and the stabilization of urban boundary layer. If enough stabilization occurs, an inversion layer is formed. This traps urban air near the surface, keeping surface air warm from the still-warm urban surfaces, resulting in warmer nighttime air temperatures within the UHI.\nGenerally speaking, the difference in temperature between the urban and surrounding rural area is more pronounced at night than in daytime. For example, in the United States, the temperature in urban areas tends to be warmer than the surrounding area by about 1\u20137 \u00b0F (0.55\u20133.9 \u00b0C) during the daytime, and about 2\u20135 \u00b0F (1.1\u20132.8 \u00b0C) warmer at night. However, the difference is more pronounced during the day in arid climates such as those in southeastern China and Taiwan. Studies have shown that diurnal variability is impacted by several factors including local climate and weather, seasonality, humidity, vegetation, surfaces, and materials in the built environment.\nSeasonal variability.\nSeasonal variability is less well understood than diurnal variability of the urban heat island temperature difference. Complex relationships between precipitation, vegetation, solar radiation, and surface materials in various local climate zones play interlocking roles that influence seasonal patterns of temperature variation in a particular urban heat island.\nMeasurements and predictions.\nUrban Heat Island Index (UHII).\nOne method to quantify the UHI effect within urban areas is the UHI Index created by the Californian EPA in 2015. It compares the temperature of a surveyed area and rural reference points upwind from the surveyed area, at a height of two meters above ground level. The difference in temperature in degrees Celsius is taken hourly and differences with an increased urban temperature compared to the reference points are summed up, creating an amount of degree-Celsius-hours, which is the UHI Index of the surveyed area. The measure of Celsius-hours might be averaged over many days, but is specified as Celsius-hours per averaged day.\nThe index was created to estimate the expected use of air conditioning and resulting greenhouse gas emissions in California. The index does not consider values of or differences in wind-speed, humidity, or solar influx, which might influence perceived temperature or the operation of air conditioners.\nModels and simulations.\nIf a city or town has a good system of taking weather observations the UHI can be measured directly. An alternative is to use a complex simulation of the location to calculate the UHI, or to use an approximate empirical method. Such models allow the UHI to be included in estimates of future temperatures rises within cities due to climate change.\nLeonard O. Myrup published the first comprehensive numerical treatment to predict the effects of the urban heat island (UHI) in 1969. The heat island effect was found to be the net result of several competing physical processes. In general, reduced evaporation in the city center and the thermal properties of the city building and paving materials are the dominant parameters. Modern simulation environments include ENVI-met, which simulates all interactions between building and ground surfaces, plants and ambient air.\nCauses.\nUrban design.\nThere are several causes of an urban heat island (UHI) related to common urban design aspects. For example, dark surfaces absorb significantly more solar radiation, which causes urban concentrations of roads and buildings to heat more than suburban and rural areas during the day; materials commonly used in urban areas for pavement and roofs, such as concrete and asphalt, have significantly different thermal bulk properties (including heat capacity and thermal conductivity) and surface radiative properties (albedo and emissivity) than the surrounding rural areas. This causes a change in the energy budget of the urban area, often leading to higher temperatures than surrounding rural areas.\nPavements, parking lots, roads or, more generally speaking transport infrastructure, contribute significantly to the urban heat island effect. For example, pavement infrastructure is a main contributor to urban heat during summer afternoons in Phoenix, United States.\nAnother major reason is the lack of evapotranspiration (for example, through lack of vegetation) in urban areas. The U.S. Forest Service found in 2018 that cities in the United States are losing 36 million trees each year. With a decreased amount of vegetation, cities also lose the shade and evaporative cooling effect of trees.\nOther causes of a UHI are due to geometric effects. The tall buildings within many urban areas provide multiple surfaces for the reflection and absorption of sunlight, increasing the efficiency with which urban areas are heated. This is called the \"urban canyon effect\". Another effect of buildings is the blocking of wind, which also inhibits cooling by convection and prevents pollutants from dissipating. Waste heat from automobiles, air conditioning, industry, and other sources also contributes to the UHI.\nHeat islands can be affected by proximity to different types of land cover, so that proximity to barren land causes urban land to become hotter and proximity to vegetation makes it cooler.\nAir pollution.\nHigh levels of air pollution in urban areas can also increase the UHI, as many forms of pollution change the radiative properties of the atmosphere. UHI not only raises urban temperatures but also increases ozone concentrations because ozone is a greenhouse gas whose formation will accelerate with the increase of temperature.\nClimate change as an amplifier.\nClimate change is not a cause but an amplifier of the urban heat island effect. The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report from 2022 summarized the available research accordingly: \"Climate change increases heat stress risks in cities [...] and amplifies the urban heat island across Asian cities at 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C and 2\u00a0\u00b0C warming levels, both substantially larger than under present climates [...].\"\nThe report goes on to say: \"In a warming world, increasing air temperature makes the urban heat island effect in cities worse. One key risk is heatwaves in cities that are likely to affect half of the future global urban population, with negative impacts on human health and economic productivity.\"\nThere are unhelpful interactions between heat and built infrastructure: These interactions increase the risk of heat stress for people living in cities.\nIncreased urbanization.\nIncreased urbanization is a major leading cause for increased urban heat risks, as it replaces vegetated areas with impervious surfaces and concentrates people into smaller land areas. \nSpatial distribution.\nHistoric urbanization processes, such as redlining in the United States, have lasting impacts on land use and may perpetuate disparities in urban heat through unequal distribution of vegetation. Access to healthcare, public transportation, adequate housing, and reliable energy typically govern disparities to heat, of which many of these communities may lack access to. Such differences in spatial distribution leave certain, localized neighborhood at risk for micro urban heat islands. Socially vulnerable groups are known to live in more densely populated areas with little vegetation that in turn have higher threats to heat exposure and often have adapting to and mitigation their exposure. \nHousing conditions.\nHousing conditions are a factor that contributes to urban heat inequity. Living on the top-floor, having a home with a dark roof, and poor insulation exacerbate heating conditions during hot weather. Lower income individuals may also not have access to air-conditioning or be unable to afford the increased electricity usage. In condensed cities, opening the windows for airflow and cooler air could introduce air pollution and odor into the home. High-density housing is Asia often has constraints on building updates that promote cooling.\nSpace poverty.\nAnother contributor to inequality is space poverty, which refers to a significantly reduced indoor residential space in a home. Space poverty is a significant issue in Hong Kong, where low-income individuals live in extremely small, sub-divided units, which has led to overcrowding and indoor air pollution. The units promote little movement, and all furniture, kitchen appliances, and bathroom necessities must fit into one sub-divided room. These units are typically developed from derelict buildings that have poor ventilation and less access to proper space cooling. High-density housing is Asia often has constraints on building updates that promote cooling, and residents often lack the space and authority to complete any improvements to their condition. These residents typically seek out adequate third places, such as libraries, parks, and caf\u00e9s, to access proper cooling and space.\nImpacts.\nOn weather and climate.\nAside from the effect on temperature, UHIs can produce secondary effects on local meteorology, including the altering of local wind patterns, the development of clouds and fog, the humidity, and the rates of precipitation. The extra heat provided by the UHI leads to greater upward motion, which can induce additional shower and thunderstorm activity. In addition, the UHI creates during the day a local low pressure area where relatively moist air from its rural surroundings converges, possibly leading to more favorable conditions for cloud formation. Rainfall rates downwind of cities are increased between 48% and 116%. Partly as a result of this warming, monthly rainfall is about 28% greater between downwind of cities, compared with upwind. Some cities show a total precipitation increase of 51%.\nOne study concluded that cities change the climate in area two\u2013four times larger than their own area. One 1999 comparison between urban and rural areas proposed that urban heat island effects have little influence on global mean temperature trends. Others suggested that urban heat islands affect global climate by impacting the jet stream.\nOn human health.\nUHIs have the potential to directly influence the health and welfare of urban residents. As UHIs are characterized by increased temperature, they can potentially increase the magnitude and duration of heat waves within cities. The number of individuals exposed to extreme temperatures is increased by the UHI-induced warming. The nighttime effect of UHIs can be particularly harmful during a heat wave, as it deprives urban residents of the cool relief found in rural areas during the night.\nIncreased temperatures have been reported to cause heat illnesses, such as heat stroke, heat exhaustion, heat syncope, and heat cramps.\nExtreme heat is the deadliest form of weather in the U.S. Per a study by Professor Terri Adams-Fuller, heat waves kill more people in the U.S. than hurricanes, floods, and tornadoes combined. These heat illnesses are more common within medium-to-large metro areas than the rest of the U.S., largely in part due to UHIs. Heat illnesses can also be compounded when combined with air pollution which is common in many urban areas.\nHeat exposure can have adverse effects on mental health. Increases in temperature can contribute to increased aggression, as well as more cases of domestic violence and substance abuse. Greater heat can also negatively impact school performance and education. According to a study by Hyunkuk Cho of Yeungnam University, an increased number of days with extreme heat each year correlates to a decrease in student test scores.\nHigh UHI intensity correlates with increased concentrations of air pollutants that gathered at night, which can affect the next day's air quality. These pollutants include volatile organic compounds, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and particulate matter. The production of these pollutants combined with the higher temperatures in UHIs can quicken the production of ozone. Ozone at surface level is considered to be a harmful pollutant. Studies suggest that increased temperatures in UHIs can increase polluted days but also note that other factors (e.g. air pressure, cloud cover, wind speed) can also have an effect on pollution.\nStudies from Hong Kong have found that areas of the city with poorer outdoor urban air ventilation tended to have stronger urban heat island effects and had significantly higher all-cause mortality compared to areas with better ventilation. Another study employing advanced statistical methods in Babol city, Iran, revealed a significant increase in Surface Urban Heat Island Intensity (SUHII) from 1985 to 2017, influenced by both geographic direction and time. This research, enhancing the understanding of SUHII's spatial and temporal variations, emphasizes the need for precise urban planning to mitigate the health impacts of urban heat islands. Surface UHI's are more prominent during the day and are measured using the land surface temperature and remote sensing.\nHeat stress vulnerability refers to an individual's predisposition, typically due to demographic factors, to be negatively impacted by heat. The measurement takes into account daily routines, location, sensitivity due to demographic factors, including age. Some demographic groups known to have higher heat stress vulnerability include the elderly, women, children, low-income households, and those who are chronically ill. Elderly populations are included because they are often unable to regular their body temperatures and typically have pre-existing medical conditions that make them more susceptible to heat. Children are also sensitive to increased heat, which may cause stress on their developing bodies. Intensified indoor heat causes stress on the mind and body and strains domestic relations.\nOn water bodies and aquatic organisms.\nUHIs also impair water quality. Hot pavement and rooftop surfaces transfer their excess heat to stormwater, which then drains into storm sewers and raises water temperatures as it is released into streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes. Additionally, increased urban water body temperatures lead to a decrease in biodiversity in the water. For example, in August 2001, rains over Cedar Rapids, Iowa led to a rise in the nearby stream within one hour, resulting in a fish kill which affected an estimated 188 fish. Since the temperature of the rain was comparatively cool, the deaths could be attributed to the hot pavement of the city. Similar events have been documented across the American Midwest, as well as Oregon and California. Rapid temperature changes can be stressful to aquatic ecosystems.\nWith the temperature of the nearby buildings sometimes reaching a difference of over from the near-surface air temperature, precipitation warms rapidly, and run-off into nearby streams, lakes and rivers (or other bodies of water) to provide excessive thermal pollution. The increase in thermal pollution has the potential to increase water temperature by . This increase causes the fish species inhabiting the body of water to undergo thermal stress and shock due to the rapid change in temperature of their habitat.\nPermeable pavements may reduce these effects by percolating water through the pavement into subsurface storage areas where it can be dissipated through absorption and evaporation.\nOn animals.\nSpecies that are good at colonizing can use conditions provided by urban heat islands to thrive in regions outside of their normal range. Examples of this include the grey-headed flying fox (\"Pteropus poliocephalus\") and the common house gecko (\"Hemidactylus frenatus\"). Grey-headed flying foxes, found in Melbourne, Australia, colonized urban habitats following the increase in temperatures there. Increased temperatures, causing warmer winter conditions, made the city more similar in climate to the more northerly wildland habitat of the species.\nWith temperate climates, urban heat islands will extend the growing season, therefore altering breeding strategies of inhabiting species. This can be best observed in the effects that urban heat islands have on water temperature (see effects on water bodies).\nUrban heat islands caused by cities have altered the natural selection process. Selective pressures like temporal variation in food, predation and water are relaxed causing a new set of selective forces to roll out. For example, within urban habitats, insects are more abundant than in rural areas. Insects are ectotherms. This means that they depend on the temperature of the environment to control their body temperature, making the warmer climates of the city perfect for their ability to thrive. A study done in Raleigh, North Carolina conducted on \"Parthenolecanium quercifex\" (oak scales), showed that this particular species preferred warmer climates and were therefore found in higher abundance in urban habitats than on oak trees in rural habitats. Over time spent living in urban habitats, they have adapted to thrive in warmer climates than in cooler ones.\nOn energy usage for cooling.\nAnother consequence of urban heat islands is the increased energy required for air conditioning and refrigeration in cities that are in comparatively hot climates. The heat island effect costs Los Angeles about US$ 100 million per year in energy (in the year 2000). Through the implementation of heat island reduction strategies, significant annual net energy savings have been calculated for northern locations such as Chicago, Salt Lake City, and Toronto.\nEvery year in the U.S. 15% of energy goes towards the air conditioning of buildings in these urban heat islands. It was reported in 1998 that \"the air conditioning demand has risen 10% within the last 40 years.\"\nIncreases in air conditioning use also serve to worsen the effects of UHIs at night. While cooler nights are often a reprieve from heat waves during the day, the residual heat created by the use of air conditioning systems can lead to higher nighttime temperatures. According to a study by Professor Francisco Salamanca Palou and colleagues, this residual heat can cause nighttime increases of up to 1\u00a0\u00b0C in urban areas. Increased energy use from air conditioners also contributes to carbon emissions, which doubly exacerbates the effects of UHIs.\nOptions for reducing heat island effects.\nStrategies to improve urban resilience by reducing excessive heat in cities include: Planting trees in cities, cool roofs (painted white or with reflective coating) and light-coloured concrete, green infrastructure (including green roofs), passive daytime radiative cooling.\nThe temperature difference between urban areas and the surrounding suburban or rural areas can be as much as . Nearly 40 percent of that increase is due to the prevalence of dark roofs, with the remainder coming from dark-coloured pavement and the declining presence of vegetation. The heat island effect can be counteracted slightly by using white or reflective materials to build houses, roofs, pavements, and roads, thus increasing the overall albedo of the city.\nConcentric expansion of cities is unfavourable in terms of the urban heat island phenomenon. It is recommended to plan the development of cities in strips, consistent with the hydrographic network, taking into account green areas with various plant species. In this way, it was planned to build urban settlements stretching over large areas, e.g. Kielce, Szczecin and Gdynia in Poland, Copenhagen in Denmark and Hamburg, Berlin and Kiel in Germany.\nPlanting trees in cities.\nPlanting trees around the city can be another way of increasing albedo and decreasing the urban heat island effect. It is recommended to plant deciduous trees because they can provide many benefits such as more shade in the summer and not blocking warmth in winter. Trees are a necessary feature in combating most of the urban heat island effect because they reduce air temperatures by , and surface temperatures by up to . Another benefit of having trees in a city is that trees also help fight global warming by absorbing CO2 from the atmosphere.\nRecent syntheses show that increasing street-tree canopy measurably cools pedestrian-level air temperatures, with effects varying by climate, canopy density, and urban form. A 2024 meta-analysis across 110 cities reports typical ~1\u20132 \u00b0C daytime cooling, and a 2024 field study found that locations with no canopy within 10 m were up to five times more likely to exceed 32.2 \u00b0C, with air temperature declining linearly as canopy increased.\nUrban green infrastructure (UGI) are integrated networks of green spaces in cities and are developed in both private and public areas of the city. Examples of UGI include urban parks with trees and shrub cover, rows of trees along a street, private gardens, rooftop gardens, and other green space throughout a city. Properly utilized UGI promotes more equitable heat distribution, where improper usage only perpetuates heat inequity. UGI provides shading and evapotranspiration, which reduces both air and land temperatures. Therefore, a lack of UGI in marginalized communities reduces the land's temperature regulating capabilities promotes heat inequity. UGI is widely recognized as an efficient, sustainable, and non-controversial solution to heat inequity.\nCool roofs and light-coloured concrete.\nPainting rooftops white has become a common strategy to reduce the heat island effect. In cities, there are many dark coloured surfaces that absorb the heat of the sun in turn lowering the albedo of the city. White rooftops allow high solar reflectance and high solar emittance, increasing the albedo of the city or area the effect is occurring. Green roofs and cool roofs can play a big role in helping cities manage extreme heat. In warmer regions, cool roofs were especially effective, with some cutting cooling energy use completely for certain low-rise buildings. Green roofs may be more beneficial in colder climates because they provide insulation and help reduce the need for heating during winter.\nAdditionally, covering rooftops with a reflective coating, has shown to be an effective measure to reduce solar heat gain. A study led by Oscar Brousse from University College London, which simulated the impact of various cooling measures in London found that rooftops, which were either painted white or had reflective coating, proved to be the most effective solution for reducing outdoor temperatures at the pedestrian level, outperforming solar panels, green roofs, and tree cover. The study simulated the impact of various cooling measures in London during a 2018 heatwave, finding that the so-called cool roofs could reduce average outdoor temperatures by 1.2\u00a0\u00b0C, and up to 2\u00a0\u00b0C in certain areas. In comparison, additional tree cover reduced temperatures by 0.3\u00a0\u00b0C and solar panels by 0.5\u00a0\u00b0C.\nRelative to remedying the other sources of the problem, replacing dark roofing requires the least amount of investment for the most immediate return. A cool roof made from a reflective material such as vinyl reflects at least 75 percent of the sun's rays, and emit at least 70 percent of the solar radiation absorbed by the building envelope. Asphalt built-up roofs (BUR), by comparison, reflect 6 percent to 26 percent of solar radiation.\nUsing light-coloured concrete has proven effective in reflecting up to 50% more light than asphalt and reducing ambient temperature. A low albedo value, characteristic of black asphalt, absorbs a large percentage of solar heat creating warmer near-surface temperatures. Paving with light-coloured concrete, in addition to replacing asphalt with light-coloured concrete, communities may be able to lower average temperatures. However, research into the interaction between reflective pavements and buildings has found that, unless the nearby buildings are fitted with reflective glass, solar radiation reflected off light-coloured pavements can increase building temperatures, increasing air conditioning demands.\nThere are specific paint formulations for daytime radiative cooling that reflect up to 98.1% of sunlight.\nGreen infrastructure.\nGreen roofs are excellent insulators during the warm weather months and the plants cool the surrounding environment. Plants can improve air quality as they absorb carbon dioxide and concomitantly produce oxygen. Green roofs can also have positive impacts on stormwater management and energy consumption. Cost can be a barrier to implementing a green roof. Several factors influence the cost of a green roof, including design and soil depth, location, and the price of labor and equipment in that market, which is typically lower in more developed markets where there is more experience designing and installing green roofs. The individualized context of each green roof presents a challenge for making broad comparisons and assessments, and focusing only on monetary costs may leave out the social, environmental, and public health benefits green roofs provide. Global comparisons of green roof performance are further challenged by the lack of a shared framework for making such comparisons.\nStormwater management is another option to help mitigate the effect of the urban heat island. Stormwater management is the controlling the water produced by the storm in a way that protects property and infrastructure. Urban infrastructure like streets, sidewalks, and parking lots do not allow for water to penetrate into the earth's surface causing water to flood. By using stormwater management, you can control the flow of the water in ways that can mitigate UHI effect. One way is using a stormwater management technique called pervious pavement system (PPS). This technique has been used in over 30 countries and found to be successful in stormwater management and UHI mitigation. The PPS allows water to flow through the pavement allowing for the water to be absorbed causing the area to be cooled by evaporation.\nGreen parking lots use vegetation and surfaces other than asphalt to limit the urban heat island effect.\nPassive daytime radiative cooling.\nA passive daytime radiative cooling roof application can double the energy savings of a white roof, attributed to high solar reflectance and thermal emittance in the infrared window, with the highest cooling potential in hot and dry cities such as Phoenix and Las Vegas. When installed on roofs in dense urban areas, passive daytime radiative cooling panels can significantly lower outdoor surface temperatures at the pedestrian level.\nSociety and culture.\nHistory of research.\nThe phenomenon was first investigated and described by Luke Howard in the 1810s, although he was not the one to name the phenomenon. A description of the very first report of the UHI by Luke Howard said that the urban center of London was warmer at night than the surrounding countryside by .\nInvestigations of the urban atmosphere continued throughout the nineteenth century. Between the 1920s and the 1940s, researchers in the emerging field of local climatology or microscale meteorology in Europe, Mexico, India, Japan, and the United States pursued new methods to understand the phenomenon.\nIn 1929, Albert Peppler used the term in a German publication believed to be the first instance of an equivalent to urban heat island: (which is \"urban heat island\" in German). Between 1990 and 2000, about 30 studies were published annually; by 2010, that number had increased to 100, and by 2015, it was more than 300.\nLeonard O. Myrup published the first comprehensive numerical treatment to predict the effects of the urban heat island (UHI) in 1969. His paper surveys UHI and criticizes then-existing theories as being excessively qualitative.\nAspects of social inequality.\nUrban heat inequity, also termed thermal inequity, is an unequal distribution of heat in urban areas or neighborhoods within them, which causes disproportionate impacts to people living in those communities. Unequal threat of heat stress in urban environments is often correlated with differences in demographics, including racial and ethnic background, income, education level, and age. While the general impacts of urban heat inequity depend on the city studied, negative effects typically act on historically marginalized communities. The idea is closely tied to the urban heat island effect, where a major cause to urban heat inequity is increased urbanization.\nSome studies suggest that the effects of UHIs on health may be disproportionate, since the impacts may be unevenly distributed based on a variety of factors such as age, ethnicity and socioeconomic status. This raises the possibility of health impacts from UHIs being an environmental justice issue. Studies have shown that communities of color in the United States have been disproportionately affected by UHI.\nThere is a correlation between neighborhood income and tree canopy cover. Low-income neighborhoods tend to have significantly fewer trees than neighborhoods with higher incomes. Researchers hypothesized that less-well-off neighborhoods do not have the financial resources to plant and maintain trees. Affluent neighborhoods can afford more trees, on \"both public and private property\". One reason for this discrepancy is that wealthier homeowners and communities can afford more land, which can be kept open as green space, whereas poorer housing often takes the form of rentals, where landowners try to maximize their profit by putting as much housing density as possible on their land.\nOn a global scale, there are discrepancies in the effects of UHIs in different regions of the world. While overall heat exposure is increasing worldwide, its effects have increased faster in the Global South in recent decades, per a study by Professor Kanging Huang and colleagues.\nThe disproportionate impact of UHIs on the Global South exacerbates already occurring environmental injustices. Because many countries in the equator are naturally hot and humid, these areas are particularly susceptible to the effects of UHIs. One World Bank study has found a 7.0\u00b0 disparity between the hottest and coolest neighborhoods in Bandung, Indonesia.\nThe US experience.\nThere is a correlation in the U.S. between ethnicity and exposure to UHIs. Within most U.S. cities, people of color are more likely to live in areas of high Surface Urban Heat Island Intensity than white people in the same cities. According to a study by climatologist Angel Hsu and colleagues, \"the average person of color lives in a census tract with higher SUHI intensity than non-Hispanic whites in all but 6 of the 175 largest urbanized areas\" in the U.S. A 2023 policy brief further found that historically redlined and low\u2011income Black neighborhoods\u2014already burdened by urban heat\u2014also experience clusters of violent crime, amplifying intersecting vulnerabilities in these communities.\nEconomic status also plays a role in the human effects on UHIs. Not only are people of lower economic classes more likely to live in UHIs, but they are also less likely to be able to afford commodities such as air conditioning. Like the correlation between SUHI intensity and ethnicity, a similar pattern can be seen when comparing households under the poverty line against those with an income more than double the poverty line.\nUHIs can have particularly strong effects on African Americans with chronic diseases. African Americans have higher rates of various chronic diseases, such as asthma and diabetes, than the general population. Per Professor Pamela Jackson and colleagues, these diseases can be exacerbated by extreme heat, leading to health problems such as hypertension or stroke.\nResearchers have also noted that the spread of impervious surfaces, such as concrete, tar, and asphalt, is correlated with neighborhoods of low socioeconomic status across various U.S. cities and states. The presence of these materials serves as a predictor of \"intra-urban variation in temperature\".\nRedlining, Urban Heat Exposure, and Health Inequity in U.S. cities.\nRedlining worked as a housing policy created and put to use in the 1930s, under the Roosevelt Administration, by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC). This policy, when implemented, categorized neighborhoods by perceived investment risk. Notably, areas with higher populations of minorities and low-income residents were discriminated against using this policy, often labeled as hazardous and outlined in red on HOLC maps. This significantly restricted not only access to housing loans but also led to long-term divestment from these communities.\nA study analyzing 108 U.S. cities found that formerly redlined neighborhoods are, on average, 2.6 \u00b0C (4.7\u202f\u00b0F) hotter than non-redlined areas, and as the authors noted, this was largely due to a lack of tree canopy and the increased presence of heat-absorbent surfaces like asphalt and other dark clustered infrastructure. In cities like Durham, Fresno, and Pittsburgh, \"D\" graded areas have substantially lower tree coverage compared to wealthier, \"A\" graded neighborhoods, which are also predominantly white. Similarly, Phoenix, Arizona, a rapidly warming city, also shows high surface temperatures in formerly redlined communities reaching up to 10-15 \u00b0F (5.6\u20138.3\u202f\u00b0C) higher than other neighborhoods.\nIn addition to higher temperatures, these neighborhoods also experience higher levels of air pollution due to their proximity to highways and industrial zones, a characterization of previously redlined areas. Cities like Los Angeles experienced freeway construction in the 1950s that routed interstates through redlined areas, including neighborhoods like Boyle Heights and South Los Angeles. These areas have since experienced much higher concentrations of vehicular emissions such as diesel exhaust and fine particulate matter (PM2.5), which are also closely associated with higher risks of respiratory illness, cardiovascular disease, and birth defects. On an international scale, research has also suggested that urban air pollution, like that of vehicular emissions, may directly intensify the urban heat island effect. In China, an urban haze effect, essentially a miniature greenhouse layer which prevents outgoing thermal radiation from escaping dense urban areas, was found to contribute as much as 0.7 \u00b0C of additional nighttime warming. This conclusion underscores the critical consequences of urban heat islands, especially in previously redlined communities driven by both local development and broader atmospheric processes. \nIn response to these disparities, some cities have begun to introduce urban greening programs and reflective \"cool pavement\" initiatives to help mitigate the urban heat island effect in historically disadvantaged communities. These efforts are part of an ongoing pish toward not only climate justice but also aims to redress the legacy of redlining, a policy driven by environmental racism.\nChief heat officers.\nBeginning in the 2020s, a number of cities and local governments began creating Chief Heat Officer positions to organize and manage work counteracting the urban heat island effect. They lead efforts to try to mitigate the increasing effects of climate change by increasing shade, providing for cooling centers, planting trees, and coordinating anti-heat work. Early heat officer positions were created in Los Angeles, Miami-Dade County, Melbourne, Athens, and Freetown. The initiative to create the positions was organized by the Atlantic Council's Adrienne Arsht-Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center. Eleni Myrivili is the current United Nations Human Settlements Programme's chief heat officer and the City of Athens Chief Resilience Officer.\nExamples.\nUnited States.\nBill S.4280, introduced to the U.S. Senate in 2020, would authorize the National Integrated Heat Health Information System Interagency Committee (NIHHIS) to tackle extreme heat in the United States. Successful passage of this legislation would fund NIHHIS for five years and would instate a $100 million grant program within NIHHIS to encourage and fund urban heat reduction projects, including those using cools roofs and pavements and those improving HVAC systems. As of July 22, 2020 the bill has not moved past introduction to Congress.\nThe city of New York determined that the cooling potential per area was highest for street trees, followed by living roofs, light covered surface, and open space planting. From the standpoint of cost effectiveness, light surfaces, light roofs, and curbside planting have lower costs per temperature reduction.\nLos Angeles.\nA hypothetical \"cool communities\" program in Los Angeles has projected in 1997 that urban temperatures could be reduced by approximately after planting ten million trees, reroofing five million homes, and painting one-quarter of the roads at an estimated cost of US$1\u00a0billion, giving estimated annual benefits of US$170\u00a0million from reduced air-conditioning costs and US$360\u00a0million in smog related health savings.\nIn a case study of the Los Angeles Basin in 1998, simulations showed that even when trees are not strategically placed in these urban heat islands, they can still aid in minimization of pollutants and energy reduction. It is estimated that with this wide-scale implementation, the city of Los Angeles can annually save $100M with most of the savings coming from cool roofs, lighter colored pavement, and the planting of trees. With a citywide implementation, added benefits from the lowering smog-level would result in at least one billion dollars of saving per year.\nLos Angeles TreePeople is an example of how tree planting can empower a community. TreePeople provides the opportunity for people to come together, build capacity, community pride and the opportunity to collaborate and network with each other.\nLos Angeles has also begun to implement a Heat Action Plan to address the city's needs at a more granular level than the solutions provided by the state of California. The city uses the LA Equity Index in an effort to ensure that the effects of extreme heat are mitigated in an equitable manner.\nVirginia.\nIn 2021, Climate Adaptation Planning Analysis (CAPA) received funding from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to conduct Heat Mapping across the United States. Ten areas from Virginia \u2013 Abington, Arlington, Charlottesville, Farmville, Harrisonburg, Lynchburg, Petersburg, Richmond, Salem, Virginia Beach and Winchester \u2013 participated in the heat watch campaign. This campaign consisted of 213 Volunteers brought together by campaign organizers who made 490,423 Heat Measurements across 70 Routes total. After taking measurements throughout the day, equipment and data was sent back to CAPA where it was analyzed using machine learning algorithms. After analysis of the data, CAPA came back together with campaign organizers from each area to discuss potential plans for each town in the future.\nNew York.\nNew York City implemented its \"Cool Neighborhoods NYC\" program in 2017 intending to mitigate the effects of extreme urban heat. One of the plan's ambitions was to increase funding for the city's Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. Specifically, the plan sought to increase funding for cooling solutions for lower-income families.\nIndia.\nSeveral cities in India experience significant urban heat island effects due to rapid urbanization, loss of green cover, and extensive concretization. A report by \"The Hindu\" highlights that metropolitan areas like Delhi, Bengaluru, Chennai, Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Mumbai, and Kolkata have seen temperature differences ranging from 1\u00a0\u00b0C to 6\u00a0\u00b0C compared to their rural surroundings. These urban heat islands not only increase the local temperatures but also exacerbate the impacts of heatwaves, leading to higher energy consumption for cooling and posing health risks to vulnerable populations.\nMumbai.\nMumbai, India's financial hub and one of the most densely populated cities globally, is significantly affected by the urban heat island effect. Rapid urbanization, extensive concretization, and loss of green spaces have led to higher temperatures in the city compared to its surroundings. According to a report, Mumbai is projected to spend twice as much as New York City to manage urban heat generated due to concretization. This increased expenditure highlights the severity of the urban heat island effect in Mumbai and its impact on the city's infrastructure and residents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32237", "revid": "50420101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32237", "title": "UMTS", "text": "Third generation mobile cellular system\nThe Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) is a 3G mobile cellular system for networks based on the GSM standard. UMTS uses wideband code-division multiple access (W-CDMA) radio access technology to offer greater spectral efficiency and bandwidth to mobile network operators compared to previous 2G systems like GPRS and CSD. The original version of UMTS provides a peak theoretical data rate of 384 kbit/s.\nDeveloped and maintained by the 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project), UMTS is a component of the International Telecommunication Union IMT-2000 standard set and compares with the CDMA2000 standard set for networks based on the competing cdmaOne technology. The technology described in UMTS is sometimes also referred to as Freedom of Mobile Multimedia Access (FOMA) or 3GSM.\nUMTS specifies a complete network system, which includes the radio access network (UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network, or UTRAN), the core network (Mobile Application Part, or MAP) and the authentication of users via SIM (subscriber identity module) cards. Unlike EDGE (IMT Single-Carrier, based on GSM) and CDMA2000 (IMT Multi-Carrier), UMTS requires new base stations and new frequency allocations. UMTS has since been enhanced as High Speed Packet Access (HSPA).\nFeatures.\nUMTS supports theoretical maximum data transfer rates of 42\u00a0Mbit/s when Evolved HSPA (HSPA+) is implemented in the network. Users in deployed networks can expect a transfer rate of up to 384\u00a0kbit/s for Release '99 (R99) handsets (the original UMTS release), and 7.2\u00a0Mbit/s for High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA) handsets in the downlink connection. These speeds are significantly faster than the 9.6\u00a0kbit/s of a single GSM error-corrected circuit switched data channel, multiple 9.6\u00a0kbit/s channels in High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data (HSCSD) and 14.4\u00a0kbit/s for CDMAOne channels.\nSince 2006, UMTS networks in many countries have been or are in the process of being upgraded with High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA), sometimes known as 3.5G. Currently, HSDPA enables downlink transfer speeds of up to 21\u00a0Mbit/s. Work is also progressing on improving the uplink transfer speed with the High-Speed Uplink Packet Access (HSUPA). The 3GPP LTE standard succeeds UMTS and initially provided 4G speeds of 100\u00a0Mbit/s down and 50\u00a0Mbit/s up, with scalability up to 3\u00a0Gbit/s, using a next generation air interface technology based upon orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing.\nThe first national consumer UMTS networks launched in 2002 with a heavy emphasis on telco-provided mobile applications such as mobile TV and video calling. The high data speeds of UMTS are now most often utilised for Internet access: experience in Japan and elsewhere has shown that user demand for video calls is not high, and telco-provided audio/video content has declined in popularity in favour of high-speed access to the World Wide Web\u00a0\u2013 either directly on a handset or connected to a computer via Wi-Fi, Bluetooth or USB.\nAir interfaces.\nUMTS combines three different terrestrial air interfaces, GSM's Mobile Application Part (MAP) core, and the GSM family of speech codecs.\nThe air interfaces are called UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA). All air interface options are part of ITU's IMT-2000. In the currently most popular variant for cellular mobile telephones, W-CDMA (IMT Direct Spread) is used. It is also called \"Uu interface\", as it links User Equipment to the UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network.\nPlease note that the terms W-CDMA, TD-CDMA and TD-SCDMA are misleading. While they suggest covering just a channel access method (namely a variant of CDMA), they are actually the common names for the whole air interface standards.\nW-CDMA (UTRA-FDD).\nW-CDMA (WCDMA; Wideband Code-Division Multiple Access), along with UMTS-FDD, UTRA-FDD, or IMT-2000 CDMA Direct Spread is an air interface standard found in 3G mobile telecommunications networks. It supports conventional cellular voice, text and MMS services, but can also carry data at high speeds, allowing mobile operators to deliver higher bandwidth applications including streaming and broadband Internet access.\nW-CDMA uses the DS-CDMA channel access method with a pair of 5\u00a0MHz wide channels. In contrast, the competing CDMA2000 system uses one or more available 1.25\u00a0MHz channels for each direction of communication. W-CDMA systems are widely criticized for their large spectrum usage, which delayed deployment in countries that acted relatively slowly in allocating new frequencies specifically for 3G services (such as the United States).\nThe specific frequency bands originally defined by the UMTS standard are 1885\u20132025\u00a0MHz for the mobile-to-base (uplink) and 2110\u20132200\u00a0MHz for the base-to-mobile (downlink). In the US, 1710\u20131755\u00a0MHz and 2110\u20132155\u00a0MHz are used instead, as the 1900\u00a0MHz band was already used. While UMTS2100 is the most widely deployed UMTS band, some countries' UMTS operators use the 850\u00a0MHz (900\u00a0MHz in Europe) and/or 1900\u00a0MHz bands (independently, meaning uplink and downlink are within the same band), notably in the US by AT&amp;T Mobility, New Zealand by Telecom New Zealand on the XT Mobile Network and in Australia by Telstra on the Next G network. Some carriers such as T-Mobile use band numbers to identify the UMTS frequencies. For example, Band I (2100\u00a0MHz), Band IV (1700/2100\u00a0MHz), and Band V (850\u00a0MHz).\nUMTS-FDD is an acronym for Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS)\u00a0\u2013 frequency-division duplexing (FDD) and a 3GPP standardized version of UMTS networks that makes use of frequency-division duplexing for duplexing over an UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA) air interface.\nW-CDMA is the basis of Japan's NTT DoCoMo's FOMA service and the most-commonly used member of the Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) family and sometimes used as a synonym for UMTS. It uses the DS-CDMA channel access method and the FDD duplexing method to achieve higher speeds and support more users compared to most previously used time-division multiple access (TDMA) and time-division duplex (TDD) schemes.\nWhile not an evolutionary upgrade on the airside, it uses the same core network as the 2G GSM networks deployed worldwide, allowing dual-mode mobile operation along with GSM/EDGE; a feature it shares with other members of the UMTS family.\nDevelopment.\nIn the late 1990s, W-CDMA was developed by NTT DoCoMo as the air interface for their 3G network FOMA. Later NTT DoCoMo submitted the specification to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) as a candidate for the international 3G standard known as IMT-2000. The ITU eventually accepted W-CDMA as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards, as an alternative to CDMA2000, EDGE, and the short range DECT system. Later, W-CDMA was selected as an air interface for UMTS.\nAs NTT DoCoMo did not wait for the finalisation of the 3G Release 99 specification, their network was initially incompatible with UMTS. However, this has been resolved by NTT DoCoMo updating their network.\nCode-Division Multiple Access communication networks have been developed by a number of companies over the years, but development of cell-phone networks based on CDMA (prior to W-CDMA) was dominated by Qualcomm, the first company to succeed in developing a practical and cost-effective CDMA implementation for consumer cell phones and its early IS-95 air interface standard has evolved into the current CDMA2000 (IS-856/IS-2000) standard. Qualcomm created an experimental wideband CDMA system called CDMA2000 3x which unified the W-CDMA (3GPP) and CDMA2000 (3GPP2) network technologies into a single design for a worldwide standard air interface. Compatibility with CDMA2000 would have beneficially enabled roaming on existing networks beyond Japan, since Qualcomm CDMA2000 networks are widely deployed, especially in the Americas, with coverage in 58 countries as of 2006[ [update]]. However, divergent requirements resulted in the W-CDMA standard being retained and deployed globally. W-CDMA has then become the dominant technology with 457 commercial networks in 178 countries as of April 2012. Several CDMA2000 operators have even converted their networks to W-CDMA for international roaming compatibility and smooth upgrade path to LTE.\nDespite incompatibility with existing air-interface standards, late introduction and the high upgrade cost of deploying an all-new transmitter technology, W-CDMA has become the dominant standard.\nRationale for W-CDMA.\nW-CDMA transmits on a pair of 5\u00a0MHz-wide radio channels, while CDMA2000 transmits on one or several pairs of 1.25\u00a0MHz radio channels. Though W-CDMA does use a direct-sequence CDMA transmission technique like CDMA2000, W-CDMA is not simply a wideband version of CDMA2000 and differs in many aspects from CDMA2000. From an engineering point of view, W-CDMA provides a different balance of trade-offs between cost, capacity, performance, and density; it also promises to achieve a benefit of reduced cost for video phone handsets. W-CDMA may also be better suited for deployment in the very dense cities of Europe and Asia. However, hurdles remain, and cross-licensing of patents between Qualcomm and W-CDMA vendors has not eliminated possible patent issues due to the features of W-CDMA which remain covered by Qualcomm patents.\nW-CDMA has been developed into a complete set of specifications, a detailed protocol that defines how a mobile phone communicates with the tower, how signals are modulated, how datagrams are structured, and system interfaces are specified allowing free competition on technology elements.\nDeployment.\nThe world's first commercial W-CDMA service, FOMA, was launched by NTT DoCoMo in Japan in 2001.\nElsewhere, W-CDMA deployments are usually marketed under the UMTS brand.\nW-CDMA has also been adapted for use in satellite communications on the U.S. Mobile User Objective System using geosynchronous satellites in place of cell towers.\nJ-Phone Japan (once Vodafone and now SoftBank Mobile) soon followed by launching their own W-CDMA based service, originally branded \"Vodafone Global Standard\" and claiming UMTS compatibility. The name of the service was changed to \"Vodafone 3G\" (now \"SoftBank 3G\") in December 2004.\nBeginning in 2003, Hutchison Whampoa gradually launched their upstart UMTS networks.\nMost countries have, since the ITU approved of the 3G mobile service, either \"auctioned\" the radio frequencies to the company willing to pay the most, or conducted a \"beauty contest\"\u00a0\u2013 asking the various companies to present what they intend to commit to if awarded the licences. This strategy has been criticised for aiming to drain the cash of operators to the brink of bankruptcy in order to honour their bids or proposals. Most of them have a time constraint for the rollout of the service\u00a0\u2013 where a certain \"coverage\" must be achieved within a given date or the licence will be revoked.\nVodafone launched several UMTS networks in Europe in February 2004. MobileOne of Singapore commercially launched its 3G (W-CDMA) services in February 2005. New Zealand in August 2005 and Australia in October 2005.\nAT&amp;T Mobility utilized a UMTS network, with HSPA+, from 2005 until its shutdown in February 2022.\nRogers in Canada March 2007 has launched HSDPA in the Toronto Golden Horseshoe district on W-CDMA at 850/1900\u00a0MHz and plan the launch the service commercial in the top 25 cities October, 2007.\nTeliaSonera opened W-CDMA service in Finland October 13, 2004, with speeds up to 384\u00a0kbit/s. Availability only in main cities. Pricing is approx. \u20ac2/MB.\nSK Telecom and KTF, two largest mobile phone service providers in South Korea, have each started offering W-CDMA service in December 2003. Due to poor coverage and lack of choice in handhelds, the W-CDMA service has barely made a dent in the Korean market which was dominated by CDMA2000. By October 2006 both companies are covering more than 90 cities while SK Telecom has announced that it will provide nationwide coverage for its WCDMA network in order for it to offer SBSM (Single Band Single Mode) handsets by the first half of 2007. KT Freecel will thus cut funding to its CDMA2000 network development to the minimum.\nIn Norway, Telenor introduced W-CDMA in major cities by the end of 2004, while their competitor, NetCom, followed suit a few months later. Both operators have 98% national coverage on EDGE, but Telenor has parallel WLAN roaming networks on GSM, where the UMTS service is competing with this. For this reason Telenor is dropping support of their WLAN service in Austria (2006).\nMaxis Communications and Celcom, two mobile phone service providers in Malaysia, started offering W-CDMA services in 2005.\nIn Sweden, Telia introduced W-CDMA in March 2004.\nUTRA-TDD.\nUMTS-TDD, an acronym for Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS)\u00a0\u2013 time-division duplexing (TDD), is a 3GPP standardized version of UMTS networks that use UTRA-TDD. UTRA-TDD is a UTRA that uses time-division duplexing for duplexing. While a full implementation of UMTS, it is mainly used to provide Internet access in circumstances similar to those where WiMAX might be used. UMTS-TDD is not directly compatible with UMTS-FDD: a device designed to use one standard cannot, unless specifically designed to, work on the other, because of the difference in air interface technologies and frequencies used. It is more formally as IMT-2000 CDMA-TDD or IMT 2000 Time-Division (IMT-TD).\nThe two UMTS air interfaces (UTRAs) for UMTS-TDD are TD-CDMA and TD-SCDMA. Both air interfaces use a combination of two channel access methods, code-division multiple access (CDMA) and time-division multiple access (TDMA): the frequency band is divided into time slots (TDMA), which are further divided into channels using CDMA spreading codes. These air interfaces are classified as TDD, because time slots can be allocated to either uplink or downlink traffic.\nTD-CDMA (UTRA-TDD 3.84 Mcps High Chip Rate (HCR)).\nTD-CDMA, an acronym for Time-Division-Code-Division Multiple Access, is a channel-access method based on using spread-spectrum multiple-access (CDMA) across multiple time slots (TDMA). TD-CDMA is the channel access method for UTRA-TDD HCR, which is an acronym for UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access-Time Division Duplex High Chip Rate.\nUMTS-TDD's air interfaces that use the TD-CDMA channel access technique are standardized as UTRA-TDD HCR, which uses increments of 5\u00a0MHz of spectrum, each slice divided into 10\u00a0ms frames containing fifteen time slots (1500 per second). The time slots (TS) are allocated in fixed percentage for downlink and uplink. TD-CDMA is used to multiplex streams from or to multiple transceivers. Unlike W-CDMA, it does not need separate frequency bands for up- and downstream, allowing deployment in tight frequency bands.\nTD-CDMA is a part of IMT-2000, defined as IMT-TD Time-Division (IMT CDMA TDD), and is one of the three UMTS air interfaces (UTRAs), as standardized by the 3GPP in UTRA-TDD HCR. UTRA-TDD HCR is closely related to W-CDMA, and provides the same types of channels where possible. UMTS's HSDPA/HSUPA enhancements are also implemented under TD-CDMA.\nIn the United States, the technology has been used for public safety and government use in the New York City and a few other areas. In Japan, IPMobile planned to provide TD-CDMA service in year 2006, but it was delayed, changed to TD-SCDMA, and bankrupt before the service officially started.\nTD-SCDMA (UTRA-TDD 1.28 Mcps Low Chip Rate (LCR)).\nTime-Division Synchronous Code-Division Multiple Access (TD-SCDMA) or UTRA TDD 1.28 Mcps low chip rate (UTRA-TDD LCR) is an air interface found in UMTS mobile telecommunications networks in China as an alternative to W-CDMA.\nTD-SCDMA uses the TDMA channel access method combined with an adaptive synchronous CDMA component on 1.6\u00a0MHz slices of spectrum, allowing deployment in even tighter frequency bands than TD-CDMA. It is standardized by the 3GPP and also referred to as \"UTRA-TDD LCR\". However, the main incentive for development of this Chinese-developed standard was avoiding or reducing the license fees that have to be paid to non-Chinese patent owners. Unlike the other air interfaces, TD-SCDMA was not part of UMTS from the beginning but has been added in Release 4 of the specification.\nLike TD-CDMA, TD-SCDMA is known as IMT CDMA TDD within IMT-2000.\nThe term \"TD-SCDMA\" is misleading. While it suggests covering only a channel access method, it is actually the common name for the whole air interface specification.\nTD-SCDMA / UMTS-TDD (LCR) networks are incompatible with W-CDMA / UMTS-FDD and TD-CDMA / UMTS-TDD (HCR) networks.\nObjectives.\nTD-SCDMA was developed in the People's Republic of China by the Chinese Academy of Telecommunications Technology (CATT), Datang Telecom and Siemens in an attempt to avoid dependence on Western technology. This is likely primarily for practical reasons, since other 3G formats require the payment of patent fees to a large number of Western patent holders.\nTD-SCDMA proponents also claim it is better suited for densely populated areas. Further, it is supposed to cover all usage scenarios, whereas W-CDMA is optimised for symmetric traffic and macro cells, while TD-CDMA is best used in low mobility scenarios within micro or pico cells.\nTD-SCDMA is based on spread-spectrum technology which makes it unlikely that it will be able to completely escape the payment of license fees to western patent holders. The launch of a national TD-SCDMA network was initially projected by 2005 but only reached large scale commercial trials with 60,000 users across eight cities in 2008.\nOn January 7, 2009, China granted a TD-SCDMA 3G licence to China Mobile.\nOn September 21, 2009, China Mobile officially announced that it had 1,327,000 TD-SCDMA subscribers as of the end of August, 2009.\nTD-SCDMA is not commonly used outside of China.\nTechnical highlights.\nTD-SCDMA uses TDD, in contrast to the FDD scheme used by W-CDMA. By dynamically adjusting the number of timeslots used for downlink and uplink, the system can more easily accommodate asymmetric traffic with different data rate requirements on downlink and uplink than FDD schemes. Since it does not require paired spectrum for downlink and uplink, spectrum allocation flexibility is also increased. Using the same carrier frequency for uplink and downlink also means that the channel condition is the same on both directions, and the base station can deduce the downlink channel information from uplink channel estimates, which is helpful to the application of beamforming techniques.\nTD-SCDMA also uses TDMA in addition to the CDMA used in WCDMA. This reduces the number of users in each timeslot, which reduces the implementation complexity of multiuser detection and beamforming schemes, but the non-continuous transmission also reduces coverage (because of the higher peak power needed), mobility (because of lower power control frequency) and complicates radio resource management algorithms.\nThe \"S\" in TD-SCDMA stands for \"synchronous\", which means that uplink signals are synchronized at the base station receiver, achieved by continuous timing adjustments. This reduces the interference between users of the same timeslot using different codes by improving the orthogonality between the codes, therefore increasing system capacity, at the cost of some hardware complexity in achieving uplink synchronization.\nHistory.\nOn January 20, 2006, Ministry of Information Industry of the People's Republic of China formally announced that TD-SCDMA is the country's standard of 3G mobile telecommunication. On February 15, 2006, a timeline for deployment of the network in China was announced, stating pre-commercial trials would take place starting after completion of a number of test networks in select cities. These trials ran from March to October, 2006, but the results were apparently unsatisfactory. In early 2007, the Chinese government instructed the dominant cellular carrier, China Mobile, to build commercial trial networks in eight cities, and the two fixed-line carriers, China Telecom and China Netcom, to build one each in two other cities. Construction of these trial networks was scheduled to finish during the fourth quarter of 2007, but delays meant that construction was not complete until early 2008.\nThe standard has been adopted by 3GPP since Rel-4, known as \"UTRA TDD 1.28\u00a0Mcps Option\".\nOn March 28, 2008, China Mobile Group announced TD-SCDMA \"commercial trials\" for 60,000 test users in eight cities from April 1, 2008. Networks using other 3G standards (WCDMA and CDMA2000 EV/DO) had still not been launched in China, as these were delayed until TD-SCDMA was ready for commercial launch.\nIn January 2009, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) in China took the unusual step of assigning licences for 3 different third-generation mobile phone standards to three carriers in a long-awaited step that is expected to prompt $41 billion in spending on new equipment. The Chinese-developed standard, TD-SCDMA, was assigned to China Mobile, the world's biggest phone carrier by subscribers. That appeared to be an effort to make sure the new system has the financial and technical backing to succeed. Licences for two existing 3G standards, W-CDMA and CDMA2000 1xEV-DO, were assigned to China Unicom and China Telecom, respectively. Third-generation, or 3G, technology supports Web surfing, wireless video and other services and the start of service is expected to spur new revenue growth.\nThe technical split by MIIT has hampered the performance of China Mobile in the 3G market, with users and China Mobile engineers alike pointing to the lack of suitable handsets to use on the network. Deployment of base stations has also been slow, resulting in lack of improvement of service for users. The network connection itself has consistently been slower than that from the other two carriers, leading to a sharp decline in market share. By 2011 China Mobile has already moved its focus onto TD-LTE. Gradual closures of TD-SCDMA stations started in 2016.\nFrequency bands &amp; Deployments.\nThe following is a list of mobile telecommunications networks using third-generation TD-SCDMA / UMTS-TDD (LCR) technology.\nUnlicensed UMTS-TDD.\nIn Europe, CEPT allocated the 2010\u20132020\u00a0MHz range for a variant of UMTS-TDD designed for unlicensed, self-provided use. Some telecom groups and jurisdictions have proposed withdrawing this service in favour of licensed UMTS-TDD, due to lack of demand, and lack of development of a UMTS TDD air interface technology suitable for deployment in this band.\nComparison with UMTS-FDD.\nOrdinary UMTS uses UTRA-FDD as an air interface and is known as UMTS-FDD. UMTS-FDD uses W-CDMA for multiple access and frequency-division duplex for duplexing, meaning that the up-link and down-link transmit on different frequencies. UMTS is usually transmitted on frequencies assigned for 1G, 2G, or 3G mobile telephone service in the countries of operation.\nUMTS-TDD uses time-division duplexing, allowing the up-link and down-link to share the same spectrum. This allows the operator to more flexibly divide the usage of available spectrum according to traffic patterns. For ordinary phone service, you would expect the up-link and down-link to carry approximately equal amounts of data (because every phone call needs a voice transmission in either direction), but Internet-oriented traffic is more frequently one-way. For example, when browsing a website, the user will send commands, which are short, to the server, but the server will send whole files, that are generally larger than those commands, in response.\nUMTS-TDD tends to be allocated frequency intended for mobile/wireless Internet services rather than used on existing cellular frequencies. This is, in part, because TDD duplexing is not normally allowed on cellular, PCS/PCN, and 3G frequencies. TDD technologies open up the usage of left-over unpaired spectrum.\nEurope-wide, several bands are provided either specifically for UMTS-TDD or for similar technologies. These are 1900\u00a0MHz and 1920\u00a0MHz and between 2010\u00a0MHz and 2025\u00a0MHz. In several countries the 2500\u20132690\u00a0MHz band (also known as MMDS in the USA) have been used for UMTS-TDD deployments. Additionally, spectrum around the 3.5\u00a0GHz range has been allocated in some countries, notably Britain, in a technology-neutral environment. In the Czech Republic UTMS-TDD is also used in a frequency range around 872\u00a0MHz.\nDeployment.\nUMTS-TDD has been deployed for public and/or private networks in at least nineteen countries around the world, with live systems in, amongst other countries, Australia, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Botswana, South Africa, the UK, and the USA.\nDeployments in the US thus far have been limited. It has been selected for a public safety support network used by emergency responders in New York, but outside of some experimental systems, notably one from Nextel, thus far the WiMAX standard appears to have gained greater traction as a general mobile Internet access system.\nCompeting standards.\nA variety of Internet-access systems exist which provide broadband speed access to the net. These include WiMAX and HIPERMAN. UMTS-TDD has the advantages of being able to use an operator's existing UMTS/GSM infrastructure, should it have one, and that it includes UMTS modes optimized for circuit switching should, for example, the operator want to offer telephone service. UMTS-TDD's performance is also more consistent. However, UMTS-TDD deployers often have regulatory problems with taking advantage of some of the services UMTS compatibility provides. For example, the UMTS-TDD spectrum in the UK cannot be used to provide telephone service, though the regulator OFCOM is discussing the possibility of allowing it at some point in the future. Few operators considering UMTS-TDD have existing UMTS/GSM infrastructure.\nAdditionally, the WiMAX and HIPERMAN systems provide significantly larger bandwidths when the mobile station is near the tower.\nLike most mobile Internet access systems, many users who might otherwise choose UMTS-TDD will find their needs covered by the ad hoc collection of unconnected Wi-Fi access points at many restaurants and transportation hubs, and/or by Internet access already provided by their mobile phone operator. By comparison, UMTS-TDD (and systems like WiMAX) offers mobile, and more consistent, access than the former, and generally faster access than the latter.\nRadio access network.\nUMTS also specifies the Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (UTRAN), which is composed of multiple base stations, possibly using different terrestrial air interface standards and frequency bands.\nUMTS and GSM/EDGE can share a Core Network (CN), making UTRAN an alternative radio access network to GERAN (GSM/EDGE RAN), and allowing (mostly) transparent switching between the RANs according to available coverage and service needs. Because of that, UMTS's and GSM/EDGE's radio access networks are sometimes collectively referred to as UTRAN/GERAN.\nUMTS networks are often combined with GSM/EDGE, the latter of which is also a part of IMT-2000.\nThe UE (User Equipment) interface of the RAN (Radio Access Network) primarily consists of RRC (Radio Resource Control), PDCP (Packet Data Convergence Protocol), RLC (Radio Link Control) and MAC (Media Access Control) protocols. RRC protocol handles connection establishment, measurements, radio bearer services, security and handover decisions. RLC protocol primarily divides into three Modes\u00a0\u2013 Transparent Mode (TM), Unacknowledge Mode (UM), Acknowledge Mode (AM). The functionality of AM entity resembles TCP operation whereas UM operation resembles UDP operation. In TM mode, data will be sent to lower layers without adding any header to SDU of higher layers. MAC handles the scheduling of data on air interface depending on higher layer (RRC) configured parameters.\nThe set of properties related to data transmission is called Radio Bearer (RB). This set of properties decides the maximum allowed data in a TTI (Transmission Time Interval). RB includes RLC information and RB mapping. RB mapping decides the mapping between RB&lt;-&gt;logical channel&lt;-&gt;transport channel. Signaling messages are sent on Signaling Radio Bearers (SRBs) and data packets (either CS or PS) are sent on data RBs. RRC and NAS messages go on SRBs.\nSecurity includes two procedures: integrity and ciphering. Integrity validates the resource of messages and also makes sure that no one (third/unknown party) on the radio interface has modified the messages. Ciphering ensures that no one listens to your data on the air interface. Both integrity and ciphering are applied for SRBs whereas only ciphering is applied for data RBs.\nCore network.\nWith Mobile Application Part, UMTS uses the same core network standard as GSM/EDGE. This allows a simple migration for existing GSM operators. However, the migration path to UMTS is still costly: while much of the core infrastructure is shared with GSM, the cost of obtaining new spectrum licenses and overlaying UMTS at existing towers is high.\nThe CN can be connected to various backbone networks, such as the Internet or an Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) telephone network. UMTS (and GERAN) include the three lowest layers of OSI model. The network layer (OSI 3) includes the Radio Resource Management protocol (RRM) that manages the bearer channels between the mobile terminals and the fixed network, including the handovers.\nFrequency bands and channel bandwidths.\nUARFCN.\nA UARFCN (abbreviation for UTRA Absolute Radio Frequency Channel Number, where UTRA stands for UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access) is used to identify a frequency in the UMTS frequency bands.\nTypically channel number is derived from the frequency in MHz through the formula Channel Number = Frequency * 5. However, this is only able to represent channels that are centered on a multiple of 200\u00a0kHz, which do not align with licensing in North America. 3GPP added several special values for the common North American channels.\nSpectrum allocation.\nOver 130 licenses had been awarded to operators worldwide, as of December 2004, specifying W-CDMA radio access technology that builds on GSM. In Europe, the license process occurred at the tail end of the technology bubble, and the auction mechanisms for allocation set up in some countries resulted in some extremely high prices being paid for the original 2100\u00a0MHz licenses, notably in the UK and Germany. In Germany, bidders paid a total \u20ac50.8 billion for six licenses, two of which were subsequently abandoned and written off by their purchasers (Mobilcom and the Sonera/Telef\u00f3nica consortium). It has been suggested that these huge license fees have the character of a very large tax paid on future income expected many years down the road. In any event, the high prices paid put some European telecom operators close to bankruptcy (most notably KPN). Over the last few years some operators have written off some or all of the license costs. Between 2007 and 2009, all three Finnish carriers began to use 900\u00a0MHz UMTS in a shared arrangement with its surrounding 2G GSM base stations for rural area coverage, a trend that is expected to expand over Europe in the next 1\u20133 years.\nThe 2100\u00a0MHz band (downlink around 2100\u00a0MHz and uplink around 1900\u00a0MHz) allocated for UMTS in Europe and most of Asia is already used in North America. The 1900\u00a0MHz range is used for 2G (PCS) services, and 2100\u00a0MHz range is used for satellite communications. Regulators have, however, freed up some of the 2100\u00a0MHz range for 3G services, together with a different range around 1700\u00a0MHz for the uplink. \nAT&amp;T Wireless launched UMTS services in the United States by the end of 2004 strictly using the existing 1900\u00a0MHz spectrum allocated for 2G PCS services. Cingular acquired AT&amp;T Wireless in 2004 and has since then launched UMTS in select US cities. Cingular renamed itself AT&amp;T Mobility and rolled out some cities with a UMTS network at 850\u00a0MHz to enhance its existing UMTS network at 1900\u00a0MHz and now offers subscribers a number of dual-band UMTS 850/1900 phones.\nT-Mobile's rollout of UMTS in the US was originally focused on the 1700\u00a0MHz band. However, T-Mobile has been moving users from 1700\u00a0MHz to 1900\u00a0MHz (PCS) in order to reallocate the spectrum to 4G LTE services.\nIn Canada, UMTS coverage is being provided on the 850\u00a0MHz and 1900\u00a0MHz bands on the Rogers and Bell-Telus networks. Bell and Telus share the network. Recently, new providers Wind Mobile, Mobilicity and Videotron have begun operations in the 1700\u00a0MHz band.\nIn 2008, Australian telco Telstra replaced its existing CDMA network with a national UMTS-based 3G network, branded as NextG, operating in the 850\u00a0MHz band. Telstra currently provides UMTS service on this network, and also on the 2100\u00a0MHz UMTS network, through a co-ownership of the owning and administrating company 3GIS. This company is also co-owned by Hutchison 3G Australia, and this is the primary network used by their customers. Optus is currently rolling out a 3G network operating on the 2100\u00a0MHz band in cities and most large towns, and the 900\u00a0MHz band in regional areas. Vodafone is also building a 3G network using the 900\u00a0MHz band.\nIn India, BSNL has started its 3G services since October 2009, beginning with the larger cities and then expanding over to smaller cities. The 850\u00a0MHz and 900\u00a0MHz bands provide greater coverage compared to equivalent 1700/1900/2100\u00a0MHz networks, and are best suited to regional areas where greater distances separate base station and subscriber.\nCarriers in South America are now also rolling out 850\u00a0MHz networks.\nInteroperability and global roaming.\nUMTS phones (and data cards) are highly portable\u00a0\u2013 they have been designed to roam easily onto other UMTS networks (if the providers have roaming agreements in place). In addition, almost all UMTS phones are UMTS/GSM dual-mode devices, so if a UMTS phone travels outside of UMTS coverage during a call the call may be transparently handed off to available GSM coverage. Roaming charges are usually significantly higher than regular usage charges.\nMost UMTS licensees consider ubiquitous, transparent global roaming an important issue. To enable a high degree of interoperability, UMTS phones usually support several different frequencies in addition to their GSM fallback. Different countries support different UMTS frequency bands\u00a0\u2013 Europe initially used 2100\u00a0MHz while the most carriers in the USA use 850\u00a0MHz and 1900\u00a0MHz. T-Mobile has launched a network in the US operating at 1700\u00a0MHz (uplink) /2100\u00a0MHz (downlink), and these bands also have been adopted elsewhere in the US and in Canada and Latin America. A UMTS phone and network must support a common frequency to work together. Because of the frequencies used, early models of UMTS phones designated for the United States will likely not be operable elsewhere and vice versa. There are now 11 different frequency combinations used around the world\u00a0\u2013 including frequencies formerly used solely for 2G services.\nUMTS phones can use a Universal Subscriber Identity Module, USIM (based on GSM's SIM card) and also work (including UMTS services) with GSM SIM cards. This is a global standard of identification, and enables a network to identify and authenticate the (U)SIM in the phone. Roaming agreements between networks allow for calls to a customer to be redirected to them while roaming and determine the services (and prices) available to the user. In addition to user subscriber information and authentication information, the (U)SIM provides storage space for phone book contact. Handsets can store their data on their own memory or on the (U)SIM card (which is usually more limited in its phone book contact information). A (U)SIM can be moved to another UMTS or GSM phone, and the phone will take on the user details of the (U)SIM, meaning it is the (U)SIM (not the phone) which determines the phone number of the phone and the billing for calls made from the phone.\nJapan was the first country to adopt 3G technologies, and since they had not used GSM previously they had no need to build GSM compatibility into their handsets and their 3G handsets were smaller than those available elsewhere. In 2002, NTT DoCoMo's FOMA 3G network was the first commercial UMTS network\u00a0\u2013 using a pre-release specification, it was initially incompatible with the UMTS standard at the radio level but used standard USIM cards, meaning USIM card based roaming was possible (transferring the USIM card into a UMTS or GSM phone when travelling). Both NTT DoCoMo and SoftBank Mobile (which launched 3G in December 2002) now use standard UMTS.\nHandsets and modems.\nMost major 2G phone manufacturers were also manufacturers of 3G phones. The early 3G handsets and modems were specific to the frequencies required in their country, which meant they could only roam to other countries on the same 3G frequency (though they can fall back to the older GSM standard, where still provided). Canada and USA have a common share of frequencies, as do most European countries. The article UMTS frequency bands is an overview of UMTS network frequencies around the world.\nUsing a cellular router, PCMCIA or USB card, customers are able to access 3G broadband services, regardless of their choice of computer (such as a tablet PC or a PDA). Some software installs itself from the modem, so that in some cases absolutely no knowledge of technology is required to get online in moments. Using a phone that supports 3G and Bluetooth 2.0, multiple Bluetooth-capable laptops can be connected to the Internet. Some smartphones can also act as a mobile WLAN access point.\nThere are very few 3G phones or modems available supporting all 3G frequencies (UMTS850/900/1700/1900/2100\u00a0MHz). In 2010, Nokia released a range of phones with Pentaband 3G coverage, including the N8 and E7. Many other phones are offering more than one band which still enables extensive roaming. For example, Apple's iPhone 4 contains a quadband chipset operating on 850/900/1900/2100\u00a0MHz, allowing usage in the majority of countries where UMTS-FDD is deployed.\nOther competing standards.\nThe main competitor to UMTS is CDMA2000 (IMT-MC), which is developed by the 3GPP2. Unlike UMTS, CDMA2000 is an evolutionary upgrade to an existing 2G standard, cdmaOne, and is able to operate within the same frequency allocations. This and CDMA2000's narrower bandwidth requirements make it easier to deploy in existing spectra. In some, but not all, cases, existing GSM operators only have enough spectrum to implement either UMTS or GSM, not both. For example, in the US D, E, and F PCS spectrum blocks, the amount of spectrum available is 5\u00a0MHz in each direction. A standard UMTS system would saturate that spectrum. Where CDMA2000 is deployed, it usually co-exists with UMTS. In many markets however, the co-existence issue is of little relevance, as legislative hurdles exist to co-deploying two standards in the same licensed slice of spectrum.\nAnother competitor to UMTS is EDGE (IMT-SC), which is an evolutionary upgrade to the 2G GSM system, leveraging existing GSM spectrums. It is also much easier, quicker, and considerably cheaper for wireless carriers to \"bolt-on\" EDGE functionality by upgrading their existing GSM transmission hardware to support EDGE rather than having to install almost all brand-new equipment to deliver UMTS. However, being developed by 3GPP just as UMTS, EDGE is not a true competitor. Instead, it is used as a temporary solution preceding UMTS roll-out or as a complement for rural areas. This is facilitated by the fact that GSM/EDGE and UMTS specifications are jointly developed and rely on the same core network, allowing dual-mode operation including vertical handovers. \nChina's TD-SCDMA standard is often seen as a competitor, too. TD-SCDMA has been added to UMTS' Release 4 as UTRA-TDD 1.28 Mcps Low Chip Rate (UTRA-TDD LCR). Unlike TD-CDMA (UTRA-TDD 3.84 Mcps High Chip Rate, UTRA-TDD HCR) which complements W-CDMA (UTRA-FDD), it is suitable for both micro and macrocells. However, the lack of vendors' support is preventing it from being a real competitor.\nWhile DECT is technically capable of competing with UMTS and other cellular networks in densely populated, urban areas, it has only been deployed for domestic cordless phones and private in-house networks.\nAll of these competitors have been accepted by ITU as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards, along with UMTS-FDD.\nOn the Internet access side, competing systems include WiMAX and Flash-OFDM.\nMigrating from GSM/GPRS to UMTS.\nFrom a GSM/GPRS network, the following network elements can be reused:\nFrom a GSM/GPRS communication radio network, the following elements cannot be reused:\nThey can remain in the network and be used in dual network operation where 2G and 3G networks co-exist while network migration and new 3G terminals become available for use in the network.\nThe UMTS network introduces new network elements that function as specified by 3GPP:\nThe functionality of MSC changes when going to UMTS. In a GSM system the MSC handles all the circuit switched operations like connecting A- and B-subscriber through the network. In UMTS the Media gateway (MGW) takes care of data transfer in circuit switched networks. MSC controls MGW operations.\nProblems and issues.\nSome countries, including the United States, have allocated spectrum differently from the ITU recommendations, so that the standard bands most commonly used for UMTS (UMTS-2100) have not been available. In those countries, alternative bands are used, preventing the interoperability of existing UMTS-2100 equipment, and requiring the design and manufacture of different equipment for the use in these markets. As is the case with GSM900 today, standard UMTS 2100\u00a0MHz equipment will not work in those markets. However, it appears as though UMTS is not suffering as much from handset band compatibility issues as GSM did, as many UMTS handsets are multi-band in both UMTS and GSM modes. Penta-band (850, 900, 1700, 2100, and 1900\u00a0MHz bands), quad-band GSM (850, 900, 1800, and 1900\u00a0MHz bands) and tri-band UMTS (850, 1900, and 2100\u00a0MHz bands) handsets are becoming more commonplace.\nIn its early days, UMTS had problems in many countries: Overweight handsets with poor battery life were first to arrive on a market highly sensitive to weight and form factor. The Motorola A830, a debut handset on Hutchison's 3 network, weighed more than 200\u00a0grams and even featured a detachable camera to reduce handset weight. Another significant issue involved call reliability, related to problems with handover from UMTS to GSM. Customers found their connections being dropped as handovers were possible only in one direction (UMTS \u2192 GSM), with the handset only changing back to UMTS after hanging up. In most networks around the world this is no longer an issue.\nCompared to GSM, UMTS networks initially required a higher base station density. For fully-fledged UMTS incorporating video on demand features, one base station needed to be set up every . This was the case when only the 2100\u00a0MHz band was being used, however with the growing use of lower-frequency bands (such as 850 and 900\u00a0MHz) this is no longer so. This has led to increasing rollout of the lower-band networks by operators since 2006.\nEven with current technologies and low-band UMTS, telephony and data over UMTS requires more power than on comparable GSM networks. Apple Inc. cited UMTS power consumption as the reason that the first generation iPhone only supported EDGE. Their release of the iPhone 3G quotes talk time on UMTS as half that available when the handset is set to use GSM. Other manufacturers indicate different battery lifetime for UMTS mode compared to GSM mode as well. As battery and network technology improve, this issue is diminishing.\nSecurity issues.\nAs early as 2008, it was known that carrier networks can be used to surreptitiously gather user location information. In August 2014, the Washington Post reported on widespread marketing of surveillance systems using Signalling System No. 7 (SS7) protocols to locate callers anywhere in the world.\nIn December 2014, news broke that SS7's very own functions can be repurposed for surveillance, because of its relaxed security, in order to listen to calls in real time or to record encrypted calls and texts for later decryption, or to defraud users and cellular carriers.\nDeutsche Telekom and Vodafone declared the same day that they had fixed gaps in their networks, but that the problem is global and can only be fixed with a telecommunication system-wide solution.\nReleases.\nThe evolution of UMTS progresses according to planned releases. Each release is designed to introduce new features and improve upon existing ones.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32238", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32238", "title": "USS Ticonderoga", "text": "USS \"Ticonderoga\" may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32239", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32239", "title": "UMTS (telecommunication)", "text": ""}
{"id": "32240", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32240", "title": "Uzbeks", "text": "Turkic ethnic group of Central Asia\nThe Uzbeks () are a Turkic ethnic group native to Central Asia, being the largest Turkic ethnic group in the area. They comprise the majority population of Uzbekistan, next to Tajiks and Karakalpak minorities, and also form minority groups in Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Russia, and China. Uzbek diaspora communities also exist in Turkey, Saudi Arabia, United States, Ukraine, Pakistan, and other countries.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the word \"Uzbek\" is disputed. One view holds that it is eponymously named after Oghuz Khagan, also known as \"Oghuz Beg\", became the word \"Uzbeg\" or \"Uzbek\". Another theory states that the name means \"independent\", \"genuine man\", or the \"lord himself\", from \"\u00d6z\" (self) and the Turkic title \"bek/bey/beg\". A third theory holds that the variant \"Uz\", of the word \"u\u011fuz\", earlier \"o\u011fuz\", united with the word \"bek\" to form \"U\u011fuz-bek\" &gt; \"Uz-bek\", meaning \"leader of an o\u011fuz\".\nThe personal name \"Uzbek\" is found in Arabic and Persian historical writings. Historian Usama ibn Munqidh (d. 1188), describing the events in Iran under the Seljuk Empire, notes that one of the leaders of Bursuk's troops in 1115\u20131116 was the \"emir of the troops\" Uzbek, the ruler of Mosul. According to Rashid ad-din, the last representative of the Oghuz dynasty of Ildegizids who ruled in Tabriz was Uzbek Muzaffar 1210\u20131225.\nThe name Uzbek seems to have become widely adopted as an ethnonym under the rule of Ozbeg Khan, who converted the Golden Horde to Islam.\nOrigins.\nBefore the 5th century, what is today's Uzbekistan was part of Sogdia, Khwarazm, Bactria mainly inhabited by Sogdians, Bactrians, and Khwarazmians, all Indo-Iranian peoples. It was part of the Achaemenid Empire in the sixth to fourth centuries BC and, by the 3rd century CE, part of Sasanian Empire.\nFrom the fifth to sixth century, what is today's Uzbekistan was part of the Hephthalite Empire. From 6th to 8th century, what is today's Uzbekistan was under the rule of First Turkic Khaganate.\nThe Turkic component was part of the Kidarites in the fifth century. The seal of the Kidarites, made in the 5th century in Samarkand, has a Bactrian inscription containing the title of the ruler: \"Oglar Khun\", of Turkic origin.\nSince the entry of Central Asia into the Turkic Khaganate (6th century), the process of Turkicization has intensified. In subsequent centuries, the main ethnocultural process that took place on the territory of the Central Asian interfluve was the convergence and partial merging of the settled, Iranian-speaking and Turkic-speaking, with the nomadic, mainly Turkic-speaking population.\nTurkic and Chinese migration into Central Asia occurred during the Chinese Tang dynasty, and Chinese armies commanded by Turkic generals stationed in large parts of Central Asia. But Chinese influence ended with the An Lushan Rebellion. During the ninth and tenth centuries, Transoxiana was ruled by the Persian Samanid Empire. From the 11th century on, Transoxiana was under the rule of the Turkic Kara-Khanid Khanate, their arrival in Transoxiana signalled a definitive shift from Iranian to Turkic predominance in Central Asia. The Kara-Khanid ruler Sultan Satuq Bughra Khan was the first Turkic ruler to convert to Islam, most people of Central Asia soon followed. In the 12th century, Transoxiana was conquered by the Qara Khitai (Western Liao), a sinicized Khitan dynasty, they brought to Central Asia the Chinese system of government. In the 13th century, Kara-Khanid Khanate was destroyed by the Turkic Anushtegin dynasty, a former vassal of the Qara Khitai.\nAlthough Turko-Mongol infiltration into Central Asia had started early, and the influence of the Turkic tribes was felt in Khwarazm before the campaigns of the Mongols, after the beginning of the Chingizid rule, bilingualism became more common. It is generally believed that these ancient Indo-European-speaking peoples were linguistically assimilated by smaller but dominant Turkic-speaking groups while the sedentary population finally adopted the Persian language, the traditional \"lingua franca\" of the eastern Islamic lands. The language-shift from Middle Iranian to Turkic and New Persian was predominantly the result of an \"elite dominance\" process. Peter B. Golden listed three basic ethnic elements contributing to the Uzbeks' ethnogenesis:\nThe modern Uzbek language is largely derived from the Chagatai language which gained prominence in the Timurid Empire. The position of Chagatai (and later Uzbek) was further strengthened after the fall of the Timurids and the rise of the Shaybanid Uzbek Khaqanate that finally shaped the Turkic language and identity of modern Uzbeks, while the unique grammatical and phonetical features of the Uzbek language as well as the modern Uzbek culture reflect the more ancient Iranian roots of the Uzbek people.\n When the Shaybanids \u2013 originally Kipchak-speaking nomads \u2013 conquered Transoxiana (present-day Uzbekistan) in the 16th century, their elite designation \"Uzbek\" became an ethnic label for the entire region's Turkic-speaking population, including non-Kipchaks.\nThe majority of the population were Karluk-speaking Turks (closely related to the Uyghurs) and Chagatais (the urban population of the Timurid Empire). The Shaybanid Kipchak-speaking Uzbeks, who were a minority, assimilated with the Karluk majority and eventually adopted the Karluk language, which developed into modern Uzbek.\nToday, approximately 85\u201390% of Uzbeks speak a Karluk dialect, while minorities in Khorezm and Surxondaryo retain Kipchak or Oghuz dialects.\n Although the Timurids were historically enemies of the early Uzbeks, they are now considered part of the Uzbek cultural heritage by Majority of Uzbeks, because:\nThis process shows how a political label (\"Uzbek\") can evolve into an ethnic identity for a broader population with different origins.\nGenetic origins.\nUzbeks share a large portion of their ancestry with nearby Turkic populations, including Kyrgyz people, Uyghurs, Kazakhs, and Bashkirs.\nThe western ancestry of Uzbeks includes a Caucasus component (\u224835\u201340%), and a (Northern) European component (\u22485\u201320%), the Uzbeks eastern ancestry includes an Eastern Asian component (\u224835%), and a (Central and East) Siberian component (\u22485\u201320%). The best proxy for their western ancestry are modern day Abkhaz people, while the best proxy for their eastern ancestry are Yakuts (or alternatively, Tuvans).\nA study on modern Central Asians comparing them to ancient historical samples found that Uzbeks can be modeled as 59.1% Iron Age Indo-Iranians, and 40.9% Eastern Steppe Xiongnu, from the Mongolian Plateau.\nPaternal haplogroups.\nBased on the research of several studies, the paternal lineages of Uzbeks have been described:\nMaternal haplogroups.\nAccording to a 2010 study, slightly more than 50% of Uzbeks from Tashkent belong to East Eurasian and South Asian maternal haplogroups, while nearly 50% belong to West Eurasian haplogroups.\nA majority of Uzbeks from Ferghana belong to East Eurasian and South Asian maternal haplogroups, while considerably fewer belong to West Eurasian haplogroups.\nIn Khorzem and Qashkadarya, a majority of Uzbeks belong to West Eurasian maternal haplogroups, while considerably fewer belong to East Eurasian and South Asian haplogroups.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nIn the southern part of Central Asia, there was a Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex, which has recently been dated to c. 2250\u20131700 BC. That name is the modern archaeological designation for a Bronze Age civilization of Central Asia, previously dated to c. 2400\u20131900 BC by Sandro Salvatori.\nIranian nomads arrived from the northern grasslands of what is now Uzbekistan sometime in the first millennium BC. These nomads, who spoke Iranian dialects, settled in Central Asia and began to build an extensive irrigation system along the rivers of the region. At this time, cities such as Bukhara and Samarkand began to appear as centers of government and culture. By the 5th century BC, the Bactrian, Khwarazm, Soghdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region.\nAlexander the Great conquered Sogdiana and Bactria in 329 BC, marrying Roxana, daughter of a local Bactrian chieftain. The conquest was supposedly of little help to Alexander as popular resistance was fierce, causing Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region that became the northern part of Hellenistic Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. For many centuries the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by Persian empires, including the Parthian and Sassanid Empires.\nIn the first centuries, the northern territories of modern Uzbekistan were part of the Kangju nomad state.\nWith the arrival of the Greeks, writing based on the Greek alphabet began to spread on the territory of Bactria and Sogdiana. As a result of archaeological research on the territory of Sogdiana and Bactria, fragments of pottery with Greek inscriptions have been found.\nIn 2nd century BC China began to develop its silk trade with the West. Because of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhara and Samarkand eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Mawarannahr (Transoxiana) was one of the most influential and powerful Persian provinces of antiquity.\nIn 350\u2013375 AD, Sogdiana and Tashkent oasis were captured by the nomadic Xionite tribes who arrived from the steppe regions of Central Asia.\nTurkic Khaganate period.\nThe First Turkic Khaganate and migration of the population played a large role in the formation of a sedentary Turkic population in the territory of the oases of Central Asia in the 6th\u20138th centuries.\nIn the Western Turkic Khaganate, in addition to various Turkic tribes, there were Iranian nomadic elements, which were gradually assimilated by the Turks. The urban population of Sogd, Khwarazm, Bactria was in close contact with the Turks.\nTurkic names and titles are found in Bactrian documents of the 7th\u20138th centuries: kagan, tapaglig eltabir, tarkhan, tudun, the names Kutlug Tapaglig Bilga savuk, Kara-tongi, Tongaspar, Turkic ethnic names: halach, Turk. During the excavations of the Sogdian Penjikent, a fragment of a draft letter in the Sogdian language was discovered, in the text of which there is a Turkic name Turkash \nThe Turkic population of the Fergana Valley had their own runic writing. The Turkic rulers of Ferghana, Tokharistan, Bukhara and Chach issued their own coins.\nThe Turkic population of certain regions of Central Asia in the early Middle Ages had their own urban culture and used the proper Turkic terms, for example, baliq, which meant city.\nThe Turks had a great influence in the development of the armament of the Sogdians. The Turks are depicted in the wall paintings of ancient Samarkand.\nEarly Islamic period.\nThe conquest of Central Asia by Muslim Arabs, which was completed in the 8th century AD, brought to the region a new religion that continues to be dominant. The Arabs first invaded Mawarannahr in the middle of the 7th century through sporadic raids during their conquest of Persia. Available sources on the Arab conquest suggest that the Soghdians and other Iranian peoples of Central Asia were unable to defend their land against the Arabs because of internal divisions and the lack of strong indigenous leadership. The Arabs, on the other hand, were led by a brilliant general, Qutaybah ibn Muslim, and were also highly motivated by the desire to spread their new faith, Islam, the official beginning of which was in AD 622. Because of these factors, the population of Mawarannahr was easily subdued. The new religion brought by the Arabs spread gradually into the region. The native religious identities, which in some respects were already being displaced by Persian influences before the Arabs arrived, were further displaced in the ensuing centuries. Nevertheless, the destiny of Central Asia as an Islamic region was firmly established by the Arab victory over the Chinese armies in 750 in a battle at the Talas River.\nDespite brief Arab rule, Central Asia successfully retained much of its Iranian characteristic, remaining an important center of culture and trade for centuries after the adoption of the new religion. Mawarannahr continued to be an important political player in regional affairs, as it had been under various Persian dynasties. In fact, the Abbasid Caliphate, which ruled the Arab world for five centuries beginning in 750, was established thanks in great part to assistance from Central Asian supporters in their struggle against the then-ruling Umayyad Caliphate.\nDuring the height of the Abbasid Caliphate in the 8th and 9th centuries, Central Asia and Mawarannahr experienced a truly golden age. Bukhara became one of the leading centers of learning, culture, and art in the Muslim world, its magnificence rivaling contemporaneous cultural centers such as Baghdad, Cairo, and Cordoba. Some of the greatest historians, scientists, and geographers in the history of Islamic culture were natives of the region.\nAs the Abbasid Caliphate began to weaken and local Islamic Iranian states emerged as the rulers of Iran and Central Asia, the Persian language continued its preeminent role in the region as the language of literature and government. The rulers of the eastern section of Iran and of Mawarannahr were Persians. Under the Samanids and the Buyids, the rich Perso-Islamic culture of Mawarannahr continued to flourish.\nSamanid Empire, Ghaznavids, and Kara-Khanid Khanate.\nThe Samanids were a Persian state that reigned for 180 years, encompassing a vast territoriy stretching from Central Asia to West Asia. The Samanids were descendants of Bahram Chobin, and thus descended from the House of Mihr\u0101n, one of the Seven Great Houses of Iran. In governing their territory, the Samanids modeled their state organization after the Abbasids, mirroring the caliph's court and organization. They were rewarded for supporting the Abbasids in Transoxania and Khorasan, and with their established capitals located in Bukhara, Balkh, Samarkand, and Herat, they carved their kingdom after defeating the Saffarids.\nThe Samanid Empire was the first native Persian dynasty to arise after the Muslim Arab conquest. The four grandsons of the dynasty's founder, Saman Khuda, had been rewarded with provinces for their faithful service to the Abbasid caliph al-Mamun: Nuh obtained Samarkand; Ahmad, Fergana; Yahya, Shash; and Elyas, Herat. Ahmad's son Nasr became governor of Transoxania in 875, but it was his brother and successor, Ismail Samani who overthrew the Saffarids and the Zaydites of Tabaristan, thus establishing a semiautonomous rule over Transoxania and Khorasan, with Bukhara as his capital.\nSamanid rule in Bukhara was not formally recognized by the caliph until the early 10th century when the Saffarid ruler 'Amr-i Laith had asked the caliph for the investiture of Transoxiana. The caliph, Al-Mu'tadid however sent the Samanid amir, Ismail Samani, a letter urging him to fight Amr-i Laith and the Saffarids whom the caliph considered usurpers. According to the letter, the caliph stated that he prayed for Ismail who the caliph considered as the rightful ruler of Khorasan. The letter had a profound effect on Ismail, as he was determined to oppose the Saffarids.\nSince the 9th century, the Turkization of the population of the Central Asian interfluve has been increasing. At this time, a military system was created, in which the influence of the Turkic military was strong.\nIn the 9th century, the continued influx of nomads from the northern steppes brought a new group of people into Central Asia. These people were the Turks who lived in the great grasslands stretching from Mongolia to the Caspian Sea. Introduced mainly as slave soldiers to the Samanid dynasty, these Turks served in the armies of all the states of the region, including the Abbasid army. In the late 10th century, as the Samanids began to lose control of Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) and northeastern Iran, some of these soldiers came to positions of power in the government of the region, and eventually established their own states, albeit highly Persianized. With the emergence of a Turkic ruling group in the region, other Turkic tribes began to migrate to Transoxiana.\nThe first of the Turkic states in the region was the Persianate Ghaznavid Empire, established in the last years of the 10th century. The Ghaznavid state, which captured Samanid domains south of the Amu Darya, was able to conquer large areas of Iran, Afghanistan, and northern India apart from Central Asia, during the reign of Sultan Mahmud. The Ghaznavids were closely followed by the Turkic Qarakhanids, who took the Samanid capital Bukhara in 999 AD, and ruled Transoxiana for the next two centuries. Samarkand was made the capital of the Western Qarakhanid state.\nAccording to Peter Golden, the Karakhanid state was one of the first Turkic-Islamic states. The Islamization of the Karakhanids and their Turkic subjects played an important role in the cultural development of the Turkic culture. In the late 10th\u2013early 11th century for the first time in the history of the Turkic peoples, Tafsir (commentary on the Koran) was translated into the Turkic language.\nThe founder of the Western Karakhanid Kaganate, Ibrahim Tamgach Khan (1040\u20131068), for the first time erected a madrasah in Samarkand with state funds and supported the development of culture in the region. One of the famous scholars was the historian Majid ad-din al-Surkhakati, who in Samarkand wrote the \"History of Turkestan\", which outlined the history of the Karakhanid dynasty.\nThe most striking monument of the Karakhanid era in Samarkand was the palace of Ibrahim ibn Hussein (1178\u20131202), which was built in the citadel in the 12th century, where fragments of monumental painting depicting a Turkic ruler were discovered.\nThe dominance of Ghazna was curtailed, however, when the Seljuks led themselves into the western part of the region, conquering the Ghaznavid territory of Khorazm (also spelled Khorezm and Khwarazm). The Seljuks also defeated the Qarakhanids, but did not annex their territories outright. Instead they made the Qarakhanids a vassal state. The Seljuks dominated a wide area from Asia Minor to the western sections of Transoxiana in the 11th century. The Seljuk Empire then split into states ruled by various local Turkic and Iranian rulers. The culture and intellectual life of the region continued unaffected by such political changes, however. Turkic tribes from the north continued to migrate into the region during this period. The power of the Seljuks however became diminished when the Seljuk Sultan Ahmed Sanjar was defeated by the Kara-Khitans at the Battle of Qatwan in 1141.\nTurkic words and terms characteristic of the literature of the 11th century are used in the modern Bukhara dialect of the Uzbeks.\nIn the late 12th century, a Turkic leader of Khorazm, which is the region south of the Aral Sea, united Khorazm, Transoxiana, and Iran under his rule. Under the rule of the Khorazm shah Kutbeddin Muhammad and his son, Muhammad II, Transoxiana continued to be prosperous and rich while maintaining the region's Perso-Islamic identity. However, a new incursion of nomads from the north soon changed this situation. This time the invader was Genghis Khan with his Mongol armies.\nMongol period.\nThe Mongol invasion of Central Asia is one of the turning points in the history of the region. The Mongols had such a lasting impact because they established the tradition that the legitimate ruler of any Central Asian state could only be a blood descendant of Genghis Khan.\nThe Mongol conquest of Central Asia, which took place from 1219 to 1225, led to a wholesale change in the population of Mawarannahr. The conquest quickened the process of Turkification in some parts of the region because, although the armies of Genghis Khan were led by Mongols, they were made up mostly of Turkic tribes that had been incorporated into the Mongol armies as the tribes were encountered in the Mongols' southward sweep. As these armies settled in Mawarannahr, they intermixed with the local populations which did not flee. Another effect of the Mongol conquest was the large-scale damage the soldiers inflicted on cities such as Bukhara and on regions such as Khorazm. As the leading province of a wealthy state, Khorazm was treated especially severely. The irrigation networks in the region suffered extensive damage that was not repaired for several generations. Many Iranian-speaking populations were forced to flee southwards in order to avoid persecution.\nFollowing the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and his family members. Despite the potential for serious fragmentation, Mongol law of the Mongol Empire maintained orderly succession for several more generations, and control of most of Mawarannahr stayed in the hands of direct descendants of Chaghatai, the second son of Genghis. Orderly succession, prosperity, and internal peace prevailed in the Chaghatai lands, and the Mongol Empire as a whole remained strong and united.\nRule of Timur and Timurids.\nIn the early 14th century, however, as the empire began to break up into its constituent parts, the Chaghatai territory also was disrupted as the princes of various tribal groups competed for influence. One tribal chieftain, Timur (Tamerlane), emerged from these struggles in the 1380s as the dominant force in Mawarannahr. Although he was not a descendant of Genghis, Timur became the de facto ruler of Mawarannahr and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, the Caucasus, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea. He also invaded Russia before dying during an invasion of China in 1405.\nTimur initiated the last flowering of Mawarannahr by gathering in his capital, Samarkand, numerous artisans and scholars from the lands he had conquered. By supporting such people, Timur imbued his empire with a very rich Perso-Islamic culture. During Timur's reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a wide range of religious and palatial construction projects were undertaken in Samarkand and other population centers. Timur also patronized scientists and artists; his grandson Ulugh Beg was one of the world's first great astronomers. It was during the Timurid dynasty that Turkic, in the form of the Chaghatai dialect, became a literary language in its own right in Mawarannahr, although the Timurids were Persianate in nature. The greatest Chaghataid writer, Ali Shir Nava'i, was active in the city of Herat, now in northwestern Afghanistan, in the second half of the 15th century.\nThe Timurids supported the development of literature in the Turkic language. In 1398, Timur's son Miranshah ordered to draw up an official document in the Turkic language in the Uyghur script.\nTimur's grandson Iskandar Sultan had a court that included a group of poets, for example, Mir Khaidar, whom Iskandar encouraged to write poetry in the Turkic language. Thanks to the patronage of Iskandar Sultan, the Turkic poem \"Gul and Navruz\" was written.\nThe Timurid state quickly broke into two halves after the death of Timur. The chronic internal fighting of the Timurids attracted the attention of the Eastern Kipchak-speaking nomadic tribes called Taza Uzbeks who were living to the north of the Aral Sea. In 1501, the Uzbeks began a wholesale invasion of Mawarannahr. Under the leadership of Muhammad Shaybani, the Uzbeks conquered the key cities of Samarkand and Herat in 1505 and 1507, respectively, and founded the Khanate of Bukhara.\nUzbek period.\nBy 1510, the Uzbeks had completed their conquest of Central Asia, including the territory of the present-day Uzbekistan. Of the states they established, the most powerful, the Khanate of Bukhara, centered on the city of Bukhara. The khanate controlled Mawarannahr, especially the region of Tashkent, the Fergana Valley in the east, and northern Afghanistan. A second Uzbek state, the Khanate of Khiva was established in the oasis of Khorazm at the mouth of the Amu Darya. The Khanate of Bukhara was initially led by the energetic Shaybanid dynasty, the successors of Muhammad Shaybani. The Shaybanids initially competed against Iran for a few years, which was led by the Safavid dynasty, for the rich far-eastern territory of present-day Iran. The struggle with the Safavids also had a religious aspect, because the Uzbeks were Sunni Muslims while Iran was Shia.\nShaybani Khan wrote poetry under the pseudonym \"Shibani\". A collection of poems by Shaybani Khan, written in the Central Asian Turkic literary language, is currently kept in the Topkapi manuscript collection in Istanbul. The manuscript of his philosophical and religious work: \"Bahr ul-Khudo\", written in the Central Asian Turkic literary language in 1508, is located in London.\nShaybani-khan's nephew Ubaydulla Khan was a very educated person, he skillfully recited the Koran and provided it with commentaries in the Turkic language. Ubaydulla himself wrote poetry in Turkic, Persian and Arabic under the literary pseudonym Ubaydiy. A collection of his poems has reached us.\nThe term \"92 Uzbek tribes\", which appeared in the fifteenth-century Dasht-i Qipchaq, began to be used with a variety of meanings in the following centuries depending on the political and cultural context. Near the end of the 16th century, the Uzbek states of Bukhara and Khorazm began to weaken because of their endless wars against each other and the Persians and because of strong competition for the throne among the khans in power and their heirs. At the beginning of the 17th century, the Shaybanid dynasty was replaced by the Janid dynasty.\nAnother factor contributing to the weakness of the Uzbek khanates in this period was the general decline of trade moving through the region. This change had begun in the previous century when ocean trade routes were established from Europe to India and China, circumventing the Silk Route. As European-dominated ocean transport expanded and some trading centers were destroyed, cities such as Bukhara, Merv, and Samarkand in the Khanate of Bukhora and Khiva and Urganch (Urgench) in Khorazm began to steadily decline.\nThe Uzbeks' struggle with Iran also led to the cultural isolation of Central Asia from the rest of the Islamic world. In addition to these problems, the struggle with the nomads from the northern steppe continued. In the 17th and 18th centuries, Kazakh nomads and Mongols continually raided the Uzbek khanates, causing widespread damage and disruption. In the beginning of the 18th century, the Khanate of Bukhara lost the fertile Fergana region, and a new Uzbek khanate was formed in Quqon.\nAfghan Pashtun conquest.\nAn Afghani Uzbek Khanate existed in Maimana. The Pashtuns battled and conquered the Uzbeks and forced them into a state of subjugation and discrimination. Out of anti-Russian strategic interests, the British assisted the Afghan conquest of the Uzbek Khanates. The British gave weapons to the Afghans and backed the Afghan colonization of northern Afghanistan, which involved sending a huge number of Pashtun colonists onto Uzbek land. Furthermore, British literature from the period demonized the Uzbeks. Soviet-era arrivals in Afghanistan from Uzbekistan are referred to as Jogi.\nRusso-Soviet era.\nRussian Empire.\nIn the 19th century, Russian interest in the area increased greatly, sparked by nominal concern over British designs on Central Asia; by anger over the situation of Russian citizens held as slaves; and by the desire to control the trade in the region and to establish a secure source of cotton for Russia. When the United States Civil War prevented cotton delivery from Russia's primary supplier, the southern United States, Central Asian cotton assumed much greater importance for Russia.\nAs soon as the Russian conquest of the Caucasus was completed in the late 1850s, the Russian Ministry of War began to send military forces against the Central Asian khanates. Three major population centers of the khanates\u2014Tashkent, Bukhara, and Samarkand\u2014were captured in 1865, 1867, and 1868, respectively. In 1868 the Khanate of Bukhara signed a treaty with Russia making Bukhara a Russian protectorate. Khiva became a Russian protectorate in 1873, and the Khanat of Kokand finally was incorporated into the Russian Empire, also as a protectorate, in 1876.\nBy 1876, Russia had incorporated all three khanates (hence all of present-day Uzbekistan) into its empire, granting the khanates limited autonomy. In the second half of the 19th century, the Russian population of Uzbekistan grew and some industrialization occurred. The Jadidists engaged in educational reform among Muslims of Central Asia. To escape Russians slaughtering them in 1916, Uzbeks escaped to China.\nSoviet Union.\nIn the 1940s, Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union. In response, many Central Asians, including Uzbeks or Samarkandites, were sent to fight the Germans in the area of Smolensk. However, a number of them, including Hatam Kadirov and Zair Muratov, were captured, transported to the Netherlands, where they were abused and killed. Their bodies were buried in Rusthof cemetery near Amersfoort. For some time, these 101 victims were not identified, apart from the fact that they were Soviets, until an investigation by journalist Remco Reiding. Their plight was also studied by Uzbek historian Bahodir Uzakov of Gouda, South Holland. Witness Henk Broekhuizen said that, despite having seeing them once as a teenager, he would recall the soldiers' faces, whenever he closed his eyes.\nMoscow's control over Uzbekistan weakened in the 1970s as Uzbek party leader Sharaf Rashidov brought many cronies and relatives into positions of power. In the mid-1980s, Moscow attempted to regain control by again purging the entire Uzbek party leadership. However, this move increased Uzbek nationalism, which had long resented Soviet policies such as the imposition of cotton monoculture and the suppression of Islamic traditions. In the late 1980s, the liberalized atmosphere of the Soviet Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev (in power 1985\u201391) fostered political opposition groups and open (albeit limited) opposition to Soviet policy in Uzbekistan. In 1989, a series of violent ethnic clashes, involving Uzbeks, brought the appointment of ethnic Uzbek outsider Islam Karimov as Communist Party chief.\nPost-Soviet era.\nWhen the Supreme Soviet of Uzbekistan reluctantly approved independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Karimov became president of the Republic of Uzbekistan. On August 31, 1991, Uzbekistan declared independence, marking September 1 as a national holiday.\nUzbek diaspora.\nDissident Islamist and anti-Soviet Central Asians fled to Afghanistan, British India, and to the Hijaz in Saudi Arabia. The last Emir of Bukhara Mohammed Alim Khan fled to Afghanistan. The Islamist Uzbek As-Sayyid Q\u0101sim bin Abd al-Jabbaar Al-Andijaani (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0633\u064a\u062f \u0642\u0627\u0633\u0645 \u0628\u0646 \u0639\u0628\u062f \u0627\u0644\u062c\u0628\u0627\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0646\u062f\u064a\u062c\u0627\u0646\u064a) was born in Fergana valley's Andijan city in Turkestan (Central Asia). He went to British India was educated at Darul Uloom Deoband, and then returned to Turkestan where he preached against Communist Russian rule. He then fled to Afghanistan, then to British India and then to Hijaz where he continued his education in Mecca and Medina and wrote several works on Islam and engaged in anti-Soviet activities.\nIn the recent times, many Uzbeks started to migrate to various countries as labour migrants, especially to Russia, South Korea, the UAE, Germany, Poland, Saudi Arabia, etc.\nKyrgyzstan.\nUzbeks in Kyrgyzstan are an ethnic group native to Kyrgyzstan. In Kyrgyzstan, Uzbeks are the largest minority group, comprising about 15% of the population. They have a long history in the region and have played a significant role in the culture and economy of Kyrgyzstan. Many Uzbeks in Kyrgyzstan live in the southern part of the country, particularly in the cities of Osh, Jalal-Abad and \u00d6zg\u00f6n.\nSaudi Arabia.\nUzbek exiles in Saudi Arabia from Soviet ruled Central Asia also adopted the identity \"Turkistani\". A lot of them are also called \"Bukhari\". A number of Saudi \"Uzbeks\" do not consider themselves as Uzbek and instead consider themselves as Muslim Turkestanis. Many Uzbeks in Saudi Arabia adopted the Arabic nisba of their home city in Uzbekistan, such as Al Bukhari from Bukhara, Al Samarqandi from Samarkand, Al Tashkandi from Tashkent, Al Andijani from Andijan, Al Kokandi from Kokand, Al Turkistani from Turkistan. Bukhari and Turkistani were labels for all the Uzbeks in general while specific names for Uzbeks from different places were Farghani, Marghilani, Namangani, and Kokandi. Kokandi was used to refer to Uzbeks from Ferghana.\nShami Domullah introduced Salafism to Soviet Central Asia. Mosques in Uzbekistan are funded by Saudi-based Uzbeks. Saudis have tried to propagate their version of Islam into Uzbekistan following the collapse of the Soviet Union. Saudi Arabia's \"Bukharian brethren\" were led by Nuriddin al-Bukhari as of 1990. Official figures have placed anywhere between 400 thousand to 800 thousand Uzbeks in Saudi Arabia.\nPakistan.\nMany ethnic Uzbeks moved from Afghanistan to Pakistan owing to the Afghan War. Due to aid requirements for refugees, repatriation of camp dwellers took place. In the 1800s, Konya's north Bogrudelik was settled by Tatar Bukharlyks. In 1981, many Uzbek refugees in Pakistan moved to Turkey to join the existing Kayseri, \u0130zmir, Ankara, and Zeytinburnu-based communities.\nCulture and society.\nUzbek tribes.\nUzbeks are said to have included 92 tribes in their orbit: Manghut, Qiyat, Qipchaq, Khitai, Qanghli, Kenigas, Durman, Darghut, Shoran, Shurin, Toma, Bahrin, Giray, Aghrikur, Anghit, Barkut, Tubin, Sart, Romdan, Matin, Busa, Yojqar, Qilwa, Dojar, Jurat, Qurlat, Mehdi, Kilaj, Sakhtiyon, Qirgh, Ming, Yuz, Salor, Loqai, Qushchi, Kerait, Chaqmok, Utarchi, Turcoman, Arlot, Kait, Qirghuz, Qalon, Ushin, Ormaq, Chubi, Lechi, Qari, Moghol, Hafiz dad Kaln, Belad Bustan, Quchi, Qataghan, Barlas, Yabu, Jalair, Musit, Naiman, Semarjiq, Qarluq, Arghun, Oklan, Qalmaq, Fuladchi, Jalot Uljin or Olchin, Chimbay, Tilab, Machar or Majar, Ojinbai, Badai, Kelchi, Ilaj, Jebirgan, Botiya, Timan, Yankuz, Tatar, Uighur, Baghlan or Baghan, Danghut, Manghut, Shagird, Pesha, Tushlub, Onli, Biyat, Ozlaji, Joslayi, Tuwadiq, and Ghariband Jit. For the semi-nomadic tribes of these khanates, belonging to the \"92 tribes\" meant in certain cases a privileged position and a higher socio-economic status. In certain cases, the term \"92 Uzbek tribes\" was used with a political meaning to legitimize the ruling Uzbek dynasties of the Manghyts and Mings.\nLanguage.\nThe Uzbek language is a Turkic language of the Karluk branch. Modern Uzbek is written in wide variety of scripts including Arabic, Latin, and Cyrillic. After the independence of Uzbekistan from the former Soviet Union, the government decided to replace the Cyrillic script with a modified Latin alphabet, specifically for Turkic languages. Historically, the nomadic Uzbeks who founded the Uzbek Khanate and its other successor states spoke various dialects of Turkic language.\nReligion.\nUzbeks come from a predominantly Sunni Muslim background, usually of the Hanafi school, but variations exist between northern and southern Uzbeks. According to a 2009 Pew Research Center report, Uzbekistan's population is 96.3% Muslim, around 54% identifies as non-denominational Muslim, 18% as Sunni and 1% as Shia. And around 11% say they belong to a Sufi order. The majority of Uzbeks from the former USSR came to practice religion with a more liberal interpretation due to the movement of Jadidism which arose as an indigenous reform movement during the time of Russian imperial rule, while Uzbeks in Afghanistan and other countries to the south have remained more conservative adherents of Islam. However, with Uzbek independence in 1991 came an Islamic revival amongst segments of the population. People living in the area of modern Uzbekistan were first converted to Islam as early as the 8th century, as Arabs conquered the area, displacing the earlier faiths of the region.\nA 2015 study estimates some 10,000 Muslim Uzbek converted to Christianity, most of them belonging to some sort of evangelical or charismatic Protestant community. According to 2009 national census 1,794 Uzbeks in Kazakhstan are Christians. In Russia there are some long-term Uzbek workers who have converted to Eastern Orthodoxy through missionaries.\nHistorically, Uzbek Shia Muslims were rare. Some Uzbek tribes, particularly in Khurasan and Herat, converted to Shia Islam during the late 16th and early 17th centuries. In 1990, Olivier Roy wrote that the Uzbek Shias of Jowzjamn and Faryab often concealed their religious identity due to Sunni dominance and marginalization. Shia Uzbeks in Afghanistan had good relations with their Hazara neighbors. In Uzbekistan, after independence from the Soviets, the state tightly regulated Hanafi Sunni Islam and restricted all other forms of Islam. Furthermore, the majority of Shias in Uzbekistan were ethnic Tajiks rather than Uzbeks. The lack of institutional support and the social dominance of Sunni clerical networks made it difficult for any Shia Uzbek identity to flourish.\nThe ancient pre-Islamic religion of Uzbekistan-Zoroastrianism survives today and is followed by 7,000 people in Uzbekistan. According to 2009 national census 1,673 Uzbeks in Kazakhstan are atheists.\nAttire.\nMale clothing.\nUzbek clothing includes a loose-fitting cotton coat, called Chapan or Kaftan, which is usually made from a variety of colorful stripes, or other types of patterns. The \"chapan \" is usually of knee length, and includes different elements in various regions of the country. The botton of the sleeves, center edges, hem and neckline of the coat ate sown with a decorative braid, which was believed to protect from \"evil powers\".\nIn the past, wearing two or more coats at the same time, both in winter and summer, was seen as a status symbol, and indicated a certain level of prestige for the family.\nThe coat, or the shirt worn underneath, is tied with a folded handlerchief or a band \"belbog\". The band is viewed as an important accessory, and can be made of fine fabrics and silks, decorated with intricate silver embroidery, and fitted with little bags for tobacco and keys. Traditionally, a hand crafted knife is placed in the band, known as \"pichoq\", Chust made knives are famous in particular.\nShirts are white and wide, made of cotton, and usually worn underneath the coat. Some of them have patterns on the sleeves and the neckline, called \"jiyak\". Pants, also known as \"ishton\", are loosely cut, but narrow to the bottom, and are tucked into soft leather boots with pointed toes, for the ease of horse riding.\nFemale clothing.\nThe female version of the attire consists of a traditional robe, functional dress made of satin, and \"lozim\" \u2013 wide, light, light trousers narrowing in the lower parts. The long, loose tunic has wide sleeves, reaching down to the wrists. The loose-cut pants, are made to match the tunic, and thus are usually made of the same fabric, or one completely to the tunic. The bottom of the pants is gathered and decorated with embroidered braid. The coats, are in many ways similar to the \"chapan\" worn by males, and are made of various fabrics, such as \"atlas\", \"khan-atlas\", \"bekasama\", \"alacha\" and \"kalami\". Textile patterns are brightly colored in the shades of yellow, blue, green, violet, and orange, and often include up to six or seven different colors in various floral and/or geometrical designs.\nIn the past, color of the costume was an important signal of a person's age or social status. Notably, red and pink were common for girls and young women, whereas middle-aged women wore shades of light blue and gray. White however, was appropriate for all ages, especially the elderly, and is used widely to this day.\nBefore the Bolshevik Revolution and the subsequent establishment of communism in Central Asia, women wore traditional veils, known as \"parandga\", on all occasions in public. The designs were varied, some adhering to one or two basic colors in their designs, while others included colored floral or geometrical elements, with the face-lid, usually being made of black fabric. The face-lid could be lifted back, for ease of communication.\nHowever, after the establishment of communism, a movement to liberate women from the \"patrarchal\" and \"outdated\" practice of wearing veils, known as Hujum, gained track, and in the 20s and early 30s, public abandonments and burnings of veiles were encouraged. The result was a conservative pushback, however in the following years, with the increased participation of women in the workplace, and their gradual liberation, veils were phased out of the common use by women throughout the country.\nHeadgear.\nThe square skullcap, known as \"do'ppi\" in Uzbek and Tyubeteika in Russian, is worn by both males and females. They are made of either velvet or wool and embroidered with silk or silver threads. The design varies for males and females, with the variant worn by females, being more colorful and decorated with beads, while the male variant is usually black with four arches of pepper, which are believed to keep \"evil and enemies\" abay. The exception to this are the southern regions of Uzbekistan, where a more round and colorful cap is worn by both males and females. In the western region of Khorezm and in the Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan, men, also wear a traditional fur hat, made out of sheepskin in predominantly white and black colors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32241", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32241", "title": "Coast Guard Aviation Association", "text": "The Coast Guard Aviation Association, formerly known as the Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl (AOP), is a fraternal association founded in 1977. The organization has the purpose of focusing on United States Coast Guard aviation history. On 5 May 2007, the organization was renamed the Coast Guard Aviation Association.\nMembership is for former and present officers and enlisted personnel of the United States Coast Guard, and designated pilots of other military services and foreign governments who have piloted Coast Guard aircraft while involved in exchange programs between the Coast Guard and their respective service or government.\nIts goals include furthering and preserving the history of Coast Guard aviation and maintaining camaraderie between past and present coast guardsmen. The Coast Guard Aviation Association is headquartered in Chantilly, Virginia.\nActivities.\nThe Order hosts an annual gathering known as the \"Roost\". A Roost is normally anchored by a Coast Guard Air Station.\nList of past Roost locations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32242", "revid": "940655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32242", "title": "University of Canterbury", "text": "Public research university in Christchurch, New Zealand\nThe University of Canterbury () is a public research university based in Christchurch, New Zealand. It was founded in 1873 as Canterbury College, the first constituent college of the University of New Zealand. It is New Zealand's second-oldest university, after the University of Otago, which was founded four years earlier, in 1869.\nIts original campus was in the Christchurch Central City, but in 1961 it became an independent university and began moving out of its original neo-Gothic buildings, which were re-purposed as the Christchurch Arts Centre. The move was completed on 1 May 1975 and the university now operates its main campus in the Christchurch suburb of Ilam.\nThe university offers bachelors, masters, and doctoral degrees in, among others, Arts, Commerce, Education (physical education), Fine Arts, Forestry, Health Sciences, Law, Criminal Justice, Music, Social Work, Speech and Language Pathology, Sports Coaching and Teaching.\nHistory.\nCanterbury College, 1873\u20131960.\nOn 16 June 1873, the university was founded in the centre of Christchurch as Canterbury College, the first constituent college of the University of New Zealand and was funded by the then Canterbury Provincial Council. It became the second institution in New Zealand providing tertiary-level education (following the University of Otago, established in 1869), and the fourth in Australasia. It was founded on the basis of the Oxbridge college system, but it differed from Oxbridge in that it admitted female students from its foundation. Its foundation professors arrived in 1874, namely, Charles Cook (Mathematics, University of Melbourne, St John's College, Cambridge), Alexander Bickerton (Chemistry and Physics, School of Mining, London), and John Macmillan Brown (University of Glasgow, Balliol College, Oxford). A year later the first lectures began and in 1875 the first graduations took place. In 1880, Helen Connon was the first woman to graduate from the college, and in 1894, \u0100pirana Ngata became the first M\u0101ori-born student to graduate with a degree. The School of Art was founded in 1882, followed by the faculties of Arts, Science, Commerce, and Law in 1921, and Mental, Moral, and Social Sciences in 1924. The Students' Union, now known as the University of Canterbury Students Association, was founded in 1929 operating out of the Arts Centre of Christchurch Old Student Union Building, and the first edition of the student magazine \"Canta\" was published in 1930. In 1933, the name changed from Canterbury College to Canterbury University College.\nCollege House, a student dormitory that maintains its old tradition by adopting the Oxbridge college system, broke away from Christ's College in 1957 and relocated to the Ilam suburb of Christchurch in 1966 as a hall of residence at the University of Canterbury. In 1957 the name changed again to the University of Canterbury.\nIndependence, 1961\u20132009.\nUntil 1961, the university formed part of the University of New Zealand (UNZ), and issued degrees in its name. That year saw the dissolution of the federal system of tertiary education in New Zealand, and the University of Canterbury became an independent University awarding its own degrees. Upon the UNZ's demise, Canterbury Agricultural College became a constituent college of the University of Canterbury, as \"Lincoln College\". Lincoln College became independent in 1990 as a full university in its own right and is now known as Lincoln University.\nRelocation to Ilam campus\nOver the period from 1961 to 1974, the university campus relocated from the centre of the city to its much larger current site in the suburb of Ilam. 1973 saw the university celebrate its centenary, during which the neo-Gothic buildings of the old campus were gifted to the City of Christchurch, which became the site of the Christchurch Arts Centre, a hub for arts, crafts and entertainment in Christchurch. 1974 also marked the opening of the James Hight Library, which at the time, was New Zealand's largest university building. Ilam's three university halls of residence were renamed University Hall in 1974, and the student dormitory was used as the Athletes Village dormitory for the 1974 British Commonwealth Games hosted in Christchurch.\nIn 2004, the university underwent restructuring into four Colleges and a School of Law, administering a number of schools and departments (though a number of departments have involvement in cross-teaching in numerous academic faculties). For many years the university worked closely with the Christchurch College of Education, leading to a full merger in 2007, establishing a fifth College.\nPost-earthquakes, 2010\u20132022.\nOn 4 September 2010 at 4:35 am local time an earthquake struck the South Island of New Zealand with a moment magnitude of 7.1 several aftershocks followed the main event, the strongest of which was a magnitude 6.3 shock known as the Christchurch earthquake that occurred nearly six months later on 22 February 2011. Although there was no serious injuries to staff or students on campus and only minor damage to buildings, the initial quake closed the university for a week, and the library was shut for months while shelves were repaired and half a million books placed back on shelves. The Student Volunteer Army was a group of around 10,000 university students and others who worked over a period of months to help clean up liquefaction.\nIn the months following the earthquake, the university lost 25 per cent of its first-year students and 8 per cent of continuing students. The number of international students, who pay much higher fees and were a major source of revenue, dropped by 30 per cent. In October 2011, staff were encouraged to take voluntary redundancies. As well in September 2011, plans were announced to demolish some University buildings that were damaged from an earthquake. \nBy 2013, the university had lost 22 per cent of its students. However, a record number of 886 PhD students were enrolled at the University of Canterbury as of 2013. Other New Zealand universities, apparently defying an informal agreement, launched billboard and print advertising campaigns in the earthquake-ravaged city to recruit University of Canterbury students who were finding it difficult to study there. In 2013 the New Zealand Government also agreed to provide $260m to support the university's rebuild programme.\nStudent numbers were steadily on the rise, with a 4.5% increase in students enrolled from 2013 to 2016. International numbers also increased, nearing pre-earthquake figures at 1,134 enrolled in 2016.\nIn March 2016, Vice-Chancellor Dr Rod Carr said in \"The Press\" newspaper: \"In 2014, [students] wanted to leave Christchurch and went to Wellington, Otago and into the workforce. Now we're retaining Christchurch school leavers and we're getting our fair share of provincial students, as well as attracting greater numbers from the Auckland region.\" \"Living on or near the UC campus, and having a lifestyle that can take you from lectures to skifields in 90 minutes or the beach in 20 minutes, is much more appealing and affordable than living in Auckland.\"\nIn January 2017, the University of Canterbury released its campus master plan \u2013 50 building and landscape projects proposed over three stages by 2045, the cost could exceed $2bn. In a comment to \"The Press\", Rod Carr said that the plans were proof the university was moving away from the falling enrolments post-earthquake.\n150th anniversary, 2023\u2013present.\nThe University of Canterbury celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2023. In the same year the university experienced a surge in enrolments, reaching a record high of 21,361 students by late March, compared to 20,223 at the same period in the previous year. Among these figures, UC counted 19,975 domestic students, witnessing a substantial increase from the preceding year's count. Concurrently, the international student body also expanded to 1,393, marking a rise from 1,098 in the prior year. This growth in enrolment stands in contrast to a decline in domestic student numbers across all five North Island universities during this period. According to a spokesperson for the university, in 2023 every affiliated hall was \"at 100% occupancy\" and \"may be a record-breaker for highest number of enrolments\".\nCampuses.\nThe University of Canterbury has three campuses spread throughout the city of Christchurch:\nThe university also maintains additional small campuses in Nelson, Tauranga and Timaru, and teaching centres in Greymouth, New Plymouth, Rotorua and Timaru. The university has staff in regional information offices in Nelson, Timaru, and Auckland.\nLibraries.\nThe UC Library was first established at Canterbury College in 1879. Today there are three libraries on campus each covering different subject areas.\nCentral library\nThe Central Library () \u2013 is housed in the Puaka\u2013James Hight Building that is designed in the brutalist style architecture. In 1974, the old city campus library moved to the Ilam campus and was housed in the newly constructed James Hight building, originally named after former Canterbury professor James Hight. The building was renamed Puaka-James Hight in 2014, after the brightest star in the cluster Matariki, to reflect the growing strength of UC's relationship with Ng\u0101i Tahu and the mana of Te Ao M\u0101ori at the heart of the university's campus. The University of Canterbury Central Library is the largest university library in New Zealand. The Central Library has collections of over 2 million physical items including books, archives, journals and a miscellany of other items that support research and teaching in Humanities, Social Sciences, Law, Commerce, Music, Fine Arts and Antarctic Studies.\nEPS library\nThe EPS Library (Engineering and Physical Sciences Library, ) supports research and teaching in Engineering, Forestry and Sciences. With the move to the Ilam campus, the Library was split. First the Engineering Library, and later the Physical Sciences Library, moving to the new campus however the old Physical Sciences Library closed and its collections moved to the Engineering Library now called the EPS Library.\nMacmillian Brown library\nThe Macmillan Brown Library () is a research library, archive, and art gallery that specialises in collecting items related to New Zealand and Pacific Islands history. It holds over 100,000 published items including books, audio-visual recordings, and various manuscripts, photographs, works of art, architectural drawings and ephemera. The Macmillan Brown Library's art collection also has over 5,000 works, making it one of the largest collections in the Canterbury Region. Some notable items in its collections include copies of M\u0101ori Land Court Records, official and government documents from various Pacific Islands states, trade union records, and the personal papers of various Members of Parliament and government ministers. The library is named after John Macmillan Brown, a prominent Canterbury academic who helped found the library, allocated a large proportion of his fortune to the Macmillan Brown Library.\nStudent accommodation.\nThe university has ten student residences throughout its Ilam and Dovedale campuses: five fully-catered halls of residence exclusively for first-year undergraduate students: Arcady, College House, Rochester and Rutherford, Tupu\u0101nuku and University Hall; and five other self-catered student accommodation houses which are home to both undergraduate and postgraduate students: Sonoda Christchurch Campus, Hayashi, Kirkwood Avenue, Waimairi Village and Ilam Apartments. The largest, Ilam Apartments, houses 831 students during the academic year. Some of the halls at UC have storied histories; Tupu\u0101nuku is named for the star of the same name that is connected to food grown in the ground in the cluster Matariki in M\u0101ori Mythology; Rochester and Rutherford is named for former alumni Ernest Rutherford and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester; while Arcady, previously Bishop Julius Hall, was founded by the first Archbishop of New Zealand, Churchill Julius; additionally, College House is the oldest residential college in New Zealand.\nThe University also has a new hall, Tupu\u0101rangi, planned for completion in 2026. At Tupu\u0101rangi, every room will have its own ensuite.\nField facilities.\nThe University of Canterbury has the most field stations of any New Zealand university. The Field Facilities Centre administers four of these field stations: \nThe university and its project partners also operate an additional field station in the Nigerian Montane Forests Project; this field station stands on the Ngel Nyaki forest edge in Nigeria.\nThe Department of Physical and Chemical Sciences runs its own field laboratories:\nThe Department of Physical and Chemical Sciences also has involvement in the Southern African Large Telescope and is a member of the IceCube collaboration which is installing a neutrino telescope at the South Pole.\nTeece Museum of Classical Antiquities.\nThe University of Canterbury Teece Museum of Classical Antiquities opened in May 2017, and showcases the James Logie Memorial Collection, a collection of Greek, Roman, Egyptian and Near Eastern artefacts in New Zealand. The Teece Museum is run as a part of the faculty of Arts. The museum is named for University of Canterbury Alumni Professor David Teece and his wife Leigh Teece, who donated a substantial amount of money to the city for earthquake recovery. The money was used by the university to install the classics and music school in the Old Chemistry building at the Christchurch Arts Centre.\nThe James Logie Memorial Collection was established in 1957 as a result of Miss Marion Steven, a Classics faculty member, donating Greek pottery to Canterbury University College. Steven established the James Logie Memorial Collection to honour her husband, who served as registrar of the college from 1950 until his death in 1956.\nThe Logie Collection includes a wide range of pottery, beginning with the Bronze Age cultures of Cyprus, Crete and Mycenae it also includes vases that come from Corinth and Athens, the islands in the Aegean, East Greece and the Greek colonies in South Italy and Sicily.\nOrganisation and administration.\nGovernance.\nThe university was first governed by a board of governors (1873\u20131933), then by a college council (1933\u20131957), and since 1957 by a university council. The council is chaired by a chancellor. The Council includes representatives from the faculties, students and general staff, as well as local industry, employer and trade union representatives.\nThe original composition of the board of governors was defined in the Canterbury College Ordinance 1873, which was passed by the Canterbury Provincial Council and named 23 members who might serve for life. Initially, the board was given power to fill their own vacancies, and this power transferred to graduates once their number exceeded 30. At the time, there were discussions about the abolition of provincial government (which did happen in 1876), and the governance structure was set up to give board members \"prestige, power and permanence\", and \"provincial authority and its membership and resources were safely perpetuated, beyond the reach of grasping hands in Wellington.\"Original members of the Board of Governors were: Charles Bowen, Rev James Buller, William Patten Cowlishaw, John Enys, Charles Fraser, George Gould Sr, Henry Barnes Gresson, William Habens, John Hall, Henry Harper, John Inglis, Walter Kennaway, Arthur C. Knight, Thomas William Maude, William Montgomery, Thomas Potts, William Rolleston, John Studholme, Henry Tancred, James Somerville Turnbull, Henry Richard Webb, Joshua Williams, and Rev William Wellington Willock.\nProfessor Roy Sharp assumed the position of Vice-Chancellor on 1 March 2003. In May 2008 he announced his imminent resignation from the position, following his acceptance of the chief executive position at the Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) which he took up on 4 August 2008. The then current Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Professor Ian Town, assumed the role of acting Vice-Chancellor on 1 July 2008. On 15 October 2008 the university announced that Rod Carr, a former banker and the CEO of a local software company, would begin a five-year appointment as Vice-Chancellor on 1 February 2009.\nCouncil member and former Pro-Chancellor, Rex Williams, became Chancellor in 2009. Council member John Wood became the new Pro-Chancellor. On 1 January 2012, Wood became Chancellor after Williams retired from the role. In 2019, a new Vice Chancellor, Cheryl de la Rey, was appointed from the University of Pretoria, and Susan McCormack took over as Chancellor.\nBoard of Governors, chair of the College Council, and chancellor\nThe following table lists those who have held the position of chair of the Board of Governors, chair of the College Council, and chancellor.\nCoat of arms.\nAn explanation of the arms appears on the university http:// , where it is explained that the fleece symbolises the pastoral, and the plough at the base the agricultural background of the province of Canterbury. The bishop's pall and the cross flory represent Canterbury's ecclesiastical connections, and the open book denotes scholarship.\nAs an institution of learning, the university's coat of arms does not have a helmet, crest or mantling.\nThe university's unofficial coat of arms was accompanied by the Latin motto:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ergo tua rura manebunt (therefore the lands shall remain yours).\u2014\u200a\nBecause of the land holdings with which the Provincial Government endowed the early University, this was appropriate. When the coat of arms was redesigned, the motto was removed and now the motto is only used unofficially.\nAcademic profile.\nThe University of Canterbury offers 147 undergraduate majors and 61 graduate degrees.\u00a0 For the 2020 academic year, the university granted 2,257 bachelor's degrees, 1,003 graduate degrees, and 384 honours degrees. To graduate with a full-time undergraduate degree in the usual three years, undergraduates normally take four courses per semester. In most majors, an honours degree requires advanced coursework and a thesis \u2013 this usually takes an extra year. However, some undergraduate degrees that are also professional degrees, such as the Bachelor of Laws (LLB), Bachelor of Engineering (BEng) and Bachelor of Forestry Science (BForSc), typically take four years.\nSize and composition.\nAccording to the UC Annual Report, at 31 December 2024 the university has a total of 26,433 students (18,319 equivalent full-time students), up 9% on the previous year. 2,587 are Maori students. UC has a total of 2,484 staff members.\nFollowing the earthquakes, the number of students enrolled at UC fell from 18,783 during 2010 to 14,725 during 2014, though the number of new enrolments increased in 2014. In 2016 enrolled student numbers rose to 15,564. Enrolment as of 2020 has reached pre-earthquake levels with a 18,364 students enrolled at UC.\nAcademic reputation.\nIn the 2024 \"Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities\", which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #360 (4th nationally).\nIn the 2026 \"Quacquarelli Symonds\" World University Rankings (published 2025), the university attained a position of #261 (5th nationally).\nIn the \"Times Higher Education\" World University Rankings 2026 (published 2025), the university attained a position of #601\u2013800 (8th nationally).\nIn the 2025 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", the university attained a position of #401\u2013500 (tied 2\u20134th nationally).\nIn the 2025\u20132026 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities, the university attained a tied position of #542 (4th nationally).\nIn the \"CWTS Leiden Ranking\" 2024, the university attained a position of #927 (4th nationally).\nStudent life.\nStudents' association.\nThe University of Canterbury Students' Association (UCSA) operates out of the student union building named Haere-roa which serves as the main student activity centre. The original UCSA Building was damaged in the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes and was subsequently torn down, it was rebuilt and completed in 2019, it is located on the Ilam Campus. The building is home to two bars, \"the Foundry\" and \"Bentley's\". The Association also runs several cafes and restaurants around campus. Located in Haere-roa is the Ngaio Marsh Theatre, named for the former alumnus of the same name. Haere-roa hosts a number of student societies and organisation offices.\nThe university's student population operates the main student magazine, \"Canta\", established in 1930. There are 12 issues per year, which are distributed around the UC campus every second Monday during the academic year. The newspaper's offices are in the Haere-roa building. Canterbury's student population runs a radio station which began to broadcast and operate as RDU in 1976; it began FM frequency broadcasting in 1986. RDU acquired its present frequency of 98.5 in 2003.\nClubs.\nThe university has over 140 academic, sporting, recreational and cultural societies and clubs. The most prominent of these include the Student Volunteer Army, the University of Canterbury Engineering Society (ENSOC), the University of Canterbury Law Society (LAWSOC), the University of Canterbury Commerce Society (UCOM) as well as the largest non-faculty clubs such as PongSoc (University of Canterbury Pong Society), Motosoc (Motorsports Society), Lads without Labels, CUBA (Canterbury University Boardriders' Association), CUTC (Tramping Club), UC Global Society (UCGS), UC Bike, Opsoc, The Gentlemen's Club. CUSSC (Canterbury University Snow Sports Club, formerly the CU Ski Club prior to 1997) is the only university club in New Zealand to own a ski field lodge, located at Temple Basin Ski Field. The club runs many events to raise funds for maintenance of their lodge. The University of Canterbury Drama Society (Dramasoc) achieved fame for its 1942\u20131969 Shakespeare productions under Dame Ngaio Marsh, but regularly performs as an active student- and alumni-run arts fixture in the small Christchurch theatre-scene.\nIn 2011 the SVA was established in the aftermath of the Christchurch earthquakes. A student at the University of Canterbury, Sam Johnson, rallied fellow students to help support the clean-up from the devastation. The club has grown and today is the largest club at the University of Canterbury. In 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the SVA supported the vulnerable with their shopping during the lockdown.\nLads without Labels is a not-for-profit charity dedicated to improving men's mental health in and around campus. On 5\u20138 October 2021 Lads without labels started the Project 72 fundraiser, a 72-hour relay on the University of Canterbury campus, which raised $12,000 for men's mental health; as well in 2021 Lads without labels organised a 24-hour backyard cricket marathon raising $45,000.\nOne major student tradition, the Undie 500, involved an annual car-rally from Christchurch to Dunedin run by ENSOC. The rules required only the use of a road-legal car costing under $500 with a sober driver. The 2007 event gained international news coverage (including on CNN and BBC World) when it ended in rioting in the student quarter of Dunedin and in North East Valley. ENSOC cancelled the planned 2008 event. The Undie 500 was replaced by the Roundie 500 in 2011. This event has the same principles but follows a route through rural Canterbury, returning to Christchurch the same day.\nNotable people.\nAlumni.\nSince it was founded, University of Canterbury alumni have made significant and creative contributions to society, the arts and sciences, business, national New Zealand, and international affairs.\nPolitics.\nFour New Zealand Prime Ministers have attended Canterbury, including Christopher Luxon, John Key, Bill Rowling, and Jenny Shipley, the latter attended Christchurch Teachers College, now merged with the university. International leaders educated at Canterbury include Feleti Sevele Prime Minister of Tonga, Feleti Teo Prime Minister of Tuvalu and Anote Tong President of Kiribati.\nNotable politicians who studied at Canterbury include: Ruth Richardson Minister of Finance for the \"mother of all budgets\" which formed the catalyst of her economic reforms known in the media as \"Ruthanasia\". Nicola Willis, the current Minister for Finance, also attended Canterbury, as did other former Ministers of Finance Michael Cullen and David Caygill. Former Leaders of the Opposition Judith Collins (though she did not complete her degree) and Don Brash, the latter whom is infamous for his Orewa Speech. Other significant figures include Nick Smith, Rodney Hide, Stuart Nash, Peter Dunne, Marian Hobbs, and Catherine Isaac. Mayors of Christchurch include: Lianne Dalziel, Bob Parker, Vicki Buck and George Manning.\nIt also includes \u0100pirana Ngata the first M\u0101ori to receive a degree, and described as the foremost M\u0101ori politician. He was known for his work in promoting and protecting M\u0101ori culture and language. He also features on the New Zealand fifty-dollar note.\nLaw.\nCanterbury has produced a large number of distinguished jurists, judges and lawyers around the world. Among its alumni are Supreme Court Justices Andrew Tipping, New Zealand's longest-serving judge, who spent 25 years on the bench, and William Young, also former President of the Court of Appeal. Ivor Richardson, also a former President of the Court of Appeal, is credited with significantly influencing the development of New Zealand tax law and policy.\nFurthermore, Canterbury has educated six current High Court Judges, including former Chief High Court Judge Geoffrey Venning. Other notable Lawyers include: Matthew Palmer Justice of the Court of Appeal (though he only completed his B.A. at Canterbury); Graham Panckhurst Justice of the High Court and chair of the Royal Commission into the Pike River Mine disaster; and Michael Myers sixth Chief Justice of New Zealand. The New Zealand Government's Attorneys General have included: Judith Collins and Michael Cullen.\nMathematics, sciences and economics.\nOne of the most notable Canterbury alumni is Ernest Rutherford a physicist described as \"the father of nuclear physics\", and who features on the New Zealand one hundred-dollar note. In 1908 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry \"for his investigations into the disintegration of the elements, and the chemistry of radioactive substances\". In 1917 Rutherford \"split the atom\". Roy Kerr, was also educated at Canterbury, he discovered the Kerr Solution, an exact solution to the Einstein field equation of general relativity. Beatrice Tinsley an astronomer and cosmologist who through her research in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, proved that the universe was infinite and would expand forever. Richard Barrer was a 'founding father' of zeolite science and its applications he gave his name to the zeolite Barrerite, and the barrer, a unit of gas permeability. Other notable scientists include: Ian Axford, Toby Hendy, Ian Foster, Craig Nevill-Manning and Michelle Rogan-Finnemore.\nNotable engineers include: John Britten, a mechanical engineer, who designed the Britten motorcycle that won races and set numerous speed records on international circuits; and Bill Pickering, an aerospace engineer, who headed Pasadena, California's Jet Propulsion Laboratory for 22 years. Other notable engineers include Nigel Priestley, Thomas Paulay and David Beauchamp.\nEconomists Rex Bergstrom, Brian Easton, Ken Henry, Graham Scott and John McMillan attended Canterbury. Don Brash, who received a B.A. and M.A. in economics, also served as Governor of the Reserve Bank. He presided over the reforms of central-bank autonomy and accountability under the Public Finance Act 1989 which were described as \"genuine innovations\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFaculty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonorary doctors.\nSince 1962, the University of Canterbury has been awarding honorary doctorates. In many years, no awards were made, but in most years, multiple doctorates were awarded. The highest number of honorary doctorates was awarded in 1973, when there were seven recipients.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32243", "revid": "206087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32243", "title": "USS Enterprise", "text": "USS \"Enterprise\" may refer to the following ships and other vessels:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32244", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32244", "title": "UTF8", "text": ""}
{"id": "32245", "revid": "31216503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32245", "title": "Universal property", "text": "Characterizing property of mathematical constructions\nIn mathematics, more specifically in category theory, a universal property is a property that characterizes up to an isomorphism the result of some constructions. Thus, universal properties can be used for defining some objects independently from the method chosen for constructing them. For example, the definitions of the integers from the natural numbers, of the rational numbers from the integers, of the real numbers from the rational numbers, and of polynomial rings from the field of their coefficients can all be done in terms of universal properties. In particular, the concept of universal property allows a simple proof that all constructions of real numbers are equivalent: it suffices to prove that they satisfy the same universal property. \nTechnically, a universal property is defined in terms of categories and functors by means of a universal morphism (see , below). Universal morphisms can also be thought more abstractly as initial or terminal objects of a comma category (see , below). \nUniversal properties occur almost everywhere in mathematics, and the use of the concept allows the use of general properties of universal properties for easily proving some properties that would need boring verifications otherwise. For example, given a commutative ring R, the field of fractions of the quotient ring of R by a prime ideal p can be identified with the residue field of the localization of R at p; that is formula_1 (all these constructions can be defined by universal properties).\nOther objects that can be defined by universal properties include: all free objects, direct products and direct sums, free groups, free lattices, Grothendieck group, completion of a metric space, completion of a ring, Dedekind\u2013MacNeille completion, product topologies, Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification, tensor products, inverse limit and direct limit, kernels and cokernels, quotient groups, quotient vector spaces, and other quotient spaces.\nMotivation.\nBefore giving a formal definition of universal properties, we offer some motivation for studying such constructions.\nFormal definition.\nTo understand the definition of a universal construction, it is important to look at examples. Universal constructions were not defined out of thin air, but were rather defined after mathematicians began noticing a pattern in many mathematical constructions (see Examples below). Hence, the definition may not make sense to one at first, but will become clear when one reconciles it with concrete examples.\nLet formula_2 be a functor between categories formula_3 and formula_4. In what follows, let formula_5 be an object of formula_4, formula_7 and formula_8 be objects of formula_3, and formula_10 be a morphism in formula_3. \nThen, the functor formula_12 maps formula_7, formula_8 and formula_15 in formula_3 to formula_17, formula_18 and formula_19 in formula_4.\nA universal morphism from formula_5 to formula_12 is a unique pair formula_23 which has the following property, commonly referred to as a universal property:\nFor any morphism of the form \nformula_24 in formula_4, there exists a \"unique\" morphism formula_10 in formula_3 such that the following diagram commutes:\nWe can dualize this categorical concept. A universal morphism from formula_12 to formula_5 is a unique pair formula_30 that satisfies the following universal property:\nFor any morphism of the form formula_31 in formula_4, there exists a \"unique\" morphism formula_33 in formula_3 such that the following diagram commutes:\nNote that in each definition, the arrows are reversed. Both definitions are necessary to describe universal constructions which appear in mathematics; but they also arise due to the inherent duality present in category theory.\nIn either case, we say that the pair formula_35 which behaves as above satisfies a universal property.\nConnection with comma categories.\nUniversal morphisms can be described more concisely as initial and terminal objects in a comma category (i.e. one where morphisms are seen as objects in their own right).\nLet formula_2 be a functor and formula_5 an object of formula_4. Then recall that the comma category formula_39 is the category where \nNow suppose that the object formula_23 in formula_39 is initial. Then\nfor every object formula_49, there exists a unique morphism formula_10 such that the following diagram commutes. \nNote that the equality here simply means the diagrams are the same. Also note that the diagram on the right side of the equality is the exact same as the one offered in defining a universal morphism from formula_5 to formula_12. Therefore, we see that a universal morphism from formula_5 to formula_12 is equivalent to an initial object in the comma category formula_39.\nConversely, recall that the comma category formula_56 is the category where \nSuppose formula_64 is a terminal object in formula_56. Then for every object formula_66, \nthere exists a unique morphism formula_67 such that the following diagrams commute. \nThe diagram on the right side of the equality is the same diagram pictured when defining a universal morphism from formula_12 to formula_5. Hence, a universal morphism from formula_12 to formula_5 corresponds with a terminal object in the comma category \nformula_56.\nExamples.\nBelow are a few examples, to highlight the general idea. The reader can construct numerous other examples by consulting the articles mentioned in the introduction.\nTensor algebras.\nLet formula_3 be the category of vector spaces formula_74-Vect over a field formula_74 and let formula_4 be the category of algebras formula_74-Alg over formula_74 (assumed to be unital and associative). Let\nformula_79\nbe the forgetful functor which assigns to each algebra its underlying vector space.\nGiven any vector space formula_80 over formula_74 we can construct the tensor algebra formula_82. The tensor algebra is characterized by the fact:\n\u201cAny linear map from formula_80 to an algebra formula_7 can be uniquely extended to an algebra homomorphism from formula_82 to formula_7.\u201d\nThis statement is an initial property of the tensor algebra since it expresses the fact that the pair formula_87, where formula_88 is the inclusion map, is a universal morphism from the vector space formula_80 to the functor formula_90.\nSince this construction works for any vector space formula_80, we conclude that formula_92 is a functor from formula_74-Vect to formula_74-Alg. This means that formula_92 is \"left adjoint\" to the forgetful functor formula_90 (see the section below on relation to adjoint functors).\nProducts.\nA categorical product can be characterized by a universal construction. For concreteness, one may consider the Cartesian product in Set, the direct product in Grp, or the product topology in Top, where products exist.\nLet formula_5 and formula_98 be objects of a category formula_3 with finite products. The product of formula_5 and formula_98 is an object formula_5 \u00d7 formula_98 together with two morphisms\nformula_104 : formula_105\nformula_106 : formula_107\nsuch that for any other object formula_108 of formula_3 and morphisms formula_110 and formula_111 there exists a unique morphism formula_112 such that formula_113 and formula_114.\nTo understand this characterization as a universal property, take the category formula_4 to be the product category formula_116 and define the diagonal functor\n formula_117\nby formula_118 and formula_119. Then formula_120 is a universal morphism from formula_121 to the object formula_122 of formula_116: if formula_124 is any morphism from formula_125 to formula_122, then it must equal\na morphism formula_127 from formula_128\nto formula_129 followed by formula_130. As a commutative diagram:\nFor the example of the Cartesian product in Set, the morphism formula_130 comprises the two projections formula_132 and formula_133. Given any set formula_108 and functions formula_135 the unique map such that the required diagram commutes is given by formula_136.\nLimits and colimits.\nCategorical products are a particular kind of limit in category theory. One can generalize the above example to arbitrary limits and colimits.\nLet formula_137 and formula_3 be categories with formula_137 a small index category and let formula_140 be the corresponding functor category. The \"diagonal functor\"\nformula_141\nis the functor that maps each object formula_142 in formula_3 to the constant functor formula_144 (i.e. formula_145 for each formula_5 in formula_137 and formula_148 for each formula_149 in formula_137) and each morphism formula_151 in formula_3 to the natural transformation formula_153 in formula_154 defined as, for every object formula_5 of formula_137, the component formula_157\nat formula_5. In other words, the natural transformation is the one defined by having constant component formula_159 for every object of formula_137.\nGiven a functor formula_161 (thought of as an object in formula_140), the \"limit\" of formula_12, if it exists, is nothing but a universal morphism from formula_121 to formula_12. Dually, the \"colimit\" of formula_12 is a universal morphism from formula_12 to formula_121.\nProperties.\nExistence and uniqueness.\nDefining a quantity does not guarantee its existence. Given a functor formula_2 and an object formula_5 of formula_4, \nthere may or may not exist a universal morphism from formula_5 to formula_12. If, however, a universal morphism formula_35 does exist, then it is essentially unique. \nSpecifically, it is unique up to a \"unique\" isomorphism: if formula_175 is another pair, then there exists a unique isomorphism \nformula_176 such that formula_177.\nThis is easily seen by substituting formula_178 in the definition of a universal morphism.\nIt is the pair formula_35 which is essentially unique in this fashion. The object formula_7 itself is only unique up to isomorphism. Indeed, if formula_35 is a universal morphism and formula_176 is any isomorphism then the pair formula_175, where formula_177 is also a universal morphism.\nEquivalent formulations.\nThe definition of a universal morphism can be rephrased in a variety of ways. Let formula_2 be a functor and let formula_5 be an object of formula_4. Then the following statements are equivalent:\nformula_196\nfor each object formula_41 in formula_198\nThe dual statements are also equivalent:\nformula_207\nfor each object formula_41 in formula_198\nRelation to adjoint functors.\nSuppose formula_210 is a universal morphism from formula_211 to formula_12 and formula_213 is a universal morphism from formula_214 to formula_12. \nBy the universal property of universal morphisms, given any morphism formula_216 there exists a unique morphism formula_217 such that the following diagram commutes:\nIf \"every\" object formula_218 of formula_4 admits a universal morphism to formula_12, then the assignment formula_221 and formula_222 defines a functor formula_223. The maps formula_224 then define a natural transformation from formula_225 (the identity functor on formula_4) to formula_227. The functors formula_228 are then a pair of adjoint functors, with formula_229 left-adjoint to formula_12 and formula_12 right-adjoint to formula_229.\nSimilar statements apply to the dual situation of terminal morphisms from formula_12. If such morphisms exist for every formula_5 in formula_3 one obtains a functor formula_236 which is right-adjoint to formula_12 (so formula_12 is left-adjoint to formula_229).\nIndeed, all pairs of adjoint functors arise from universal constructions in this manner. Let formula_12 and formula_229 be a pair of adjoint functors with unit formula_242 and co-unit formula_243 \n(see the article on adjoint functors for the definitions). Then we have a universal morphism for each object in formula_3 and formula_4:\nUniversal constructions are more general than adjoint functor pairs: a universal construction is like an optimization problem; it gives rise to an adjoint pair if and only if this problem has a solution for every object of formula_3 (equivalently, every object of formula_4).\nHistory.\nUniversal properties of various topological constructions were presented by Pierre Samuel in 1948. They were later used extensively by Bourbaki. The closely related concept of adjoint functors was introduced independently by Daniel Kan in 1958."}
{"id": "32246", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32246", "title": "US Marines", "text": ""}
{"id": "32248", "revid": "2707674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32248", "title": "Uncountable set", "text": "Infinite set that is not countable\nIn mathematics, an uncountable set, informally, is an infinite set that contains too many elements to be countable. The uncountability of a set is closely related to its cardinal number: a set is uncountable if its cardinal number is larger than aleph-null, the cardinality of the natural numbers.\nExamples of uncountable sets include the set &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of all real numbers and set of all subsets of the natural numbers.\nCharacterizations.\nThere are many equivalent characterizations of uncountability. A set \"X\" is uncountable if and only if any of the following conditions hold:\nThe first three of these characterizations can be proved equivalent in Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice, but the equivalence of the third and fourth cannot be proved without additional choice principles.\nProperties.\nIf an uncountable set \"X\" is a subset of set \"Y\", then \"Y\" is uncountable.\nExamples.\nThe best known example of an uncountable set is the set &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of all real numbers; Cantor's diagonal argument shows that this set is uncountable. The diagonalization proof technique can also be used to show that several other sets are uncountable, such as the set of all infinite sequences of natural numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (see: (sequence in the OEIS)), and the set of all subsets of the set of natural numbers. The cardinality of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is often called the cardinality of the continuum, and denoted by formula_3, or formula_4, or formula_5 (beth-one).\nThe Cantor set is an uncountable subset of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The Cantor set is a fractal and has Hausdorff dimension greater than zero but less than one (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has dimension one). This is an example of the following fact: any subset of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of Hausdorff dimension strictly greater than zero must be uncountable.\nAnother example of an uncountable set is the set of all functions from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This set is even \"more uncountable\" than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in the sense that the cardinality of this set is formula_6 (beth two), which is larger than formula_5.\nA more abstract example of an uncountable set is the set of all countable ordinal numbers, denoted by \u03a9 or \u03c91. The cardinality of \u03a9 is denoted formula_8 (aleph-one). It can be shown, using the axiom of choice, that formula_8 is the \"smallest\" uncountable cardinal number. Thus either formula_5, the cardinality of the reals, is equal to formula_8 or it is strictly larger. Georg Cantor was the first to propose the question of whether formula_5 is equal to formula_8. In 1900, David Hilbert posed this question as the first of his 23 problems. The statement that formula_14 is now called the continuum hypothesis, and is known to be independent of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms for set theory (including the axiom of choice).\nWithout the axiom of choice.\nWithout the axiom of choice, there might exist cardinalities incomparable to formula_1 (namely, the cardinalities of Dedekind-finite infinite sets). Sets of these cardinalities satisfy the first three characterizations above, but not the fourth characterization. Since these sets are not larger than the natural numbers in the sense of cardinality, some may not want to call them uncountable.\nIf the axiom of choice holds, the following conditions on a cardinal formula_16 are equivalent:\nHowever, these may all be different if the axiom of choice fails. So it is not obvious which one is the appropriate generalization of \"uncountability\" when the axiom fails. It may be best to avoid using the word in this case and specify which of these one means.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32249", "revid": "11801436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32249", "title": "USS Reuben James", "text": "Three ships of the United States Navy have borne the name USS \"Reuben James\". Reuben James was a boatswain's mate who distinguished himself fighting the Barbary pirates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32250", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32250", "title": "Unterseeboot", "text": ""}
{"id": "32252", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32252", "title": "Unbreakable (film)", "text": "2000 film by M. Night Shyamalan\nUnbreakable is a 2000 American superhero thriller film written, produced, and directed by M. Night Shyamalan, and starring Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, and Robin Wright. In \"Unbreakable\", David Dunn (Willis) survives a train crash with no injuries, leading to the realization that he harbors superhuman abilities. As he begins to grapple with this discovery, he comes to the attention of disabled comic book store owner Elijah Price (Jackson), who manipulates David to understand him.\nShyamalan organized the narrative of \"Unbreakable\" to parallel a comic book's traditional three-part story structure. After settling on the origin story, Shyamalan wrote the screenplay as a speculative screenplay with Willis already set to star in the film and Jackson in mind to portray Elijah Price. Filming began in April 2000 and was completed in July.\n\"Unbreakable\" was released on November 22, 2000. It received generally positive reviews, with praise for Shyamalan's direction, screenplay, its aesthetics, the performances, the emotional weight of the story, cinematography, and the score by James Newton Howard. The film has subsequently gained a strong cult following. A realistic vision of the superhero genre, it is regarded by many as one of Shyamalan's best films and one of the best superhero films. In 2011, \"Time\" listed it as one of the top ten superhero films of all time, ranking it number four. Quentin Tarantino also included it on his list of the top 20 films released from 1992 to 2009.\nAfter years of development on a follow-up film, a thematic sequel, \"Split\", with Willis reprising his role as David Dunn in a cameo role, was released in January 2017. After the financial and critical success of \"Split\", Shyamalan immediately began working on a third film, titled \"Glass\", which was released January 18, 2019, thus making \"Unbreakable\" the first installment in the \"Unbreakable\" film series.\nPlot.\nIn 1961 Philadelphia, baby Elijah Price is born with Type I osteogenesis imperfecta, a rare disease that renders his bones extremely fragile and prone to fracture.\nIn the present day, former star quarterback and security guard David Dunn is returning home to Philadelphia after a job interview in New York when his train, Eastrail 177, suddenly speeds up. He wakes up in a hospital room, unscathed, and the doctors inform him he is the sole survivor of the derailment that killed all 131 other passengers. After attending a memorial service for the victims, David finds a note on his car asking how long it has been since he has been ill and inviting him to \"Limited Edition\", an art gallery operated by the now-adult Elijah Price. He goes with his son Joseph to meet Elijah. Elijah explains his theory of real-life superheroes, and if he represents extreme frailty, there must be someone \"unbreakable\" at the opposite extreme. David is unsettled and leaves, but later finds he can bench press 350 pounds well above his expectations. Joseph idolizes his father, believing him to be a superhero, although David maintains that he is ordinary.\nDavid challenges Elijah's theory with a childhood incident when he almost drowned and contracted pneumonia. Elijah suggests that this highlights the common convention where superheroes have a weakness, contending that David's is water. David recalls the car accident in which he was unharmed and ripped off the car door with his bare hands to rescue his girlfriend, Audrey. He feigned injury from the crash to quit football because Audrey hated the violence of the sport.\nUnder Elijah's influence, David realizes that his intuition for picking out dangerous people in his work as a security guard is actually extrasensory perception. Consciously honing this ability, David discovers that touch contact with people brings him visions of criminal acts they have committed. As people bump into him in a crowd, he senses the crimes they have perpetrated such as theft, assault, and rape. He finds one he can act on: a sadistic janitor who has invaded a family home, killed the father, and is now holding the mother and two children captive. David follows the janitor to the victims' house and frees the children. The janitor pushes him into a swimming pool from the balcony, where he nearly drowns as he cannot swim, but is rescued by the children. David strangles the janitor to death, but finds the janitor has killed the mother. The following day, David shows Joseph a newspaper article featuring a sketch of the anonymous hero, whom Joseph recognizes as his father, and tearfully promises to keep his secret.\nDavid meets Elijah's elderly mother, who explains the difference between villains who fight heroes with physical strength and those who use their intelligence. Elijah asks David to shake his hand, which reveals that Elijah was responsible for numerous high-profile \"accidents,\" including David's train crash, to find his superhero rival. Elijah tells David, \"Now that we know who you are, I know who I am\". He adopts his childhood nickname, \"Mr. Glass,\" as his supervillain moniker. David reports Elijah's crimes to the police, and Elijah is confined to a psychiatric hospital for the criminally insane.\nCast.\nWriter, director, and producer M. Night Shyamalan makes an appearance as Stadium Drug Dealer. He reprises this role in the 2016 and 2019 films \"Split\", and \"Glass\", which both credit him as surveillance security guard Jai who in \"Glass\" jokingly says he used to do shady stuff in the stadium back in his youth.\nIn October 2018, Shyamalan confirmed a fan theory that \"Five-Year-Old Boy\" and \"Woman Walking By\", who bump into David Dunn outside a stadium, are younger versions of Kevin Wendell Crumb and Penelope Crumb from \"Split\", confirmed in the 2019 film \"Glass\".\nProduction.\nWhen M. Night Shyamalan conceived the idea for \"Unbreakable\", the outline had a comic book's traditional three-part structure (the superhero's \"birth\", his struggles against general evil-doers, and the hero's ultimate battle against the \"archenemy\"). Finding the birth section most interesting, he decided to write \"Unbreakable\" as an origin story. During the filming of \"The Sixth Sense\", Shyamalan had already approached Bruce Willis for the lead role of David Dunn. With Willis and Samuel L. Jackson specifically in mind for the two leading characters, Shyamalan began to write \"Unbreakable\" as a spec script during post-production on \"The Sixth Sense\". Jackson recalled meeting Willis in a casino in Casablanca while he was on vacation prior to \"Unbreakable\"'s production; Willis told Jackson that he had just finished filming for Shyamalan's \"The Sixth Sense\" and told Jackson about the new script that was written for both of them.\nWith the financial and critical success of \"The Sixth Sense\" in August 1999, Shyamalan gave Walt Disney Studios a first-look deal for \"Unbreakable\". In return, Disney purchased Shyamalan's screenplay at a \"spec script record\" for $5\u00a0million. He was also given another $5\u00a0million to direct. Disney decided to release \"Unbreakable\" under their Touchstone Pictures banner. It also helped Shyamalan establish his own production company, Blinding Edge Pictures. Julianne Moore was cast as Audrey, David's wife, in January 2000, but dropped out in March 2000, to take on the role of Clarice Starling in \"Hannibal\". Robin Wright was cast in her place. Principal photography began on April 25, 2000, and ended that July. The majority of filming took place in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the film's setting.\nShyamalan and cinematographer Eduardo Serra chose several camera angles to simulate the look of a comic book panel. Various visual narrative motifs were also applied. Several scenes relating to the Mr. Glass character involve glass. As a newborn, he is primarily seen reflected in mirrors, and as a young child, he is seen reflected in a blank TV screen. When he leaves his calling card on the windshield of David Dunn's car, he is reflected in a glass frame in his art gallery. Jackson requested his walking stick be made of glass to make his character more menacing. Using purple as Mr. Glass's color to David Dunn's green was also Jackson's idea. Mr. Glass's wig was modeled after Afro-American statesman Frederick Douglass. As he does in his other films, Shyamalan makes a cameo appearance; he plays a man David suspects of dealing drugs inside the stadium.\nShyamalan said that he wanted to market \"Unbreakable\" as a comic book movie, but Disney\u2014which had not yet bought Marvel Comics\u2014preferred to advertise it as a supernatural thriller like \"The Sixth Sense\". More than 15 minutes of footage was deleted during post-production of \"Unbreakable\". These scenes are available on the DVD release.\nSoundtrack.\nJames Newton Howard was approached by Shyamalan to work on \"Unbreakable\" immediately after scoring \"The Sixth Sense\". It was recorded at AIR Studios Lyndhurst Hall, a converted church in London.\nComic book references.\nFilmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith felt \"Unbreakable\" was briefly similar to a comic book titled \"Mage: The Hero Discovered\", written and illustrated by Matt Wagner.\nAs in comic books, the main characters have their identified color schemes and aliases. David's are green and \"Security\" or \"Hero\", while Elijah's are purple and \"Mr. Glass\". The colors show up in their clothes, the wallpaper and bed sheets in their houses, Elijah's note to David, and various personal items. The people whose bad deeds are sensed by David are identified by an article of clothing in a single bright color (red, orange), to contrast them with the dark and dreary color scheme typical of the rest of the movie (but not of most comic books). Several scenes also depict characters through reflections or doorways, as if framing them in a picture similar to comic books.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Unbreakable\" was released in the United States on November 22, 2000, in 2,708 theaters and grossed $30.3 million in its opening weekend, finishing second at the box office behind \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\". The film ended up earning $95 million domestically and $153.1 million internationally for a total of $248.1 million, against its $75 million production budget.\nCritical response.\n\"Unbreakable\" received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of based on reviews, with an average rating of . The website's critical consensus states, \"With a weaker ending, \"Unbreakable\" is not as good as \"The Sixth Sense\". However, it is a quietly suspenseful film that intrigues and engages, taking the audience through unpredictable twists and turns along the way.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 62 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"C\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert of Chicago Sun-Times, gave \"Unbreakable\" 3 out of 4 stars and had largely enjoyed the film, but was disappointed with the ending. Ebert believed that Willis's \"subtle acting\" was positively different from the actor's usual work in \"brainless action movies\". Richard Corliss of \"Time\" opined that \"Unbreakable\" continued Shyamalan's previous approach of \"balancing sophistication and horror in all of his movies\". Desson Thomson from \"The Washington Post\" wrote that \"just as he did in \"The Sixth Sense\", writer-director M. Night Shyamalan leads you into a fascinating labyrinth, an alternative universe that lurks right under our noses. In this case, it's the mythological world and, in these modern times, the secret design to that labyrinth, the key to the path, is contained in comic books.\"\nKenneth Turan, writing for the \"Los Angeles Times\", gave a negative review, arguing that \"Unbreakable\" had no originality. \"Whether it means to or not, the shadow of \"The Sixth Sense\" hangs over \"Unbreakable\",\" Turan reasoned. \"If \"The Sixth Sense\" hadn't been as big a success as it was, this story might have been assigned to oblivion, or at least to rewrite.\" Todd McCarthy of \"Variety\" mostly criticized Shyamalan's writing and the performances given by the actors. He did praise Dylan Tichenor's editing and James Newton Howard's music composition.\nIn 2002, Audrey Colombe described the movie's plot as an example of what \"Toni Morrison calls a 'dehistoricizing allegory,'\" with the Elijah Price character as yet another example of \"White Hollywood\"'s \"magical African American male character\" helping the white hero do the right thing, though Elijah is described as a rare exception to the rule that this character is \"never 'bad'\".\nShyamalan admitted he was disappointed by the reaction \"Unbreakable\" received from the public and critics. Shyamalan also disliked Touchstone Pictures' marketing campaign. He wanted to promote \"Unbreakable\" as a comic book movie, but Touchstone insisted on portraying it as a psychological thriller, similar to \"The Sixth Sense\".\nLater reviews.\nIn 2009, filmmaker Quentin Tarantino praised \"Unbreakable\", and included it on his list of the top 20 films released since 1992, the year he became a director. Tarantino praised the film as a \"brilliant retelling of the Superman mythology\", and said it contains what he considers to be Bruce Willis' best performance. He also criticized the way the film was marketed upon release, stating he felt that it would have been far more effective if the film's advertising simply posed the question of \"what if Superman was here on earth, and didn't know he was Superman?\"\nIn 2011, \"Time\" ranked the film at No. 4 in its list of top ten superhero movies of all time, describing it as one of the best superhero origin stories and as a \"relatively quiet, subtle and realistic look at the pressures that come with being a superhero.\" In 2018, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" called it a \"deconstruction of the American superhero/villain complex\" that is \"more prescient than ever.\"\nHome media.\n\"Unbreakable\" was released on DVD and VHS on June 26, 2001. The DVD version is a THX certified two-disc set that features a DTS audio track, behind-the-scenes footage, deleted scenes and other bonus material. This release sold 2.3 million units in the United States, and was the top DVD video rental of 2001. It grossed a total of $ from DVD sales and DVD/VHS rentals in the United States. The film thus had a combined global box office and U.S. home video revenue of $371,028,653, with a 495% return on investment.\nIn 2008, the movie was released on Blu-ray which had all the bonus features of the Special Edition on DVD \"Vista Series\".\nIn the United Kingdom, the film was watched by 8.7 million viewers on television in 2004, making it the year's third most-watched film on television.\nWalt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on Ultra HD Blu-ray on September 21, 2021.\nSequels.\nAfter the film's release, rumors of possible sequels began circulating in different interviews and in film fansites. In 2000, Bruce Willis was quoted as hoping for an \"Unbreakable\" trilogy. In December 2000, Shyamalan denied rumors he wrote \"Unbreakable\" as the first installment of a trilogy, saying he was not even thinking about it. In August 2001, Shyamalan stated that, because of successful DVD sales, he had approached Touchstone Pictures about an \"Unbreakable\" sequel, an idea Shyamalan said the studio originally turned down because of the film's disappointing box office performance. In a September 2008 article, Shyamalan and Samuel L. Jackson said there was some discussion of a sequel when the film was being made, but that it mostly died with the disappointing box office. Jackson said he was still interested in a sequel but Shyamalan was non-committal. In February 2010, Willis said that Shyamalan was \"still thinking about doing the fight movie between me and Sam that we were going to do\", and stated that as long as Jackson was able to participate he would be \"up for it\".\n\"Split\".\nIn September 2010, Shyamalan revealed that an additional villain had been omitted from \"Unbreakable\" in anticipation of their inclusion in a sequel, but that the character had instead been used for a forthcoming film he was writing for and producing.\nShyamalan's horror thriller film \"Split\" has been described as a thematic sequel to \"Unbreakable\", and was released on January 20, 2017. Although it was filmed substantially as a standalone film, an uncredited cameo by Bruce Willis as David Dunn indeed establishes \"Split\" as a story within the same world.\nAdditionally, Shyamalan has stated the orange-suited villain portrayed by Chance Kelly in \"Unbreakable\" was initially going to be the character \"The Horde\". However, features of The Horde were dropped to make the character simpler in order to keep the focus on David. The original character, Kevin Wendell Crumb, would later be fully realized in \"Split\".\n\"Glass\".\nShyamalan expressed hope for a third installment following \"Split\", saying, \"I hope [a third \"Unbreakable\" film happens]. The answer is yes. I'm just such a wimp sometimes. I don't know what's going to happen when I go off in my room, a week after this film opens, to write the script. But I'm going to start writing. [I have] a really robust outline, which is pretty intricate. But now the standards for my outlines are higher. I need to know I've won already. I'm almost there but I'm not quite there.\" In April 2017, Shyamalan announced the official title, release date, and returning actors for the third movie. The film, titled \"Glass\", was released on January 18, 2019, and features Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Anya Taylor-Joy, and James McAvoy returning to their respective roles in the series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32253", "revid": "46044876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32253", "title": "Constitution Party (United States)", "text": "American political party\nThe Constitution Party, named the U.S. Taxpayers' Party until 1999, is an ultra-conservative political party in the United States that promotes a religiously conservative interpretation of the principles and intents of the United States Constitution. The party platform is based on originalist interpretations of the Constitution and shaped by principles which it believes were set forth in the Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights, the Constitution and the Bible.\nThe party was founded by Howard Phillips, a conservative activist, after President George H. W. Bush violated his pledge of \"\". During the 1992 and 1996 presidential elections, the party sought to give its presidential nomination to prominent politicians including Pat Buchanan and Ross Perot, but was unsuccessful and instead selected Phillips as its presidential nominee in three successive elections. Michael Peroutka was given the presidential nomination in 2004, followed by Chuck Baldwin in 2008 (although he faced opposition from multiple state affiliates), Virgil Goode in 2012, Darrell Castle in 2016, Don Blankenship in 2020 and Randall Terry in 2024.\nIn 2000, Rick Jore, a three-term Republican member of the\u00a0Montana House of Representatives, became a member of the Constitution Party and the first member of the party to hold a seat in a state legislature as a Constitution Party member in 2006. He was defeated in the 2000, 2002 and 2004 elections; however, he was elected to the Montana state legislature in 2006, the first Constitution Party candidate to be elected. In 2002, Greg Moeller became the first member of the party to win a partisan election. The Constitution parties of Minnesota and Colorado have both achieved major party status once.\nAs of June 2024[ [update]], the Constitution Party has 28 members who have been elected to city council seats and other municipal offices across the United States. In terms of registered members, the party ranks fifth among national parties in the United States.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nDuring the 1988 presidential election, Republican nominee George H. W. Bush stated \"\" at the 1988 Republican National Convention. However, Bush violated that pledge during his presidency. Following the breaking of the no new taxes pledge, Howard Phillips announced that he would form a third political party called the U.S. Taxpayers' Party.\nPhillips formed his new party through the U.S. Taxpayers Alliance, an organization he had founded and which had affiliates in twenty-five states, using its mailing list to announce the formation of a new party. Phillips also attempted to create a coalition with state affiliates of the American Party, but was rejected. The party was accepted into the Coalition for Free and Open Elections alongside the Freedom Socialist Party. The party launched its first petition drive when Jack Perry started a campaign to appear on the 1991 United States special election ballot in Pennsylvania.\n1990s.\nFrom January 25 to 26, 1997, the national committee of the U.S. Taxpayers' Party convened in Miami, Florida. During their meeting it was proposed to change the name of the party to either \"Constitutional\" or \"Independent American\", but the vote was tied 27 to 27 so U.S. Taxpayers' was retained as the party's name. In March 1999, another name change was proposed, with American Independent, American Heritage, Constitutional, Independent American, and American Constitution as possible names, but it was unsuccessful. On September 3, 1999, the national convention of the U.S. Taxpayers' Party was held and during it the name of the party was successfully changed to Constitution. Every state affiliate of the party, except for Nevada and California, changed their names except for in Michigan where the Michigan Secretary of State denied the request. The party is still called the U.S. Taxpayers' Party in Michigan as of 2022.\nIn 1998, Patricia Becker, the U.S. Taxpayer's nominee for Minnesota state auditor, received over 5% of the popular vote giving the U.S Taxpayers' Party major party status in Minnesota. The party would later hold caucuses during the 2000 presidential election.\n1992 presidential election.\nMembers of the party sought to give its presidential nomination to Ross Perot or Pat Buchanan during the 1992 presidential election, but were unsuccessful. In January 1992, Phillips was selected to serve as a tentative presidential candidate for the party until a more prominent candidate wanted the party's presidential nomination. Albion W. Knight Jr. was later selected to serve as the party's tentative vice-presidential nominee.\nOn April 15, Phillips announced that he would run for the presidency. Phillips accepted the U.S. Taxpayers' Party's presidential nomination at its national convention in New Orleans, Louisiana, which was held from September 4 to 5. In the general election Phillips and Knight placed seventh with 43,400 votes.\nFollowing the 1992 presidential election, the U.S. Taxpayers' Party's had ballot qualified state affiliates in California, New Mexico, and South Carolina.\n1996 presidential election.\nIn 1996, Phillips sent a memo to conservative Christian leaders including James Dobson, the head of Focus on the Family, stating that anti-abortion candidates like Pat Buchanan, Alan Keyes, or Bob Dornan were unlikely to become the Republican presidential nominee and that they should instead support an anti-abortion third-party candidate.\nPhillips supported giving the presidential nomination of the U.S. Taxpayers' Party to Buchanan. Tom Staley, Buchanan's campaign chairman in northern Texas, stated that Buchanan would consider accepting the party's nomination if it had ballot access in all fifty states. Phillips was given the party's presidential nomination again at its national convention in San Diego, California, on August 17, 1996, and Herbert Titus was selected to serve as the vice-presidential nominee. In the general election Phillips and Titus placed sixth with 184,820 votes.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, a schism occurred within the party, with those who advocated an explicitly religious party leaving to form the Christian Liberty Party, then known as the American Heritage Party.\nOn February 15, 2000, Rick Jore, a member of the Montana House of Representatives who had attended the 1999 Constitution Party National Convention, announced that he was leaving the Republican Party and joining the Constitution Party. Jore unsuccessfully sought reelection in 2000, and unsuccessfully attempted to win election to the Montana House of Representatives in 2002, and 2004, before winning election to the state house in 2006.\nOn November 5, 2002, Greg Moeller became the first member of the Constitution Party to win a partisan election when he won election as a Scott Township Trustee in Hamilton County, Iowa, with only a write-in opponent.\nIn 2006, the Constitution Party of Oregon disaffiliated with the national Constitution Party over disagreements regarding abortion policy. However, despite disaffiliating the Constitution Party of Oregon gave its presidential nomination to Baldwin during the 2008 presidential election. During the 2012 presidential election the party attempted to give its presidential nomination to Ron Paul, but he rejected it and Will Christensen was given the nomination instead. In 2013, the Constitution Party of Oregon affiliated with the Independent American Party.\n2000 presidential election.\nUnlike the 1992 and 1996 presidential elections, the U.S. Taxpayers' Party did not seek a prominent politician to give its presidential nomination to. New Hampshire Senator Bob Smith announced that he was leaving the Republican Party on July 13, 1999, and briefly sought the presidential nomination of the Constitution Party before dropping out.\nOn September 4, 1999, the party selected to give its presidential nomination to Phillips and its vice-presidential nomination to Joseph Sobran. However, on March 31, 2000, Sobran resigned from the ticket due to conflicts between him being a columnist and vice-presidential nominee. On September 2, Curtis Frazier was selected to replace Sobran as the party's vice-presidential nominee. In the general election Phillips and Frazier placed sixth with 98,027 votes.\n2004 presidential election.\nOn November 7, 2003, Michael Peroutka announced that he would seek the Constitution Party's presidential nomination and on the same day the party selected him to serve as the stand-in presidential candidate. He won the presidential nominations of the American Independent and Alaskan Independence parties. Peroutka was given the party's presidential nomination and Chuck Baldwin was given the party's vice-presidential nomination.\n2008 presidential election.\nChuck Baldwin and Alan Keyes sought the Constitution Party's presidential nomination during the 2008 presidential election. At the party's national convention Baldwin defeated Keyes winning the party's presidential nomination and Darrell Castle was selected to serve as the vice-presidential nominee. Baldwin also received the presidential nomination of the Reform Party of Kansas. In the general election they placed sixth with 199,880 votes.\nHowever, the American Independent Party, which had been affiliated with the Constitution since 1991, split into two factions between supports of Baldwin and Keyes. The Secretary of State of California ruled that the presidential ticket of Keyes and Wiley Drake had the nomination of the American Independent Party. In the general election they placed ninth with 47,941 votes.\nOn September 5, the Constitution Party of Montana submitted a list of presidential electors pledged to Ron Paul for president and Michael Peroutka for vice-president. Paul was aware and that he would not object as long as he did not need to sign any declaration of candidacy. However, Paul later wrote a letter to the Secretary of State of Montana asking for his name to be removed from the ballot as he was nominated without permission, but it was too late to remove his name from the ballot. Paul also appeared on the ballot in Louisiana under the name \"Louisiana Taxpayers Party\" with Barry Goldwater Jr. as his vice-presidential running mate. Paul later endorsed Baldwin for president. In the general election he placed tenth with 47,512 votes.\n2010s.\nDuring the 2010 Colorado gubernatorial election, the American Constitution Party, the Constitution Party's affiliate in Colorado, gave its gubernatorial nomination to Tom Tancredo. In the general election Tancredo received over 36% of the popular vote, more than the 10% required for major party status in Colorado. During the campaign the American Constitution Party's voter registration doubled from 1,271 to 2,731 voters. Major party status in Colorado gave the party the ability to appoint seventeen members to Colorado state boards and commissions, but the party suffered from complicated campaign finance reports and fines from errors and omissions in the reports which led to a negative bank account balance.\n2012 presidential election.\nOn February 21, 2012, Virgil Goode, a former member of the United States House of Representatives who had served as a Democrat, independent, and Republican, announced that he would seek the Constitution Party's presidential nomination. Goode won the nomination at the party's national convention which was held from April 18 to 21, 2012, in Nashville, Tennessee, and Jim Clymer was selected to serve as his vice-presidential running mate. Goode was the first Constitution Party presidential nominee to have held elected federal or state office. In the general election Goode and Clymer placed sixth with 122,417 votes.\nThe Reform Party of Kansas gave its presidential nomination to Chuck Baldwin and its vice-presidential nomination to Joseph Martin as his vice-presidential running mate. However, the party attempted to give its presidential nomination to Goode, but the attempt to change the nomination was rejected by the Kansas State Objections Board.\n2020s.\nIn 2020, the Virginia, Idaho, South Dakota, and Alaska Constitution parties disaffiliated with the national Constitution Party and the Montana Constitution Party disbanded. On April 14, the Constitution Party of Virginia's state committee voted to reaffiliate with the national Constitution Party, but was rejected by the national party on May 2.\n2020 presidential election.\nFrom October 18 to 19, 2019, a meeting of the Constitution Party's national committee was held. Don Blankenship served as a speaker at the meeting and announced his intention to run for the party's presidential nomination. On May 2, 2020, Blankenship won the party's nomination at its virtual convention and William Mohr was selected to serve as the vice-presidential nominee.\nHowever, the Constitution parties of Virginia and New Mexico instead gave their presidential nominations to Sheila Tittle and the Virginia Constitution Party gave its vice-presidential nomination to Matthew Hehl. The South Carolina Constitution Party chose to not run a presidential candidate during the 2020 presidential election.\n2024 presidential election.\nThe party nominated anti-abortion activist Randall Terry for president and Stephen Broden for vice president. Some state parties such as Nevada and Utah rejected Terry's nomination and instead nominated convention opponent Joel Skousen.\nImpact.\nThe party has sometimes been described as a spoiler for the Republican Party. There have been instances of the Democratic Party helping Constitution Party candidates for this reason, such as by running ads for their nominee in the 2020 United States Senate election in South Carolina, or assisting Randall Terry, their nominee in the 2024 presidential election, with ballot access and campaign promotion efforts.\nVoter registration and notable members.\nMultiple Republicans, including Bob Smith, Virgil Goode, Tom Tancredo, Ellen Craswell, Rick Jore, and Cynthia Davis, have joined the Constitution Party.\nOn April 2, 2002, Ezola Foster, who had served as the Reform Party of the United States of America's vice-presidential nominee during the 2000 presidential election, left the Reform Party to join the Constitution Party. From 2002 to 2004, she served on the party's national committee.\nJim Gilchrist, the founder of the Minuteman Project, ran for a seat in the United States House of Representatives from California's 48th congressional district in a 2005 special election. He was the nominee of the American Independent Party, when it was affiliated with the Constitution Party, and placed third with 26,507 votes (25.5%). During the campaign, Gilchrist had raised more money than all of the Democratic candidates combined. Gilchrist's 25.5% was the highest percentage of the vote received for a third-party candidate in a United States House of Representatives election where both major parties participated since the A Connecticut Party received 26.3% in Connecticut's 1st congressional district in 1994.\nJerome Corsi, who co-authored books with Gilchrist and Ohio Secretary of State Ken Blackwell, considered running for the Constitution Party's presidential nomination during the 2008 presidential election, but declined to seek the nomination. Joe Miller, who ran as the Republican nominee in Alaska's 2010 Senate election, considered running for the Constitution Party's presidential nomination during the 2016 presidential election, but later declined. John Hostettler, who served in the United States House of Representatives from 1994 to 2006 as a Republican, also considered running for the party's presidential nomination in 2016.\nOn November 18, 2010, Virgil Goode joined the national committee of the Constitution Party. Goode served as a speaker at the Constitution Party's national committee meetings in 2009 and 2012. Goode later served as the party's presidential nominee during the 2012 presidential election.\nPlatform.\nDomestic.\nElectoral College.\nThe Constitution Party's 2016 platform supported retaining the Electoral College and was opposed to establishing a popular vote system to elect the president and vice president of the United States.\nEnvironmental policy.\nThe party believes that \"it is our responsibility to be prudent, productive, and efficient stewards of God's natural resources\".\nThe party rejects the scientific consensus on climate change, saying that \"globalists are using the global warming threat to gain more control via worldwide sustainable development\". According to the party, eminent domain is unlawful because \"under no circumstances may the federal government take private property, by means of rules and regulations which preclude or substantially reduce the productive use of the property, even with just compensation\".\nIn regards to energy, the party calls attention to \"the continuing need of the United States for a sufficient supply of energy for national security and for the immediate adoption of a policy of free market solutions to achieve energy independence for the United States,\" and calls for the abolition of the Department of Energy.\nFederalism.\nThe party supports the repeal of the Sixteenth Amendment, which allows Congress to tax income derived from interest, dividends, and capital gains, and the Seventeenth Amendment, which requires the direct (popular) election of Senators. The party holds that each state's membership in the Union is voluntary, a stance known as the compact theory.\nFiscal policy.\nThe Constitution Party's 2012 platform called for phasing out social security, and the 2016 platform states that \"Social Security is a form of individual welfare not authorized in the Constitution\".\nThe 2012 platform supports reducing the role of the United States federal government through cutting bureaucratic regulation, reducing spending, and replacing the income tax with a tariff-based revenue system supplemented by excise taxes. The party also takes the position that the \"imposition [...] of Federal income, payroll, and estate taxes [...] is an unconstitutional Federal assumption of direct taxing authority\". The party also supports the prohibition of fractional-reserve banking and the return to the gold standard saying quote \"The Constitution forbade the States from accepting or using anything other than a Gold and Silver based currency\" as stated in the 2016-2020 platform.\nSocial policy.\nThe party opposes euthanasia, suicide, and abortion, including in cases of rape and incest. The party supports the right of states to administer the death penalty.\nThe party opposes any government legislation to authorize or define marriage contrary to the Bible, and states that \"The law of our Creator defines marriage as the union between one man and one woman\". It supports the right for local and state governments to \"proscribe offensive sexual behavior\" and rejects \"the notion that homosexuals, transgenders [sic] or those who are sexually deviant are deserving of legal favor or special protection\". The party strongly opposes \"adoption by homosexual singles or couples\".\nThe party also opposes pornography, believing that it is \"a destructive element of society resulting in significant and real emotional, physical, spiritual and financial costs to individuals, families and communities,\" and distinguishable from the US citizen's \"cherished First Amendment right to free speech.\" While expressing its belief in the individual responsibility of citizens and corporations, the party maintains that government plays a \"vital role\" in establishing and maintaining the highest level of decency in America's community standards.\nThe party opposes all government sponsorship, involvement in, or promotion of gambling. Citing and Amendment 10, the party opposes federal anti-drug laws, while conceding that the federal government may have a role in limiting the import of drugs.\nThe Constitution Party believes that charitable giving is most effective when conducted by private parties. Because the authority to administer charity has not been granted to the government in the Constitution, the party maintains that the government has no business being involved in such endeavors. The party opposes federal restrictions on, or subsidization of, medical treatments.\nThe party supports English as the official language for all governmental business, opposes bilingual ballots, and insists that those who wish to take part in the electoral process and governance of the U.S. be required to read and comprehend basic English as a precondition for citizenship.\nIn 2009, the Southern Poverty Law Center described the party as a \"Patriot Group,\" a category of parties that \"advocate or adhere to extreme anti-government doctrines\".\nReligion.\nR. J. Rushdoony, a main figure in Christian reconstructionism, helped write the party's 1992 platform. The 1992 platform stated that \"the U.S. Constitution established a republic under God, not a democracy\". Christian reconstructionism has been influential in the Constitution Party and calls for the remaking of government and society according to Old Testament Biblical law.\nThe preamble of the 2004 platform states that the Lordship of Christ Jesus and the Bible are the final authority of law. It also stated that the purpose of the party was to restore American jurisprudence to its biblical and constitutional roots.\nForeign.\nTrade.\nThe Constitution Party's 2012 platform supports a non-interventionist foreign policy. It advocates reduction and eventual elimination of the role the United States plays in multinational and international organizations such as the United Nations and favors withdrawal of the United States from most treaties, such as NATO, North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization. The party supports protectionist policies in international trade.\nThe party also believes in exercising a tariff system to counteract the United States' increasingly negative balance of trade.\nImmigration policy.\nIn 2012, the party opposed immigration to the United States without government permission, and sought stricter controls on legal immigration. It demanded that the federal government implement an immigration policy disqualifying potential immigrants on grounds of ill health, criminality, low morals, or financial dependence, claiming that they would impose an improper burden on the United States. The party favored a moratorium on future immigration, with exceptions only for extreme cases of necessity, until federal welfare programs have been phased out and a better vetting program is in place.\nThe party opposes welfare subsidies and other benefits to undocumented immigrants. It rejects the practice of bestowing U.S. citizenship on children born to illegal immigrant parents while in this country (\"jus soli\"), and flatly rejects any extension of amnesty to undocumented immigrants. The Constitution Party additionally calls for the use of the United States military to enforce its strict immigration policy.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32254", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32254", "title": "German submarine U-552", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-552\" was a Type VIIC U-boat built for Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" for service during World War II. She was laid down on 1 December 1939 at Blohm &amp; Voss in Hamburg as yard number 528, launched on 14 September 1940, and went into service on 4 December 1940. \"U-552\" was nicknamed the \"Roter Teufel\" (\"Red Devil\") after her mascot of a grinning devil, which was painted on the conning tower. She was one of the more successful of her class, operating for over three years of continual service and sinking or damaging 35 Allied ships with 164,276 gross register tonnage (GRT) and 1,190 tons sunk and 26,910 GRT damaged. She was a member of 21 wolf packs.\n\"U-552\" was involved in two controversial actions: On 31 October 1941, she sank the , the first US Navy warship to be lost in World War II; this was at a time when the US was still officially neutral, and caused a diplomatic dispute. On 3 April 1942, she sank the freighter \"David H. Atwater\" off the US seaboard.\n\"U-552\" had an unusually long service life, surviving to the end of World War II; after evacuating from her French base during the spring of 1944, she operated on training duties in the Baltic Sea until she was decommissioned in February 1945. On 5 May 1945, she was scuttled in Helgoland Bight, to prevent her falling into enemy hands.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-552\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder, supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, and two Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie GG UB 720/8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-552\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), 14 torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and a C/30 antiaircraft gun. The boat had a complement between 44 and 60.\nService history.\nInitial voyage to Helgoland.\nFollowing construction, which was completed on 4 December 1940, \"U-552\" was given two months of working-up training, during which she prepared her crew and equipment for the operations ahead. She then sailed from Kiel on 13 February to Helgoland for her first official patrol, arriving there on 18 February 1941. This port city was to remain \"U-552\"'s home base until she was transferred to the occupied French port of St Nazaire in mid-March 1941.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-552\"'s first official war patrol began on 18 February 1941, when she left Helgoland for a patrol in the North Sea and the North Atlantic south of Iceland. This first operation yielded one British tanker and one Icelandic trawler carrying fish. The British tanker \"Cadillac\" was sunk just north of Scotland on 1 March, while the trawler was sunk just south of Iceland on 10 March. Following these victories, \"U-552\" headed back to St Nazaire. The remainder of her later patrols were all conducted from the French city, which gave her easy access to the Atlantic Ocean and allowed her more time at sea.\nSecond patrol.\n\"U-552\" began her second war patrol on 7 April 1941, when she left her new home port of St Nazaire for the North Atlantic. The \"U-552\" arrived in her assigned patrol area south-west of Iceland on 11 April. No targets were engaged until 26 April when at 18:09 GMT, the \"U-552\" was midway between Iceland and northern Scotland. Topp sighted \u201cs\"moke cloud bearing 10\u00b0T\"\u201d from a small \u201c\"patrol vessel size\"\u201d target. The target was followed \u201c\"at the limit of visibility\"\u201d while waiting for nightfall. At 00:10 (27 April), about 130 nautical miles SE of Iceland, the small vessel \"Commander Horton\" was attacked. The U-552 log records \u201c\"Fishing trawler (patrol vessel) sunk with 82 shots of 8.8 cm and 102 shots MG C30.\u00a0 No resistance.\u201d\" (https://, 227 tones, 14 casualties).\nAround 11:00 GMT on 27 April, the \"U-552\" was submerged and \u201c\"Propeller sounds heard bearing 200\u00b0T\"\u201d. Topp then commenced a surface pursuit of a large steamer. \u201c\"Estimate enemy speed 16 knots.\u00a0 Am gaining only as a result of the zig zags.\"\u201d At 14:12, at grid position AL3236, the \"Beacon Grange\" was in the targeting range of 1000 meters. The submerged U-552 fired a fan of three torpedoes. All three torpedoes hit the ship. A few minutes later while the crew were launching lifeboats, the U-552 surfaced and \u201c\"ran in for a coup de grace\u201d.\" \u00a0A fourth torpedo was fired and the U-boat log records \u201c\"Hit aft 20 meters.\" \u2026 \"Steamer breaks completely in the center, deck awash, ends continue to float.\u201d\" (https://, 10,119 tones, 2 casualties)\nDuring the afternoon of 28 April 1941, a historic battle was underway about 180 miles south of Iceland. A wolf pack \u201c\"Rudeltaktik\"\u201d of five U-boats had launched the war's first submerged daylight attack on a convoy. The submerged U-boats, which were spread out over a distance of about 10 miles, intercepted and attacked an east-bound convoy. The \"U-123\" (Karl-Heinz Moehle), had spotted Convoy HX 121 and called in \"U-65\" (Joachim Hoppe), \"U-95\" (Gerd Schreiber), \"U-96\" (Heinrich Lehmann-Willenbrock), and \"U-552\" (Erich Topp) for the kill. \"U-552\" started things off at 14:15 GMT (60\u00b006\u2019N 20\u00b018\u2019W), when it torpedoed the British tanker https://. Nine casualties resulted, and the tanker was abandoned, but did not sink. At 17:25, three more ships were sunk by \"U-96\" with one spread of three torpedoes: British tanker \"Oilfield\" (47 casualties, 8 survivors); Norwegian tanker \"Caledonia\" (12 casualties, 25 survivors); and British freighter \"Port Hardy\" (one casualty). \"U-65\" was sunk by HMS \"Douglas\" in a depth-charge attack, and all 50 men in the crew perished.\nAfter torpedoing the tanker \"Capulet\", \"U-552\" was depth charged in five separate attacks from destroyers HMS \"Maori\" and HMS \"Inglefield\", forcing the submarine to remain submerged for hours until the convoy was out of range. The \"U-552\" had been damaged and this would be a troubled day, with attacks from air and sea as it neared the convoy, swift dives, and gingerly resurfacing. After diving and hearing nothing at 01:45 on the 30th, Erich Topp realized that Convoy HX 121 must have changed course to the north. His convoy pursuit was broken off and his boat came to a southerly course. At 02:18 GMT, Topp sent a message to B.d.U. (Admiral D\u00f6nitz): \u201cS\"ank: \u201cBeacon Grange\u201d, a patrol vessel. From convoy tanker 8000 tons. Return Transit via North Channel.\" [My position] \"AM2477\".\u201d In his log, Topp recorded \u201c\"Intention: As long as fuel allows, position in North Channel\".\u201d\nOn 30 April, the surfaced \"U-552\" was about 150 nautical miles west of the North Channel entrance \u2026 and searching for targets. At 21:40 GMT, Topp sighted a ship, the troopship \"S.S. Nerissa\" approaching from the north-west. For almost 2 hours, Topp stalked the zigzagging \"Nerissa\" and adjusted his torpedo firing solution accordingly. Finally, Topp saw a phosphorescent glow on the sea and decided that 1,000 metres was as close as he should approach his target, and he fired a fan of three torpedoes. The \"U-552\" log records that one of the three torpedoes \u201c\"hit astern\"\u201d at 00:27 Berlin Time (GMT+2). About 6 minutes later, Topp closed in on the already stricken ship and fired a fourth torpedo as a \"coup de grace\" into \"Nerissa's\" aft starboard side while her crew and passengers were launching lifeboats. More than half of the 207 casualties were Canadians. (\"SS Nerissa\", 5,583 tones, casualties 207) \u00a0\nThe \"U-552\" had four remaining torpedoes and she continued searching for merchant ships in transit towards the North Channel. Topp was not successful in engaging any additional targets and almost 48 hours after sinking the \"SS Nerissa\", the \"U-552\" commenced her homeward transit south. She arrived in St Nazaire on 6 May. \u00a0\nThird patrol.\n\"U-552\" left St Nazaire for her third war patrol on 25 May 1941. In 39 days, she travelled into the North Atlantic and sank three British vessels: the \"Ainderby\" on 10 June, the \"Chinese Prince\" on 12 June, and the \"Norfolk\" on 18 June. During the attack on the \"Norfolk\", \"U-552\" attempted to attack the remaining ships in the convoy, but was forced to break off the attack due to the arrival of several of the convoy's escorts. All of these attacks occurred off the northwest coast of Ireland, and once \"U-552\" returned to St. Nazaire on 2 July 1941, she had amassed a total of 24,401 GRT from the ships she had sunk.\nFourth patrol.\n\"U-552\"'s fourth patrol was much less successful than her previous three. Having left St Nazaire on 18 August, she proceeded to head south into the waters off Portugal and Spain. Here, she sank the Norwegian vessel, \"Spind\". Following this sinking, \"U-552\" returned to St Nazaire on 26 August 1941, after only 9 days at sea.\nFifth and sixth patrols.\nHer next two patrols all took her further into the Atlantic, where the danger was lessened, but so were the targets, with the result that she only hit three more cargo ships. Also this time, during her final patrol of 1941, she sank the \"Reuben James\", which was torpedoed and sunk on 31 October in controversial circumstances.\nSinking of USS \"Reuben James\".\nOn 31 October 1941, USS \"Reuben James\" was one of five destroyers escorting convoy HX 156, close to the coast of Iceland, about west of the island. \"Reuben James\" had just begun turning to investigate a strong direction- finder bearing when a torpedo launched from \"U-552\" struck her port side and caused an explosion in her forward magazine. The entire bow section of the destroyer was blown off as far back as the fourth funnel and sank immediately. The stern remained afloat for around five minutes before sinking; unsecured depth charges compounded the damage, exploding as they sank and killing survivors in the water. Of her 160-man crew, 115 were killed, including all the officers.\nThe destroyer was the first US Navy warship to be sunk in World War II.\nThe incident provoked a furious outburst in the United States, especially when Germany refused to apologize, instead countering that the destroyer was operating in what Germany considered to be a war zone and had suffered the consequences. The sinking of the \"Reuben James\" did not lead the US to declare war on Germany; it did, however, provide a pretext to officially transfer the US Coast Guard from its peacetime role as an arm of the US Treasury Department to a wartime function as part of the US Navy. Congress also amended the Neutrality Act to permit the arming of US-registered merchant ships and authorized them to enter European waters for the first time since 1939.\nSecond Happy Time.\nIn 1942, again commanded by Erich Topp (who later became an admiral in the postwar Bundesmarine), \"U-552\" participated in the \"Second Happy Time\" (Operation \"Drumbeat\" or \"Paukenschlag\"), during which German submarines had great success against unescorted American merchantmen sailing alone along the eastern seaboard of the US. \"U-552\" was particularly successful during this period, sinking 13 ships and damaging another in just three patrols in the first six months of 1942. Two further patrols under Topp during the summer netted four more ships. However, in an attack against Convoy ON 155 on 3 August 1942, the boat was nearly sunk when she was caught on the surface by the Canadian corvette . The corvette machine-gunned the submarine and hit the conning tower with a four-inch shell, causing severe damage and forcing Topp to return to base for repairs. \"U-552\" was badly damaged by heavy seas during another patrol and was put into port for repairs, during which Topp was promoted and replaced by a more cautious commander, Klaus Popp.\nSinking of the \"David H. Atwater\".\nThe destruction of the , in the Atlantic Ocean off Chincoteague, Virginia, was one of the more controversial actions of the Kriegsmarine during the Second World War, primarily due to the manner of the sinking.\nOn the night of 2 April 1942, at the height of the U-boat offensive against US shipping known as the \"Second Happy Time\", the unarmed coastal steamer \"David H. Atwater\" was en route from Norfolk, Virginia, to Fall River, Massachusetts, with a full load of 4,000 tons of coal.\nAround 21:00, between Cape Charles and Cape Henlopen, the ship was ambushed by \"U-552\", which had followed her submerged. The submarine surfaced about from the freighter and opened fire with her 88 mm deck gun and machine guns without warning, one of her first shells destroying the bridge and killing all of the officers. In all, 93 rounds were fired from the deck gun, with 50 hits being recorded on the small freighter, which rapidly began to sink.\nAs it did so, Topp directed his crewmen to continue firing, striking the \"Atwater\"'s crewmen as they tried to man the lifeboats. When Captain Webster was hit, the crew abandoned attempts to launch the lifeboats and leapt into the sea.\nThe first ship to arrive on the scene was the small Coast Guard Patrol Boat USCGC \"CG-218\", which found a lifeboat holding three survivors and three bodies; the survivors reported that they had dived overboard and swum to the boat. Next on the scene was the Coast Guard cutter , which had heard the gunfire and arrived just 15 minutes later. The \"Legare\" found a second lifeboat with a body aboard; the boat was discovered to have been riddled by gunfire, and lent strength to the widespread belief at the time that U-boats were deliberately murdering the survivors of ships they had sunk. The \"Legare\" landed the three survivors and four bodies at Chincoteague Island Coastguard Station, then returned to sea to search further.\nThe destroyers and were directed to the scene at 21:22 and arrived at 24:00, but \"U-552\" had by then escaped the scene, going on to sink other vessels.\nWhether the attack on the liferafts was deliberate, or an unfortunate and unintended consequence of a nighttime attack, has been heavily debated. Some of the crew of \"U-552\" survived the war, and her captain, Erich Topp, later became an admiral in the postwar Bundesmarine. No charges were brought against Topp, as happened to Helmuth von Ruckteschell, captain of the raider \"Widder\" for a similar offence.\nLater patrols.\n\"U-552\" had less success in later years, as did the U-boat force in general, as U-boats failed to keep ahead of the rapidly increasing numbers and capabilities of Allied antisubmarine efforts. She was transferred to operations off the Spanish, Portuguese, and African coasts, which were nearer to base and less dangerous than the newly reorganized defenses of the United States, where she attempted to sink troopships during Operation Torch. Whilst on this duty, Topp sank a small British minesweeper and later a cargo ship, but failed to enter the Straits of Gibraltar or seriously threaten the landings.\nDuring 1943, \"U-552\" was increasingly unable to serve effectively against the well-prepared and organized Allied convoy system, a fact reflected by her failure to sink a single ship during her two patrols into the North Atlantic Ocean. During one of these, a Royal Air Force B-24 Liberator aircraft spotted her and she was seriously damaged by depth charges, which necessitated four months' repairs.\nIn 1944, she had a single patrol, but was unable to close with or threaten any Allied convoys, so was withdrawn to Germany in April 1944 for use as a training vessel in the 22nd U-boat Flotilla, a role she fulfilled until she was decommissioned in February 1945. On 5 May 1945, she was scuttled in Wilhelmshaven Bay to prevent her capture.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-552\" took part in 21 wolfpacks, namely:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32255", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32255", "title": "German submarine U-571", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-571\" was a Type VIIC U-boat built for the \"Kriegsmarine\" of Nazi Germany for service during World War II. \"U-571\" conducted eleven war patrols, sinking five ships totalling \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT), and damaging one other for 11,394 GRT. On 28 January 1944 she was attacked by an Australian-crewed Sunderland aircraft from No. 461 Squadron RAAF west of Ireland and was destroyed by depth charges. All hands were lost.\nThe fictional 2000 U.S. war film 'U-571' has no relation to this U-boat, but is very loosely based on the British capture of and her Enigma and cipher keys.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-571\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie GG UB 720/8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-571\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and a C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\nHer keel was laid down on 8 June 1940 by Blohm &amp; Voss of Hamburg. She was commissioned on 22 May 1941 with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Helmut M\u00f6hlmann in command. Under his command \"U-571\" had nine successful patrols in the Arctic and in the North and Central Atlantic. In August and September 1941, \"U-571\" operated against Allied and Soviet forces, damaging the Soviet passenger vessel \"Marija Uljanova\" on 26 August.\nIn 1942, \"U-571\" operated off the east coast of the United States, sinking the British cargo ship on 29 March, the Norwegian tanker M/T\u00a0\"Koll\" on 6 April off Cape Hatteras, and the American freighter \"Margaret\" on April 14 after the ship left San Juan, Puerto Rico. Although \"U-571\"\u2019s log mentions that some of the 8\u00a0officers and 21\u00a0men managed to get into a lifeboat and onto rafts, none of \"Margaret\"\u2019s crew was ever seen again. In July 1942 the submarine operated in the Caribbean and torpedoed four ships: the British freighter \"Umtata\" on 7 July, the American tanker, \"J. A. Moffett, Jr.\" on 8 July, the Honduran freighter \"Nicholas Cuneo\" on 9 July and on 15 July the American tanker, \"Pennsylvania Sun\".\nThe whole crew of \"J. A. Moffett, Jr.\" (35 merchant marine and 5\u00a0Naval Armed Guard) abandoned ship into two lifeboats and three rafts, except for the master who was killed. The United States Coast Guard vessels \"Mary Jean\" and \"Southbound\" picked up the 39 survivors and brought them to Florida. When \"Pennsylvania Sun\" was torpedoed, two of the merchant crew died in the resulting explosion, but the rest of the 40 merchant marine crew and the 17 members of the Naval Armed Guard aboard survived after being rescued by . \"Pennsylvania Sun\" was later salvaged and returned to service, while the other three ships attacked in July were sunk.\nOn 22 March 1943, \"U-571\" was attacked by an aircraft in the North Atlantic and was damaged and had to return to base. In April 1943, M\u00f6hlmann claimed that he sank three additional ships but these could not be matched with records of Allied losses. On 22 April 1943, she had to return to base because the commander was badly injured in an accident on the conning tower. On 2 May 1943, M\u00f6hlmann was relieved by \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Gustav L\u00fcssow. \"U-571\" patrolled off the west coast of Africa in July before returning to base on 1 September. Between September and December, \"U-571\" was probably being overhauled in a drydock as no mention of the boat for that time period appears in war diary kept by the German Commander in Chief, Submarines, Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz. \nOn 18 January 1944, L\u00fcssow reported to his submarine command that he attacked and sank an unknown destroyer. This could not, however, be identified with any known Allied losses during World War II.\nFate.\nOn 28 January 1944 she was attacked by an Australian captained Sunderland aircraft from No. 461 Squadron RAAF west of Ireland and was destroyed by depth charges. The aircraft's captain, Flight Lieutenant R. D. Lucas, reported that most of the crew successfully abandoned ship, but soon died from hypothermia. A dinghy was dropped but failed to open. \"U-571\" sank with all hands\u00a0\u2013 52 dead\u00a0\u2013 at . She had not, until her loss, suffered any casualties to her crew during her entire career. The plane, \"EK577\" (callsign \"D for Dog\"), was crewed partly by Royal Air Force (RAF) personnel and was based at RAF Pembroke Dock, in Wales. The crew was Lucas, Sergeant (Sgt) J. R. Brannan (RAF, a Canadian), Flight Sergeant (F/Sgt) W. J. Darcey, Sgt D. Musson (RAF), F/Sgt S. T. Burnett, Sgt D. McWalker (RAF), Flying Officer (F/O) H. D. Roberts, F/Sgt G. H. Simmonds (RAF), F/O R. H. Prentice, and F/Sgt C. D. Bremner.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-571\" took part in 14 wolfpacks, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32256", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32256", "title": "German submarine U-110 (1940)", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-110\" was a Type IXB U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" that operated during World War II. She was captured by the Royal Navy on 9 May 1941 and provided a number of secret cipher documents to the British. \"U-110\"'s capture, later given the code name \"Operation Primrose\", was one of the biggest secrets of the war, remaining so for seven months. President Franklin D. Roosevelt was only told of the capture by Winston Churchill in January 1942.\nDesign.\nType IXB submarines were slightly larger than the original Type IX submarines, later designated IXA. \"U-110\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40/46 supercharged four-stroke, nine-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/34 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-110\" was fitted with six torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and two at the stern), 22 torpedoes, one SK C/32 naval gun, 180 rounds, and a SK C/30 as well as a C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of forty-eight.\nService history.\n\"U-110\"'s keel was laid down 1 February 1940 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser, of Bremen, Germany as yard number 973. She was launched on 25 August 1940 and commissioned on 21 November with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Fritz-Julius Lemp in command.\nThe boat was part of the 2nd U-boat Flotilla from her commissioning date until her loss. Lemp commanded \"U-110\" for her entire career. In an earlier boat (), he was responsible for the sinking of the passenger liner \"SS Athenia\" on the first day of the war. The circumstances were such that he was considered for court-martial. He continued, however, to be one of the most successful and rebellious commanders of his day.\nOperational career.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-110\" set out on her first patrol from Kiel on 9 March 1941. Her route to the Atlantic Ocean took her through the gap between the Faroe and Shetland Islands. Her first victim was \"Erodona\" which she damaged south of Iceland on 16 March. She also damaged \"Siremalm\" on the 23rd. This ship only escaped after she was hit by a torpedo which failed to detonate, (although it left a large dent) and the U-boat's 105\u00a0mm deck gun crew forgot to remove the tampion in the muzzle before engaging their target. The resulting explosion on firing the first round wounded three men and compelled the boat to fire on the merchantman with the smaller 37 and 20\u00a0mm armament. Despite being hit, \"Siremalm\" successfully fled the scene, zig-zagging as she went.\n\"U-110\" arrived in Lorient on the French Atlantic coast on 29 March, having cut the patrol short due to damage from the exploding gun.\nSecond patrol and capture.\nThe boat departed Lorient on 15 April 1941. On the 27th, she sank \"Henri Mory\" about west northwest of Blasket Islands, Ireland.\nHer next quarry were the ships of convoy OB 318 east of Cape Farewell (Greenland). She successfully attacked and sank \"Esmond\" and \"Bengore Head\", but the escort vessels responded. The British corvette located the U-boat with ASDIC (sonar). \"Aubrietia\" and British destroyer then proceeded to drop depth charges, forcing \"U-110\" to surface.\nOperation \"Primrose\" (9 May 1941).\n\"U-110\" survived the attack, but was seriously damaged. and \"Broadway\" remained in contact after \"Aubrietia\"'s last attack. \"Broadway\" shaped course to ram, but fired two depth charges beneath the U-boat instead, in an endeavour to make the crew abandon ship before scuttling her. Lemp announced \"Last stop, everybody out\", meaning \"Abandon ship\". As the crew turned out onto the U-boat's deck they came under fire from \"Bulldog\" and \"Broadway\" with casualties from gunfire and drowning. The British had believed that the German deck gun was to be used and ceased fire when they realised that the U-boat was being abandoned and the crew wanted to surrender.\nLemp realised that \"U-110\" was not sinking and attempted to swim back to it to destroy the secret material, and was never seen again. A German eyewitness testified that he was shot in the water by a British sailor, but his fate is not confirmed. Including Lemp, 15 men were killed in the action, and 32 were captured. Radio Officer Georg H\u00f6gel and the rest of the crew were held at \"Camp 23\" (Monteith POW camp at Iroquois Falls, Northern Ontario, Canada), which is now the Monteith Correctional Complex.\n\"Bulldog\"'s boarding party, led by Sub-Lieutenant David Balme, got onto \"U-110\" and stripped it of everything portable, including her Kurzsignale code book and Enigma machine. William Stewart Pollock, a former radio operator in the Royal Navy and on loan to \"Bulldog\", was on the second boat to board \"U-110\". He retrieved the Enigma machine and books as they looked out of place in the radio room. \"U-110\" was taken in tow back toward Britain, but was intentionally sunk en route to prevent its capture from being revealed.\nThe documents captured from \"U-110\" helped Bletchley Park codebreakers solve \"Reservehandverfahren\", a reserve German hand cipher.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-110\" took part in one wolfpack, West (9 May 1941).\nModern-day connections.\nThe 2000 film \"U-571\" was partially inspired by the capture of \"U-110\".\nIn 2007, the submarine's chronometer was featured on the BBC programme \"Antiques Roadshow\", from Alnwick Castle, in the possession of the grandson of the captain of the ship which captured her.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32257", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32257", "title": "German submarine U-20 (1936)", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-20\" was a Type IIB U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\". Her keel was laid down on 1 August 1935, by Germaniawerft of Kiel as yard number 550. She was commissioned on 1 February 1936. During World War II, she conducted operations against enemy shipping.\n\"U-20\" went on 16 war patrols, sinking 13 ships totalling \u00a0GRT and 9 tons , damaging one more of \u00a0GRT.\nDesign.\nGerman Type IIB submarines were enlarged versions of the original Type IIs. \"U-20\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. Officially, the standard tonnage was , however. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two MWM RS 127 S four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines of for cruising, two Siemens-Schuckert PG VV 322/36 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-20\" was fitted with three torpedo tubes at the bow, five torpedoes or up to twelve Type A torpedo mines, and a anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of twenty five.\nOperational history.\nFirst, second and third patrols.\n\"U-20\"'s first three patrols involved observation (in August 1939) and the laying of mines in the North Sea and off the British east coast. She would start in Kiel and finish in Wilhelmshaven; then reverse the process.\nFourth and fifth patrols.\nShe sank \"Magnus\" about east northeast of Peterhead in Scotland. The ship went down in 90 seconds; there was only one survivor. She also sank \"Ionian\" and \"Willowpool\" in November and December respectively, with mines laid in November.\nThe boat sank \"Sylvia\" northeast of Aberdeen on her fifth sortie on 13 October 1940.\nSixth to eighth patrols.\n\"U-20\" sank a steady number of ships on her sixth and seventh patrols, (her eighth foray was relatively quiet), but a series of changes were on the way.\nShe was transferred to the \"U-Ausbildungsflottille\" as a school boat on 1 May 1940, then the Black Sea, avoiding the heavy British presence at Gibraltar and throughout the Mediterranean by being transported in sections along the Danube to the Romanian port of Gala\u021bi. She was then re-assembled by the Romanians at the Gala\u021bi shipyard and sent to her new home in the Black Sea so she could serve with the 30th U-boat Flotilla.\nNinth and tenth patrols.\nThe boat's first patrol in the new environment, but her ninth overall, almost ended in disaster when she tried to torpedo a Soviet submarine chaser; the vessel responded by dropping eight depth charges. \"U-20\" was obliged to stay submerged for four hours and returned to base with various mechanical failures.\nNear the end of sally number ten, a crew member from who had been taken sick, was transferred to \"U-20\" on 4 August 1943. The boat docked at Constanta on the seventh.\n11th to 14th patrols.\nThese patrols were conducted between Constanta and Sevastopol. \"U-20\" sank the Soviet \"Vaijan Kutur'e\" on 16 January 1944 off Cape Anakria.\n15th patrol.\nThe boat sank \"Pestel\" on 19 June 1944 off Trabzon. The Soviets reported that this ship was sunk in Turkish territorial waters.\nShe also sank the Soviet landing craft \"DB-26\" on 26 June with gunfire and demolition charges.\n16th patrol and fate.\nShe was scuttled on 10 September 1944, in the Black Sea off the coast of Turkey.\nOn 3 February 2008, \"The Daily Telegraph\" newspaper reported that \"U-20\" had been discovered by Sel\u00e7uk Kolay, a Turkish marine engineer, in of water off the coast of the Turkish city of Karasu.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32259", "revid": "45901660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32259", "title": "Bladder", "text": "Organ in vertebrates that collects and stores urine from the kidneys before disposal\nThe bladder (from ang \" bl\u00e6dre\"\u00a0'bladder, blister, pimple') is a hollow organ in humans and other vertebrates that stores urine from the kidneys. In placental mammals, urine enters the bladder via the ureters and exits via the urethra during urination. In humans, the bladder is a distensible organ that sits on the pelvic floor. The typical adult human bladder will hold between 300 and 500 ml (10 and 17 fl oz) before the urge to empty occurs, but can hold considerably more.\nThe Latin phrase for \"urinary bladder\" is \"vesica urinaria\", and the term \"vesical\" or prefix \"vesico-\" appear in connection with associated structures such as vesical veins. The modern Latin word for \"bladder\" \u2013 \"cystis\" \u2013 appears in associated terms such as cystitis (inflammation of the bladder).\nStructure.\nIn humans, the bladder is a hollow muscular organ situated at the base of the pelvis. In gross anatomy, the bladder can be divided into a broad (base), a body, an apex, and a neck. The apex (also called the vertex) is directed forward toward the upper part of the pubic symphysis, and from there the median umbilical ligament continues upward on the back of the anterior abdominal wall to the umbilicus. The peritoneum is carried by it from the apex on to the abdominal wall to form the middle umbilical fold. The neck of the bladder is the area at the base of the trigone that surrounds the internal urethral orifice that leads to the urethra. In males, the neck of the urinary bladder is next to the prostate gland.\nThe bladder has three openings. The two ureters enter the bladder at ureteric orifices, and the urethra enters at the trigone of the bladder. These ureteric openings have mucosal flaps in front of them that act as valves in preventing the backflow of urine into the ureters, known as vesicoureteral reflux. Between the two ureteric openings is a raised area of tissue called the interureteric crest. This makes the upper boundary of the trigone. The trigone is an area of smooth muscle that forms the floor of the bladder above the urethra. It is an area of smooth tissue for the easy flow of urine into and from this part of the bladder \u2013 in contrast to the irregular surface formed by the rugae.\nThe walls of the bladder have a series of ridges, thick mucosal folds known as rugae that allow for the expansion of the bladder. The detrusor muscle is the muscular layer of the wall made of smooth muscle fibers arranged in spiral, longitudinal, and circular bundles. The detrusor muscle is able to change its length. It can also contract for a long time whilst voiding, and it stays relaxed whilst the bladder is filling. The wall of the urinary bladder is normally 3\u20135\u00a0mm thick. When well distended, the wall is normally less than 3\u00a0mm.\nNearby structures.\nIn males, the prostate gland lies outside the opening for the urethra. The middle lobe of the prostate causes an elevation in the mucous membrane behind the internal urethral orifice called the uvula of urinary bladder. The uvula can enlarge when the prostate becomes enlarged.\nThe bladder is located below the peritoneal cavity near the pelvic floor and behind the pubic symphysis. In males, it lies in front of the rectum, separated by the rectovesical pouch, and is supported by fibres of the levator ani and of the prostate gland. In females, it lies in front of the uterus, separated by the vesicouterine pouch, and is supported by the elevator ani and the upper part of the vagina.\nBlood and lymph supply.\nThe bladder receives blood by the vesical arteries and drained into a network of vesical veins. The superior vesical artery supplies blood to the upper part of the bladder. The lower part of the bladder is supplied by the inferior vesical artery, both of which are branches of the internal iliac arteries. In females, the uterine and vaginal arteries provide additional blood supply. Venous drainage begins in a network of small vessels on the lower surfaces of the bladder, which coalesce and travel with the lateral ligaments of the bladder into the internal iliac veins.\nThe lymph drained from the bladder begins in a series of networks throughout the mucosal, muscular and serosal layers. These then form three sets of vessels: one set near the trigone draining the bottom of the bladder; one set draining the top of the bladder; and another set draining the outer undersurface of the bladder. The majority of these vessels drain into the external iliac lymph nodes.\nNerve supply.\nThe bladder receives both sensory and motor supply from sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems. The motor supply from both sympathetic fibers, most of which arise from the superior and inferior hypogastric plexuses and nerves, and from parasympathetic fibers, which come from the pelvic splanchnic nerves.\nSensation from the bladder, relating to distension or to irritation (such as by infection or a stone) is transmitted primarily through the parasympathetic nervous system. These travel via sacral nerves to S2-4. From here, sensation travels to the brain via the dorsal columns in the spinal cord.\nMicroanatomy.\nWhen viewed under a microscope, the bladder can be seen to have an inner lining (called epithelium), three layers of muscle fibres, and an outer adventitia.\nThe inner wall of the bladder is called urothelium, a type of transitional epithelium formed by three to six layers of cells; the cells may become more cuboidal or flatter depending on whether the bladder is empty or full. Additionally, these are lined with a mucous membrane consisting of a surface glycocalyx that protects the cells beneath it from urine. The epithelium lies on a thin basement membrane, and a lamina propria. The mucosal lining also offers a urothelial barrier against the passing of infections.\nThese layers are surrounded by three layers of muscle fibres arranged as an inner layer of fibres orientated longitudinally, a middle layer of circular fibres, and an outermost layer of longitudinal fibres; these form the detrusor muscle, which can be seen with the naked eye.\nThe outside of the bladder is protected by a serous membrane called adventitia.\nDevelopment.\nIn the developing embryo, at the hind end lies a cloaca. This, over the fourth to the seventh week, divides into a urogenital sinus and the beginnings of the anal canal, with a wall forming between these two inpouchings called the urorectal septum. The urogenital sinus divides into three parts, with the upper and largest part becoming the bladder; the middle part becoming the urethra, and the lower part changes depending on the biological sex of the embryo.\nThe human bladder derives from the urogenital sinus, and it is initially continuous with the allantois. The upper and lower parts of the bladder develop separately and join around the middle part of development. At this time the ureters move from the mesonephric ducts to the trigone. In males, the base of the bladder lies between the rectum and the pubic symphysis. It is superior to the prostate, and separated from the rectum by the recto-vesical pouch. In females, the bladder sits inferior to the uterus and anterior to the vagina; thus its maximum capacity is lower than in males. It is separated from the uterus by the vesico-uterine pouch. In infants and young children the urinary bladder is in the abdomen even when empty.\nFunction.\nUrine is excreted by the kidneys and flows into the bladder through the ureters, where it is stored until urination (micturition). Urination involves coordinated muscle changes involving a reflex based in the spine, with higher inputs from the brain. During urination, the detrusor muscle contracts, the external urinary sphincter and muscles of the perineum relax, and urine flows through the urethra and exits the penis or vulva through the urinary meatus.\nThe urge to pass urine stems from stretch receptors that activate when between 300 and 400 mL urine is held within the bladder. As urine accumulates, the rugae flatten and the wall of the bladder thins as it stretches, allowing the bladder to store larger amounts of urine without a significant rise in internal pressure. Urination is controlled by the pontine micturition center in the brainstem.\nStretch receptors in the bladder signal the parasympathetic nervous system to stimulate the muscarinic receptors in the detrusor to contract the muscle when the bladder is distended. This encourages the bladder to expel urine through the urethra. The main receptor activated is the M3 receptor, although M2 receptors are also involved and whilst outnumbering the M3 receptors they are not so responsive.\nThe main relaxant pathway is via the adenylyl cyclase cAMP pathway, activated via the \u03b23 adrenergic receptors. The \u03b22 adrenergic receptors are also present in the detrusor and even outnumber \u03b23 receptors, but they do not have as important an effect in relaxing the detrusor smooth muscle.\nClinical significance.\nInflammation and infection.\nCystitis refers to infection or inflammation of the bladder. It commonly occurs as part of a urinary tract infection. In adults, it is more common in women than men, owing to a shorter urethra. It is common in males during early childhood, and in older men where an enlarged prostate may cause urinary retention. Other risk factors include other causes of blockage or narrowing, such as prostate cancer or the presence of vesico-ureteric reflux; the presence of outside structures in the urinary tract, such as urinary catheters; and neurologic problems that make passing urine difficult. Infections that involve the bladder can cause pain in the lower abdomen (above the pubic symphysis, so called \"suprapubic\" pain), particularly before and after passing urine, and a desire to pass urine frequently and with little warning (urinary urgency). Infections are usually due to bacteria, of which the most common is E coli.\nWhen a urinary tract infection or cystitis is suspected, a medical practitioner may request a urine sample. A dipstick placed in the urine may be used to see if the urine has white blood cells, or the presence of nitrates which may indicate an infection. The urine specimen may be also sent for microbial culture and sensitivity to assess if a particular bacteria grows in the urine, and identify its antibiotic sensitivities. Sometimes, additional investigations may be requested. These might include testing the function of the kidneys by assessing electrolytes and creatinine; investigating for blockages or narrowing of the renal tract with an ultrasound, and testing for an enlarged prostate with a digital rectal examination.\nUrinary tract infections or cystitis are treated with antibiotics, many of which are consumed by mouth. Serious infections may require treatment with intravenous antibiotics.\nInterstitial cystitis refers to a condition in which the bladder is infected due to a cause that is not bacteria.\nIncontinence and retention.\nFrequent urination can be due to excessive urine production, small bladder capacity, irritability or incomplete emptying. Males with an enlarged prostate urinate more frequently. One definition of an overactive bladder is when a person urinates more than eight times per day. An overactive bladder can often cause urinary incontinence. Though both urinary frequency and volumes have been shown to have a circadian rhythm, meaning day and night cycles, it is not entirely clear how these are disturbed in the overactive bladder. Urodynamic testing can help to explain the symptoms. An underactive bladder is the condition where there is a difficulty in passing urine and is the main symptom of a neurogenic bladder. Frequent urination at night may indicate the presence of bladder stones.\nDisorders of or related to the bladder include:\nDisorders of bladder function may be dealt with surgically, by redirecting the flow of urine or by replacement with an artificial urinary bladder. The volume of the bladder may be increased by bladder augmentation. An obstruction of the bladder neck may be severe enough to warrant surgery. Ultrasound can be used to estimate bladder volumes.\nCancer.\nCancer of the bladder is known as bladder cancer. It is usually due to cancer of the urothelium, the cells that line the surface of the bladder. Bladder cancer is more common after the age of 40, and more common in men than women; other risk factors include smoking and exposure to dyes such as aromatic amines and aldehydes. When cancer is present, the most common symptom in an affected person is blood in the urine; a physical medical examination may be otherwise normal, except in late disease. Bladder cancer is most often due to cancer of the cells lining the ureter, called transitional cell carcinoma, although it can more rarely occur as a squamous cell carcinoma if the type of cells lining the urethra have changed due to chronic inflammation, such as due to stones or schistosomiasis.\nInvestigations performed usually include collecting a sample of urine for an inspection for malignant cells under a microscope, called cytology, as well as medical imaging by a CT urogram or ultrasound. If a concerning lesion is seen, a flexible camera may be inserted into the bladder, called cystoscopy, in order to view the lesion and take a biopsy, and a CT scan will be performed of other body parts (a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis) to look for additional lesions.\nTreatment depends on the cancer's stage. Cancer present only in the bladder may be removed surgically via cystoscopy; an injection of the chemotherapeutic mitomycin C may be performed at the same time. Cancers that are high grade may be treated with an injection of the BCG vaccine into the bladder wall, and may require surgical removal if it does not resolve. Cancer that is invading through the bladder wall may be managed by complete surgical removal of the bladder (radical cystectomy), with the ureters diverted into a segment of part of ileum connected to a stoma bag on the skin. Prognosis can vary markedly depending on the cancer's stage and grade, with a better prognosis associated with tumours found only in the bladder, that are low grade, that do not invade through the bladder wall, and that is in visual appearance.\nTransplantation.\nIn May 2025, surgeons from the University of Southern California and UCLA Health performed the world's first human bladder transplant. The team was led by Dr. Inderbir Gill and Dr. Nima Nassiri. The recipient was a patient whose bladder function had been lost due to cancer treatment. This procedure is being explored as a potential alternative to the current standard of care, which involves reconstructing a bladder from a portion of the patient's own intestine, a method that can lead to significant complications. The initial transplant was part of a clinical trial to assess the safety and efficacy of the procedure.\nInvestigation.\nA number of investigations are used to examine the bladder. The investigations that are ordered will depend on the taking of a medical history and an examination. The examination may involve a medical practitioner feeling in the suprapubic area for tenderness or fullness that might indicate an inflamed or full bladder. Blood tests may be ordered that may indicate inflammation; for example a full blood count may demonstrate elevated white blood cells, or a C-reactive protein may be elevated in an infection.\nSome forms of medical imaging exist to visualise the bladder. A bladder ultrasound may be conducted to view how much urine is within the bladder, indicating urinary retention. A urinary tract ultrasound, conducted by a more trained operator, may be conducted to view whether there are stones, tumours or sites of obstruction within the bladder and urinary tract. A CT scan may also be ordered.\nA flexible internal camera, called a cystoscope, can be inserted to view the internal appearance of the bladder and take a biopsy if required.\nUrodynamic testing can help to explain the symptoms.\nOther animals.\nMammals.\nAll species of mammal have a urinary bladder. This structure begins as an embryonic cloaca. In the vast majority of species, it eventually becomes differentiated into a dorsal part, connected to the intestine, and a ventral part, associated with the urinogenital passage and urinary bladder. The only mammals in which this does not take place are the platypus and the spiny anteater, both of which retain the cloaca into adulthood.\nThe mammalian bladder is an organ that regularly stores a hyperosmotic concentration of urine. It therefore is relatively impermeable and has a multi-layer epithelium. The urinary bladders of cetaceans (whales and dolphins) are proportionally smaller than those of land-dwelling mammals.\nReptiles.\nIn all reptiles, the urinogenital ducts and the rectum both empty into the organ called the cloaca. In some reptiles, a midventral wall in the cloaca opens into a urinary bladder. The urinary bladder exists in all species of turtle and tortoise and most species of lizard. Monitor lizards, the legless lizards, snakes, alligators, and crocodiles do not have urinary bladders.\nMany turtles, tortoises, and lizards have proportionally very large bladders. Charles Darwin noted that the bladder of the Galapagos tortoise could store urine weighing up to 20% of the tortoise's body weight. Such adaptations are the result of environments, such as remote islands and deserts, where fresh water is very scarce. Other desert-dwelling reptiles have large bladders, which can hold long-term reserves of water for several months and aid in osmoregulation.\nTurtles have two or more accessory urinary bladders, beside the neck of the urinary bladder and above the pubis, occupying much of the body cavity. Turtles' bladder is also usually divided into two lobes: the right lobe is under the liver, which prevents large stones from remaining in the lobe; the left lobe is likelier than the right to have calculi.\nAmphibians.\nMost aquatic and semi-aquatic amphibians can absorb water directly through their skin. Some semi-aquatic animals also have similarly permeable bladder membranes. They tend to have high rates of urine production, to offset this high water intake; and the dissolved salts in their urine are highly dilute. The urinary bladder helps these animals to retain salts. Some aquatic amphibians, such as \"Xenopus\", do not reabsorb water from their urine, to prevent excessive water influx. For land-dwelling amphibians, dehydration results in reduced urine output.\nThe amphibian bladder is usually highly distensible; among some land-dwelling species of frogs and salamanders, it may account for 20%\u201350% of total body weight. Urine flows from the kidneys through the ureters into the bladder and is periodically released from the bladder to the cloaca.\nFish.\nThe gills of most teleost fish help to eliminate ammonia from the body, and fish live surrounded by water, but most still have a distinct bladder for storing waste fluid. The urinary bladder of teleosts is permeable to water, though this is less true for freshwater dwelling species than saltwater species. In freshwater fish the bladder is a key site of absorption for many major ions in marine fish urine is held in the bladder for extended periods to maximise water absorption. The urinary bladders of fish and tetrapods are thought to be analogous while the former's swim-bladders and latter's lungs are considered homologous.\nMost fish also have an organ called a swim-bladder which is unrelated to the urinary bladder except in its membranous nature. The loaches, pilchards, and herrings are among the few types of fish in which a urinary bladder is poorly developed. It is largest in those fish which lack an air bladder, and is situated in front of the oviducts and behind the rectum. \nBirds.\nIn nearly all bird species, there is no urinary bladder per se. Although all birds have kidneys, the ureters open directly into a cloaca which serves as a reservoir for urine, fecal matter, and eggs.\nCrustaceans.\nUnlike the urinary bladder of vertebrates, the urinary bladder of crustaceans both stores and modifies urine. The bladder consists of two sets of lateral and central lobes. The central lobes sit near the digestive organs and the lateral lobes extend along the front and sides of the crustacean's body cavity. The tissue of the bladder is thin epithelium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32260", "revid": "1315219213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32260", "title": "U-571 (film)", "text": "2000 film by Jonathan Mostow\nU-571 is a 2000 submarine film directed by Jonathan Mostow from a screenplay he co-wrote with Sam Montgomery and David Ayer. The film stars Matthew McConaughey, Bill Paxton, Harvey Keitel, Jon Bon Jovi, Jake Weber and Matthew Settle. The film follows a World War II German U-boat boarded by American submariners to capture her Enigma cipher machine.\nAlthough the film was financially successful and received generally positive reviews from critics, winning the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing, the fictitious plot was subject to substantial controversy and criticism.\nPlot.\nAfter an attack on a British merchant ship in May 1942, during the Battle of the Atlantic, German U-boat \"U-571\" has her engines badly damaged by depth charges from a British destroyer. With all of her engineers and machinists killed in a flash fire, the sub's commander \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" G\u00fcnther Wassner transmits a distress call.\nAllied intelligence intercepts the distress message and US Navy submarine \"S-33\" is modified to resemble a German resupply U-boat. Their crew is ordered to steal the Enigma machine coding device and sink the \"U-571\". The executive officer of \"S-33\", Lieutenant Tyler, is unhappy a recommendation for command of his own submarine has been blocked by his commanding officer, Lieutenant Commander Dahlgren. The CO feels Tyler can't issue orders without hesitation, a crucial quality he feels submarine captains need to have. The crew for the mission includes Lieutenant Hirsch from Naval Intelligence who is fluent in German, Radioman Wentz who is also fluent in German due to immigrant parents, and a Marine explosives expert named Coonan.\nThe \"S-33\"'s arrives at \"U-571\" during a storm, and their boarding party surprises and overwhelms the Germans. When Hirsch hesitates to speak in German, Wentz is forced to initiate the conversation after Tyler tries to tend to a mortally wounded Griggs. After securing \"U-571\", the American \"S-33\" is torpedoed by a German resupply submarine. Coonan, Emmett and Larson are killed. Dahlgren, adrift and dying, orders Tyler to dive the captured U-boat with the survivors of the boarding party, including Chief Keough, a World War I vet. Tyler dives \"U-571\" and destroys the resupply submarine in a torpedo duel.\nThe men find two survivors from the destruction of the \"S-33\": the cook from the \"S-33\", Eddie, and Wassner, who disguises himself as an electrician. After Tank makes repairs and gets the sub operating again, Tyler routes the disabled submarine toward Land's End. They are spotted by a German reconnaissance plane and Mazzola, dubious of Tyler's leadership, tries to convince Rabbit to defy Tyler's orders and fire on the plane. Tyler punches Mazzola.\nWhen a German destroyer forces the crew to dive, Wassner escapes captivity, sabotages the starboard motor and shoots Mazzola twice. The mortally wounded Mazzola helps subdue Wassner with Eddie. The destroyer sends over a whaleboat to the still-surfaced submarine, which opens fire on the destroyer, damaging its radio and preventing it from reporting that the Allies have the Enigma machine. The submarine dives beneath the destroyer, which drops depth charges. Tyler ejects debris and Mazzola's corpse to deceive the German ship they've been destroyed. \"U-571\" descends to where it is damaged by high water pressure and continues to sink, prompting an uncontrollable ascent. Tyler orders Trigger to submerge himself in the bilge underwater to repressurize the single remaining torpedo tube, in a do-or-die attempt to sink the destroyer when they hit the surface.\nTrigger uses an air hose to breathe inside the flooded compartment and closes the air valve to the stern tube, but finds a second leak that is out of reach. When Wassner is discovered signalling in Morse Code, Hirsch bludgeons him to death. \"U-571\" surfaces, unable to fire her last torpedo. The pursuing destroyer fires with her main guns and Trigger's leg's are hit, pinning him beyond reach of the air hose. He closes the valve before he drowns and Tyler orders Tank to fire the torpedo. The destroyer is unable to evade it and is sunk. The heavily damaged submarine is abandoned and sinks. The crew is rescued, with the Enigma still in their possession, by a US Navy PBY Catalina flying boat.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\n\"U-571\" was filmed in the Mediterranean, near Rome and Malta. Footage, sets and models from the movie have been reused for other productions, including \"Submerged\", depicting the loss of , and the fictional \"Ghostboat\". A non-diving replica of the US submarine \"S-33\" is located in Grand Harbour, Valletta.\nIn the US the film was originally rated \"R\", because of a scene where Lt. Emmett is beheaded by flying debris. To get a \"PG-13\", the shot was redone with Emmett instead knocked overboard. A death scene was also filmed for Major Coonan, but the effect did not work well, so it was cut. This leaves the character vanishing during the explosion.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film performed well at the box office. It grossed $19 million at number one during the opening weekend of April 21\u201323, 2000. It remained number one on its second weekend until \"Gladiator\" took over in the third week. The film eventually earned $77 million in North America and $127 million worldwide.\nCritical reception.\nThe film was generally well received by critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 68% based on 117 reviews, with an average rating of 6.3/10. The consensus reads: \"Excellent cinematography and an interesting plot accompanied by a talented cast and crew make \"U-571\" a tense thriller.\" Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 62 out of 100, based on 35 critics. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave it an average grade of \"B+\" on an A+-to-F scale.\nHowever, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film two out of four, writing, \"\"U-571\" is a clever wind-up toy of a movie, almost a trailer for a video game. Compared to \"Das Boot\" or \"The Hunt For Red October\", it's thin soup. The characters are perfunctory, the action is recycled straight out of standard submarine formulas, and there is one shot where a man is supposed to be drowning and you can just about see he's standing on the bottom of the studio water tank.\" Reviewer George Perry gave the film two stars out of five, comparing it negatively with \"Das Boot\", praising the acting but criticised the \"cardboard characters\", and \"chaotic\" action sequences. Reviewing the DVD release,\"myReviewer.com\" felt the cast to be underused and criticised the story. Philip Sledge felt the film to be entertaining.\nAlex von Tunzelmann of The Guardian ranked the film with a \"C-\" stating that the \"only honest thing about \"\"U-571\" is its tagline: \"Nine men are about to change history.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nThe film was nominated for two awards at the 73rd Academy Awards: Best Sound (Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, Rick Kline and Ivan Sharrock) and Best Sound Editing. It won the sound editing award, while losing the sound award to \"Gladiator\".\nHistorical inaccuracies.\nThe film's story and characters are fictional. The film sparked controversy during its production and release. Anger over the film's inaccuracies reached the House of Commons. Labour MP Brian Jenkins used Prime Minister's Questions in June 2000 to state that the film was an \"affront to the memories of the British sailors who lost their lives on this action.\" Prime Minister Tony Blair said, \"I agree entirely with what you say... we hope that people realise these are people that, in many cases, sacrificed their lives in order that this country remained free.\" Paul Truswell, for the constituency of Pudsey, a town closely associated with , wrote to the US president Bill Clinton, who acknowledged that the film's plot was only a work of fiction. The director of the local Horsforth Museum lamented the rewriting of history, saying: \"You can't rewrite history and we have to pass on the facts to the younger generation through the schools.\" In 2009, the film was first on a list of \"most historically inaccurate movies\" in \"The Times\".\nSub Lt. David Balme, the Royal Navy officer who led the boarding party on \"U-110\", called \"U-571\" \"a great film\" and that \"young people will love it\" and said that it would not have been financially viable without being \"americanised\". The film's producers did not agree to his request for a statement that it was a work of fiction, but the end credits dedicate the film to the \"Allied sailors and officers who risked their lives capturing Enigma materials\" during the Second World War. The credits acknowledge the Royal Navy's role in capturing Enigma machines and code documents from \"U-110\", \"U-559\" and the US Navy's capture of \"U-505\".\nAuthor Hugh Sebag argues that while the media may have made reports on the fact that the British made the most crucial captures, the Americans role was also unjustly downgraded, noting that they made an important part in breaking the Enigma code. However, in 2006 screenwriter David Ayer expressed regret over making \"U-571\", stating that the film had distorted history, and said that he would not do it again. He told BBC Radio 4's \"The Film Programme\" that he \"did not feel good\" about suggesting that Americans, rather than the British, had captured the naval Enigma cipher: \"It was a distortion...a mercenary decision...to create this parallel history in order to drive the film for an American audience. Both my grandparents were officers in the Second World War, and I would be personally offended if somebody distorted their achievements.\"\nThe first captured (three-cylinder) military Enigma was examined by Polish Intelligence in 1928; the Polish Cipher Bureau broke the Enigma code in 1932 and gave their findings to Britain and France in 1939, just before the German invasion of Poland. Gordon Welchman, head of Hut 6 at Bletchley Park, wrote: \"Hut 6 Ultra would never have got off the ground if we had not learned from the Poles, in the nick of time, the details both of the German military version of the commercial Enigma machine, and of the operating procedures that were in use.\"\nThe first capture of a (five-cylinder) naval Enigma machine with its cipher keys from a U-boat, designation , was made on 9 May 1941 by of the Royal Navy, commanded by Captain Joe Baker-Cresswell assisted by HMS \"Aubrietia\", seven months before the United States entered the war. The United States's involvement in the European theatre of the Second World War did not commence until mid-1941 with Lend-Lease, and direct, open participation did not begin until the US Navy began engaging the Kriegsmarine in the fall of 1941, months before Pearl Harbor, by which time Enigma machines had already been captured and their codes broken in Europe.\nIn 1942, the Royal Navy also seized , capturing additional Enigma codebooks. According to Britain's Channel 4, \"the captured codebooks provided vital assistance to British cryptographers such as Alan Turing, at the code-breaking facility of Bletchley Park.\" The Allies captured Enigma-related codebooks and machines about fifteen times during the War. All but two of these by British forces, the exceptions being the Royal Canadian Navy capture of \"U-744\" in March 1944, and the US Navy Coast Guard Cutter USS Campbell's seizure of in June 1944: by this time, the Allies were already routinely decoding German naval Enigma traffic.\nThe actual , captained by \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Gustav L\u00fcssow, was never involved in any such events, was not captured, and was in fact lost with all hands on 28 January 1944, west of Ireland. She was hit by depth charges, dropped from a Short Sunderland Mk III flying boat, \"EK577\", callsign \"D for Dog\", belonging to No. 461 Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) and based at RAF Pembroke Dock in Wales. The aircraft's commander, Flt Lt Richard Lucas, reported that most of the U-boat's 52 crew managed to abandon ship, but all died from hypothermia.\nThe film portrays the U-boat sailors machine-gunning British merchant crewmen of the ship they sank; although Wassner clearly dislikes giving the order, and some of his men are just as unhappy as he is, Wassner argues that because the boat is so badly crippled, short on crew members and supplies, with sensitive information aboard, it is too risky to leave the British survivors to possibly report the U-boat's position. The shooting of survivors could also be seen more as mercy killings rather than leaving them to die. As shown later with Taylor and his crew keeping Wassner alive; sabotage is a possibility as well. In reality, U-boat crewmen are far more often known to have assisted survivors with food, directions and occasionally medical aid. Such assistance only stopped after Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz issued the \"Laconia order\" following a US air attack on U-boats transporting injured survivors under a Red Cross flag in 1942. German U-boat crews were thereafter under War Order No. 154 not to rescue survivors, which parallelled Allied policy. Afterward, U-boats still occasionally provided aid for survivors. In fact, out of several thousand of sinkings of merchant ships in World War II, there is only one verifiable case of a U-boat's crew deliberately attacking the survivors: that of after the sinking of the Greek ship \"Peleus\" in 1944.\nThe real was stationed in the Pacific Ocean from June 1942 until the end of the war. She was sold for scrap in 1946. When Lt. Cmdr. Dahlgren orders Lt. Tyler to take down the captured German U-boat, he cries out \"Take her down!\" These were the last words of Lieutenant Commander Howard W. Gilmore who posthumously received the Medal of Honor for his self-sacrifice in saving his boat, . Mazzola mentions that sank in a test dive. The real \"S-26\" did not sink in a test dive, instead sinking in a collision with a patrol combatant, , in January 1942.\nThe Kriegsmarine destroyer \"Z-49\" was ordered on 12 June 1943 but never laid down, let alone completed and sailed.\nTechnical inaccuracies.\nAs in most films, the audible sonar \"ping\" is not accurate, and is introduced for the audience's benefit. The sound of WW2 German Gruppenhorchger\u00e4t system was more complex, whilst the more advanced ASDIC system used by the British Navy used frequencies outside the range of human hearing.\nThe Kriegsmarine destroyers rarely ventured out into the open Atlantic Ocean, but usually stayed in European coastal waters. During the destroyer's depth charge attack more than eighty depth charges are detonated in the film, despite the fact that they rarely carried more than thirty.\nThe German resupply U-boat would most likely not have been sunk by \"U-571\". This would have been difficult for a German U-boat to achieve, as German sonar was not as advanced as British during the war. The only instance of a submerged submarine sinking another submerged vessel was in February 1945 when sank with torpedoes.\nGerman Type XIV supply U-boats or \"Milchk\u00fche\" (\"milk cows\") did not have torpedo tubes or deck guns, being armed only with anti-aircraft guns for defense, and therefore could not have attacked other vessels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32261", "revid": "750223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32261", "title": "U.S. economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "32263", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32263", "title": "U-flak", "text": ""}
{"id": "32264", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32264", "title": "United Earth Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "32266", "revid": "29291527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32266", "title": "UnifiedModelingLanguage", "text": ""}
{"id": "32267", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32267", "title": "UV", "text": ""}
{"id": "32268", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32268", "title": "United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration", "text": "International relief agency (1943\u20131947)\nUnited Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA, ) was an international relief agency founded in November 1943 on the joint initiative of the United States, United Kingdom, USSR, and the Republic of China. Its purpose was to \"plan, co-ordinate, administer or arrange for the administration of measures for the relief of victims of war in any area under the control of any of the United Nations through the provision of food, fuel, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities, medical and other essential services\". Of the aid, 70% originated with the United States, but 44 countries participated in the relief in Europe and Asia. It became part of the United Nations (UN) in 1945 and was dissolved in September 1948. Its staff of civil servants included 12,000 people, with headquarters in New York. Funding came from many nations, and totalled $3.7 billion, of which the United States contributed $2.7 billion; Britain, $625 million; and Canada, $139 million.\nUNRRA cooperated closely with dozens of volunteer charitable organizations, which sent hundreds of their own staff to work alongside UNRRA. In operation for only four years, the agency distributed about $4 billion worth of goods, food, medicine, tools, and farm implements at a time of severe global shortages and worldwide transportation difficulties. The recipient nations had been especially hard hit by starvation, dislocation, and political chaos. It played a major role in helping displaced persons return to their home countries in Europe in 1945\u201346.\nMany of its functions were transferred to several UN agencies, including the International Refugee Organization and the World Health Organization. As an American relief project, it was later replaced by the Marshall Plan, which began operations in 1948. However, the historian Jessica Reinisch has proposed that UNRRA should not just figure as a chapter in U.S. history, but rather that UNRRA was unique in that it managed to bring together very different partners and models of international relief, each of which had their own history and antecedents.\nFounding and authority.\nThe First World War displaced more refugees than in Europeans' living memory, first from Belgium in 1914, later in eastern Europe, cf. the civil wars and new national boundaries of 1917\u201319. Relief was undertaken largely by private charities, often American as organized by Herbert Hoover. The Second World War seemed likely to create still more refugees, prompting governments to act: U.S. president Franklin Delano Roosevelt proposed the agency in June 1943, to provide relief to areas liberated from Axis Powers when the fighting ended. Roosevelt had already obtained the approval of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China; he later obtained endorsements from 40 other governments to form the first \"United Nations\" organization.\nThe Agreement for United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration founding document was signed by 44 countries in the White House in Washington on 9 November 1943. UNRRA was headed by a Director-General and governed by a Council (composed of representatives of all state parties) with a Central Committee representing the United States, Britain, China, and the Soviet Union. The other countries who signed the agreement included: Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the French Committee of National Liberation, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, South Africa, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia.\nAlthough the UNRRA was called a \"United Nations\" agency, it was established prior to the founding of the United Nations. The explanation for this is that the term \"United Nations\" was used at the time to refer to the Allies of World War II, having been originally coined for that purpose by Roosevelt in 1942.\nAlthough initially restricted by its constitution to render aid only to nationals from the United Nations (the Allies), this was changed late in 1944, in response to pleas from Jewish organizations who were concerned with the fate of surviving Jews of German nationality, to also include \"other persons who have been obliged to leave their country or place of origin or former residence or who have been deported therefrom by action of the enemy because of race, religion or activities in favor of the United Nations.\"\nUNRRA operated in occupied Germany, primarily in camps for displaced persons, especially the 11,000,000 non-Germans who had been moved into Germany during the war, but did not render assistance to ethnic Germans.\nIn Asia, the organization provided assistance in the Dutch East Indies, Korea, and China (including Taiwan). China was the largest recipient of funds.59\nUNRRA Headquarters was in Washington, D.C., and the European Regional Office was set up in London. The organization was subject to the authority of the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Forces (SHAEF) in Europe and was directed by three Americans during the four years of its existence:\nOperations.\nUNRRA funds became a point of tension in the relations between the United States and Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist government of China when Chiang pushed to control the disposition of funds in China to ensure that relief funds did not go to the Communist-governed areas of the country.39 These tensions worsened during the Chinese Civil War.39\nBy 1947, UNRRA was running nearly 800 resettlement camps, housing over 700,000 people. Forty-four nations contributed to funding, supplying, and staffing the agency, of which the United States was the leading donor. The largest recipients of UNRRA commodity aid, in millions of US dollars were China, $518; Poland\u00a0\u2013 $478; Italy\u00a0\u2013 $418; Yugoslavia\u00a0\u2013 $416; Greece\u00a0\u2013 $347; Czechoslovakia\u00a0\u2013 $261; Ukraine (USSR)\u00a0\u2013 $188; and Austria\u00a0\u2013 $136. A number of academic assessments state that UNRRA was not perfect and was troubled by inefficiency, poor planning, shortages of supplies, and some incompetent personnel. On balance however, many argue that it was a major success in terms of delivering aid, food, and medicine, and helping Europe on the path to recovery, especially Eastern and Southern Europe.\nIn popular culture.\nThe activities of the UNRRA, as well as the plight of displaced orphans in post-war Europe, is portrayed in Fred Zinnemann\u2019s contemporaneous film \"The Search\". The child actor in the film, Ivan Jandl, was awarded a special Academy Juvenile Award and a Golden Globe Award for his portrayal of Karel Malik. Jandl was prohibited from attending either ceremony by the Czech communist government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32269", "revid": "15371737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32269", "title": "UNRRA", "text": ""}
{"id": "32270", "revid": "41888491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32270", "title": "UNRWA", "text": "UN agency supporting Palestinian refugees\nThe United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA, ) is a UN agency that supports the relief and human development of Palestinian refugees. UNRWA's mandate encompasses Palestinians who fled or were expelled during the Nakba, the 1948 Palestine war, and subsequent conflicts, as well as their descendants, including legally adopted children. As of 2019, more than 5.6 million Palestinians are registered with UNRWA as refugees.\nUNRWA was established in 1949 by the UN General Assembly (UNGA) to provide relief to all refugees resulting from the 1948 conflict; this initially included Jewish and Arab Palestine refugees inside the State of Israel until the Israeli government took over this responsibility in 1952. As a subsidiary body of the UNGA, UNRWA's mandate is subject to periodic renewal every three years; it has consistently been extended since its founding, most recently until 30 June 2026.\nUNRWA employs over 30,000 people, most of them Palestinian refugees, and a small number of international staff. Originally intended to provide employment and direct relief, its mandate has broadened to include providing education, health care, and social services to its target population. UNRWA operates in five areas: Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank (including East Jerusalem). Aid for Palestinian refugees outside these five areas is provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), established in 1950 as the main agency to aid all other refugees worldwide. UNRWA is the only UN agency dedicated to helping refugees from a specific region or conflict.\nUNRWA has received praise and recognition for its work by various governments, public figures, and independent monitors. It has also been subject to controversy related to its operations, role in the Gaza Strip, relationship with Hamas and terrorism, and textbook content. Most recently, the agency faced allegations by the Israeli government that twelve of its employees were involved in the October 7 attacks, leading to lay-offs, an investigation, and the temporary suspension of funding by numerous donors. As of May 2024, several major donors have since resumed funding as the investigation remains ongoing. In October 2024, Israel's parliament passed a bill designating UNRWA as a terrorist group and prohibiting it from operating within the country. Israel has long opposed the Palestinian right of return and has accused UNRWA of \"perpetuating the refugee issue\". In January 2025, Israel's UNRWA ban went into effect.\nIn October 2025, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) found that \"Israel has not substantiated its allegations that a significant part of UNRWA\u2019s employees are \u2018members of Hamas\u2026 or other terrorist factions\u201d.\nHistory and operations.\nFollowing the outbreak of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War and the 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight of Palestinian Arabs, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution 212 (III), dated 19 November 1948, which established the UN Relief for Palestine Refugees (UNRPR) to provide emergency relief to Palestine refugees in coordination with other UN or humanitarian agencies. In response to the political aspects of the conflict, less than a month later the General Assembly adopted Resolution 194, creating the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine (UNCCP), mandated to help achieve a final settlement between the warring parties, including facilitating \"the repatriation, resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees\" in collaboration with the UNRPR. By that time, the conflict had displaced over 700,000 people.\nUnable to resolve the \"Palestine problem\" which required political solutions beyond the scope of its mandate, the UNCCP recommended the creation of a \"United Nations agency designed to continue relief activities and initiate job-creation projects\" while an ultimate resolution was pending. Pursuant to this recommendation and to paragraph 11 of Resolution 194 which concerned refugees, on 8 December 1949 the General Assembly adopted Resolution 302(IV) which established the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The resolution was adopted and passed unopposed, supported by Israel and the Arab states with only the Soviet bloc and South Africa abstaining.\nUNRWA succeeded the UNRPR with a broader mandate for humanitarian assistance and development and the requirement to function neutrally. When it began operations in 1950 the initial scope of its work was \"direct relief and works programmes\" to Palestine refugees in order to \"prevent conditions of starvation and distress\u2026 and to further conditions of peace and stability\". UNRWA's mandate was expanded in December 1950 through Resolution 393(V) which instructed the agency to \"establish a reintegration fund which shall be utilized ... for the permanent re-establishment of refugees and their removal from relief\". A 26 January 1952 resolution allocated four times as much funding on reintegration than on relief, requesting UNRWA to otherwise continue providing programs for health care, education, and general welfare.\nDefinition of refugee.\nUNRWA has developed its own working definition of \"refugee\" to allow it to provide humanitarian assistance. Its definition does not cover final status.\nPalestine refugees are \"persons whose regular place of residence was Palestine during the period 1 June 1946 to 15 May 1948, and who lost both home and means of livelihood as a result of the 1948 conflict.\"\nThe Six-Day War of 1967 generated a new wave of Palestinian refugees who could not be included in the original UNRWA definition. Since 1991, the UN General Assembly has adopted an annual resolution allowing the 1967 refugees within the UNRWA mandate. UNRWA's \"mandate\" is not a single document but the sum of all relevant resolutions and requests of the General Assembly. While focused on Palestine refugees, it also extends to persons displaced by \"the 1967 and subsequent hostilities\" and occasionally to a broader cross-section of the local community. Several categories of persons have long been registered as eligible to receive UNRWA services although not \"Palestine refugees\". The descendants of Palestine refugee males, including adopted children, are also eligible for registration as refugees.\nOrganisation and mandate.\nUNRWA is a subsidiary organ of the United Nations General Assembly, established pursuant to Articles 7(2) and 22 of the UN Charter. It is one of two UN agencies that reports directly to the General Assembly. The scope and renewal of UNRWA's mandate is determined primarily by resolutions of the General Assembly; unlike other UN agencies, such as the World Health Organization or the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, it lacks a constitution or statute. The mandate may also be shaped by requests from other UN organs, such as the Secretary-General. The General Assembly passes a series of resolutions annually that address UNRWA's responsibilities, functions, and budget. As it is technically a temporary organisation, the agency's mandate is extended every three years.\nUNRWA is led by a Commissioner-General\u2014since 8 March 2020, Philippe Lazzarini of Switzerland\u2014an Under-Secretary-General of the UN responsible for managing all of the agency's activities and personnel. The Commissioner-General selects and appoints all the agency's staff, pursuant to internal rules and regulations, and reports directly to the General Assembly. UNRWA's operations are organised into five fields\u2014Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, West Bank, and Gaza\u2014each led by a director who is in charge of distributing humanitarian aid and overseeing general UNRWA operations. The agency's headquarters are divided between the Gaza Strip and Amman, with the latter hosting the Deputy Commissioner-General, currently Leni Stenseth of Norway, who administers departmental activities such as education, healthcare, and finance. UNRWA is the largest agency of the United Nations, employing over 30,000 staff, 99% of which are locally recruited Palestinians.\nAdvisory Commission.\nConcurrent with the creation of UNRWA, the UN General Assembly established an Advisory Commission (AdCom) to assist the Commissioner-General in carrying out UNRWA's mandate. Created with four members, the AdCom currently has 28 members and four observers. Membership is obtained via General Assembly resolutions, with all host countries of Palestinian refugees (Jordan, Syria, Lebanon) sitting on the commission followed by the 24 leading donors and supporters of UNRWA. Palestine, the European Union (EU), and the League of Arab States have had observer status since 2005, with the Organisation for Islamic Cooperation joining as an observer in 2019.\nMembers of the AdCom, including the year they joined, are: Australia (2005), Belgium (1953), Brazil (2014), Canada (2005), Denmark (2005), Egypt (1949), Finland (2008), France (1949), Germany (2005), Ireland (2008), Italy (2005), Japan (1973), Jordan (1949), Kazakhstan (2013), Kuwait (2010), Lebanon (1953), Luxembourg (2012), Netherlands (2005), Norway (2005), Qatar (2018), Saudi Arabia (2005), Spain (2005), Sweden (2005), Switzerland (2005), Syria (1949), Turkey (1949), United Arab Emirates (2014), the United Kingdom (1949), and the United States (1949).\nThe Advisory Commission is led by a chair and a vice-chair, representing a host country and a donor country, respectively. Each is appointed annually in June from among the Commission members according to the alphabetical rotation, serving for one year beginning 1 July. At each appointment, the chair will alternate between a host and a donor country.\nThe AdCom meets twice a year, usually in June and November, to discuss important issues of UNRWA and develop a consensus-based guidance for the Commissioner-General. Additionally, members and observers convene more regularly through sub-committee meetings. The AdCom also conducts periodic field visits to UNRWA's area of operations.\nAreas of operation.\nUNRWA services are available to all registered Palestine refugees living in its area of operations who need assistance. When UNRWA began operations in 1950, it was responding to the needs of about 700,000 Palestinian refugees. By 2023, some 5.9\u00a0million people were registered as eligible for UNRWA services. UNRWA provides facilities in 59 recognized refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, and in other areas where large numbers of registered Palestine refugees live outside of recognized camps.\nFor a camp to be recognized by UNRWA, there must be an agreement between the host government and UNRWA governing the use of the camp. UNRWA does not itself run camps, has no police powers or administrative role, but simply provides services in the camp. Refugee camps, which developed from tent cities to dense urban dwellings similar to their urban surroundings, house around one-third of all registered Palestine refugees.\nFunding.\nUNRWA's budget is set by the UN General Assembly and derives almost entirely from voluntary contributions by UN member states. It also receives some revenue from the regular UN budget, mostly for international staffing costs. In addition to its regular budget, UNRWA receives funding for emergency activities and special projects, such as in response to the Syrian civil war and the COVID-19 pandemic.\nHistorically, most of the agency's funds came from the United States and the European Commission; in 2019, close to 60 percent of its pledge of $1 billion came from EU countries, with Germany being the largest individual donor. The next largest donors were the EU, United Kingdom, Sweden, and the United Arab Emirates, followed by Saudi Arabia, France, Japan, Qatar, and the Netherlands. UNRWA also establishes partnerships with nongovernmental donors, including nonprofit \"national committees\" based in donor countries.\nThe voluntary nature of UNRWA funding has led to budgetary problems due to acute emergencies or political developments in donor countries. In 2009, officials spoke of a \"dire financial crisis\", including a funding shortfall of $200 million, in the wake of the Israeli offensive in Gaza. In August 2018, the U.S. ceased its contributions, arguing that UNRWA's mandate should be reduced to the few hundred thousand Palestinians alive when the agency was created. The U.S. decision resulted in the loss of $300 million out of the $1.2 billion budget, contributing to an overall deficit of $446 million. The shortfall was covered with increased contributions from elsewhere.\nIn mid-2019, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland temporarily suspended funding to UNRWA, citing ethics report that alleged mismanagement, corruption, and discrimination among the agency's leadership. In December 2019, the Netherlands restored its funding, increasing its donation by \u20ac6 million for 2019, to \u20ac19 million. The EU increased its contribution from \u20ac82 million ($92.2 million) by \u20ac21 million ($23.3 million), and Germany agreed to fund four new UNRWA projects, totaling \u20ac59 million ($65.6 million). Qatar increased its donation for Palestinians in Syria by $20.7 million, bringing the 2019 total to $40 million.\nThe funding situation for 2019 and beyond was discussed in April at a \"Ministerial Strategic Dialogue\" attended by representatives from Egypt, France, Germany, Japan, Kuwait, Norway, United Kingdom, the European External Action Service, and the European Commission. At the annual meeting of the General Assembly that year, a high-level ministerial meeting was held regarding UNRWA funding. In July 2020 Commissioner-General Lazzarini warned that UNRWA's budget was \"not sustainable\", with shortfalls in four out of the five previous years, and funding at its lowest point since 2012. According to the World Bank, for all countries receiving more than $2\u00a0billion in international aid in 2012, Gaza and the West Bank received a per capita aid budget over double the next largest recipient, at a rate of $495.\nIn January 2010, the Government of Canada announced that it was redirecting aid previously earmarked to UNRWA to projects under the Palestinian Authority. Previously, Canada provided UNRWA with 11 percent of its budget at $10\u00a0million (Canadian) annually. The decision came despite positive internal evaluations of the Agency by CIDA officials. The 2010 Canadian decision put it very much at odds with the US and EU, which maintained or increased their levels of funding. Some suggested that the decision also cost Canada international support in its failed October 2010 effort to obtain a seat on the UN Security Council. Documents obtained from CIDA revealed that even the government of Israel opposed the Canadian move which had asked Canada to resume contributions to UNRWA's General Fund.\nEU suspended funding for UNRWA in January 2024 but reinstated the funding later on 1 March 2024. In 2024, the Swiss National Council voted to cut finding to UNWRA, citing concerns of antisemitism and connections to terrorism; the legislation will need to pass Council of States to go into effect.\nOperations.\nUNRWA provides a wide variety of social and humanitarian services, as determined by resolutions of the UN General Assembly. Since its initial establishment in 1949, its operations have expanded beyond immediate relief and social services; as of 2019, the bulk of its budget is spent on education (58 percent), followed by health care (15 percent), and general support services (13 percent).\nEducation programme.\nEducation is UNRWA's largest area of activity, accounting for more than half its regular budget and the majority of its staff. It operates one of the largest school systems in the Middle East, spanning 711 elementary and preparatory schools, eight vocational and technical schools, and two teacher training institutes. It has been the main provider of basic education to Palestinian refugee children since 1950. Free basic education is available to all registered refugee children, currently numbering 526,000. In the 1960s, UNRWA schools became the first in the region to achieve full gender equality, and a slight majority of enrolled students are female.\nHalf the Palestine refugee population is under 25. Overcrowded classrooms containing 40 or even 50 pupils are common. Almost three-quarters run on a double-shift system, where two separate groups of pupils and teachers share the same buildings, thus reducing teaching time. The school year is often interrupted by conflicts, prompting UNRWA to develop a special programme that provides education in emergency situations.\nPer the longstanding agreement, UNRWA schools follow the curriculum of their host countries. This allows UNRWA pupils to progress to further education or employment holding locally recognised qualifications and complies with the sovereignty requirements of countries hosting refugees. Wherever possible, UNRWA students take national exams conducted by the host governments.\nRelief and social services programme.\nUNRWA provides food aid, cash assistance, and help with shelter repairs to these families. In addition, children from special hardship case families are given preferential access to the Agency's vocational training centres, while women in such families are encouraged to join UNRWA's women's programme centres. In these centres, training, advice, and childcare are available to encourage female refugees' social development. In Palestinian refugee society, families without a male head of household are often vulnerable. Those headed by a widow, a divorcee, or a disabled father often live in dire poverty. These families are considered \"hardship cases\" and constitute less than 6% of UNRWA beneficiaries.\nUNRWA has created community-based organizations (CBOs) to target women, refugees with disabilities, and to look after the needs of children. The CBOs now have their own management committees staffed by volunteers from the community. UNRWA provides them with technical and small sums of targeted financial assistance, but many have formed links of their own with local and international NGOs.\nHealth program.\nSince 1950, UNRWA has been the main healthcare provider for Palestinian refugees. Basic health needs are met through a network of primary care clinics, providing access to secondary treatment in hospitals, food aid to vulnerable groups, and environmental health in refugee camps.\nKey figures for 2014 are:\nThe health of Palestine refugees has long resembled that of many populations in the transition from developing world to developed world status. However, there is now a demographic transition.\nPeople are living longer and developing different needs, particularly those related to non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and chronic conditions that require lifelong care, such as diabetes, hypertension, and cancer. A healthy life is a continuum of phases from infancy to old age, each of which has unique, specific needs, and our programme therefore takes a 'life-cycle approach' to providing its package of preventive and curative health services.\nTo address the changing needs of Palestine refugees, we undertook a major reform initiative in 2011. We introduced the Family Health Team (FHT) approach, based on the World Health Organization-indicated values of primary health care, in our primary health facilities (PHFs).\nThe FHT offers comprehensive primary health care services based on wholistic care of the entire family, emphasizing long-term provider-patient relationships and ensuring person-centeredness, comprehensiveness, and continuity. Moreover, the FHT helps address intersectional issues that impact health, such as diet and physical activity, education, gender-based violence, child protection, poverty, and community development.\nMedical services include outpatient care, dental treatment, and rehabilitation for the physically disabled. Maternal and child healthcare is a priority for UNRWA's health program. School health teams and camp medical officers visit UNRWA schools to examine new pupils to aid early detection of childhood diseases. All UNRWA clinics offer family planning services with counselling that emphasises the importance of birth spacing as a factor in maternal and child health. Agency clinics also supervise the provision of food aid to nursing and pregnant mothers who need it, and six clinics in the Gaza Strip have their own maternity units. Infant mortality rates have for some time been lower among refugees than the World Health Organization's benchmark for the developing world.\nUNRWA provides refugees with assistance in meeting the costs of hospitalisation either by partially reimbursing them, or by negotiating contracts with government, NGOs, and private hospitals. UNRWA's environmental health services program \"controls the quality of drinking water, provides sanitation, and carries out vector and rodent control in refugee camps, thus reducing the risk of epidemics.\"\nMicrofinance Department.\nUNRWA's Microfinance Department (MD) aims to alleviate poverty and support economic development in the refugee community by providing capital investment and working capital loans at commercial rates. The programme seeks to be as close to self-supporting as possible. It has a strong record of creating employment, generating income, and empowering refugees.\nThe MD is an autonomous financial unit within UNRWA, established in 1991 to provide microfinance services to Palestine refugees, as well as poor or marginal groups living and working in close proximity to them. With operations in three countries, the MD currently has the broadest regional coverage of any microfinance institution in the Middle East. Having begun its operations in the Palestinian territories, it remains the largest non-bank financial intermediary in the West Bank and Gaza.\nKey figures, cumulative as of 2023 are:\nEmergency operations.\nUNRWA takes a wide variety of actions to mitigate the effects of emergencies on the lives of Palestine refugees. Particularly in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip (occupied Palestinian territory) there has been ongoing intervention made necessary by, e.g., the 1967 War as well as the first and second intifadas, and the 2014 Gaza War. The reconstruction work at Nahr el-Bared Palestine refugee camp in Lebanon has been the largest reconstruction project ever undertaken by UNRWA. This work began in 2009 and was made necessary when the camp was destroyed in the fighting between the Lebanese Armed Forces and Fatah al-Islam in 2007.\nServices range from supplying temporary shelter, water, food, clothing, and blankets to temporary job-creation and help for rebuilding. There is extensive cooperation with other international NGOs and local actors.\nInfrastructure and camp/settlement improvement.\nAs of 2023, there are 58 official refugee camps for Palestinians, of which nine are undergoing active improvement. 6 million refugees were registered with UNRWA, with 1.37 million in Gaza using a UNRWA camp. The camps are neither owned nor administered by the Agency; host governments are responsible for allocating land (mostly of which is privately owned) and providing security and order. Rather, UNRWA is responsible for operating education, health, relief and social services, microfinance, and emergency assistance programmes, some of which may be located outside the camps.\nHowever, as the camps have gradually transformed from temporary \"tent\" cities to semi-permanent and dense urban environments, UNRWA has characterized them as \"hyper-congested\" and \"overcrowded\" with \"critically substandard and in many cases life-threatening\" infrastructure. In response, in 2007 the Agency launched the Infrastructure and Camp Improvement Programme (ICIP) to improve spatial and environmental conditions through comprehensive urban planning methods and community engagement. ICIP is implemented differently in each host country based on local needs, resources, and priorities, albeit with a broader focus on rehabilitating or reconstructing existing shelters, building new housing or service centers, providing maintenance, and improving public infrastructure such as sanitation and water drainage.\nFollowing the destruction of much of the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon in 2007, resulting from months of fighting between Fatah al-Islam militants and the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNRWA led the initiative to rebuild the camp, in what has become the largest project in its history. As of April 2021, nearly two-thirds (72 percent) of the camp has been reconstructed, including 386 shops and businesses, enabling 3,550 families to return. Special funding has been provided by Saudi Arabia, Japan, the Netherlands, and the United Arab Emirates.\nPhoto and film archives.\nThroughout its history, UNRWA has collected photographs and film to document the lives of refugees as well as relief efforts. These materials are produced by UNRWA staff or by external contractors, including photographers working for other UN agencies. An initial batch of photographs were provided by staff of the Red Cross, covering a period before UNRWA was active. As of 2008, the collection had grown to around 10,000 photographs, 400,000 negatives, 15,000 colour slides, 75 films, and 400 videotapes. These are stored in UNRWA facilities in Gaza and Amman. The images and films come from the five areas where the agency is active: Gaza, Jerusalem, the West Bank, Lebanon, and Syria. In 2009, UNESCO added this collection to its Memory of the World International Register, recognising it as documentary heritage of global importance. In 2012, UNRWA began digitising this archive and making images available online.\nAssessment and praise.\nUNRWA has received praise from Nobel Peace laureates Mair\u00e9ad Corrigan Maguire and Kofi Annan, the president of the UN General Assembly, former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and representatives from the European Union, the United States, the Netherlands, Japan, Bangladesh, Cyprus, Jordan, Ghana, and Norway, among others. In 2007, the permanent representative of Norway to the United Nations described his country as a \"strong supporter\" of UNRWA, which acts as \"a safety net\" for the Palestine refugees, providing them with \"immediate relief, basic services and the possibility of a life in dignity\". The same day, the representative of Iceland praised the agency's ability to \"deliver substantial results\" despite \"often life-threatening conditions\".\nIn 2007, Israel expressed its continued support for UNRWA, noting that despite \"concerns regarding the politicization\" of the agency, the country supports its humanitarian mission.\nOn 17 January 2024, US State Department spokesperson Matthew Miller rejected calls to defund UNRWA, saying:UNRWA has done and continues to do invaluable work to address the humanitarian situation in Gaza at great personal risk to UNRWA members. I believe it\u2019s over 100 UNRWA staff members have been killed doing this lifesaving work, and we continue to not only support it but we continue to commend them for the really heroic efforts that they make oftentimes while making the greatest sacrifice.\nIndependent evaluations.\nIn 2011, UNRWA agreed to be assessed by the Multilateral Organisation Performance Assessment Network (MOPAN), a network of donor countries established to determine the organisational effectiveness of multilateral organisations. Based on four dimensions of organisational effectiveness\u2014strategic management, operational management, relationship management, and knowledge management\u2014MOPAN concluded that the agency performs adequately or well in most key indicators, particularly within strategic management. UNRWA responded to the result positively, noting that \"many of the challenges highlighted in the report reflect challenges within most, if not all, multilateral organisations.\" In its most recent assessment in 2019, MOPAN commended UNRWA for continuing to increase the efficiency of its programmes, recognizing the agency as \"competent, resilient and resolute\".\nCriticism and issues.\nIn 2004, Emanuel Marx and Nitza Nachmias pointed out that many criticisms of the agency corresponded to its age, \"including symptoms of inflexibility, resistance to adjust to the changing political environment, and refusal to phase out and transfer its responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority\".\nIn 2007, UNRWA initiated a reform program to improve efficiency. However, an internal ethics report leaked to \"Al Jazeera\" in 2019 alleged that, since 2015, the agency's senior management have consolidated power at the expense of efficiency, leading to widespread misconduct, nepotism, and other abuses of power among high ranking personnel. Responding to the \"Al Jazeera\" report, UNRWA issued a statement that both internal and external assessments of its management have been \"positive\":A recent report by an external group of experts (MOPAN) [Multilateral Organisation Performance Assessment Network] has just shown satisfactory (and at times very satisfactory) results of UNRWA's management and impact - which is particularly important for us during these times of intense political and financial pressure on the agency ... Similarly, the United Nations Board of Auditors recognized the quality of the management and leadership of UNRWA. Finally, the 2018 annual report recently presented by UNRWA's Department of Internal Oversight Services and Ethics Division - both independent bodies - to UNRWA's Advisory Commission (host countries and largest donors) confirmed these positive assessments. These reports testify to the strength of this Agency and are a matter of public record.\nMandate.\nSome critics of UNRWA have argued that it serves to perpetuate the conflict. Although UNRWA's mandate is only for relief works, \"The Wall Street Journal Europe\", published an op-ed by Asaf Romirowsky and Alexander H. Joffe in April 2011 saying that \"it is hard to claim that the UNRWA has created any Palestinian institutions that foster genuinely civil society. Ideally, the UNRWA would be disbanded and Palestinians given the freedom \u2013 and the responsibility \u2013 to build their own society.\"\nThe UNHCR is mandated to help refugees get on with their lives as quickly as possible and works to settle them rapidly, most frequently in countries other than those they fled. UNRWA policy, however, states that the Palestinian Arabs who fled from Israel in the course of the 1948 war, plus all of their descendants, are to be considered refugees until a just and durable solution can be found by political actors. UNRWA was specifically designed not to prescribe how the outcome of an agreement would take shape.\nJames G. Lindsay, a former UNRWA general counsel and fellow researcher for Washington Institute for Near East Policy, published a report for in 2009 in which he criticized UNRWA practices. One of his conclusions was that UNRWA's failure to match the UNHCR's success in resettling refugees \"obviously represents a political decision on the part of the agency\" and \"seems to favor the strain of Palestinian political thought espoused by those who are intent on a 'return' to the land that is now Israel\".\nOperations.\nProtection of Palestinian refugees.\nAsem Khalil, Associate Professor of Law at Birzeit University and dean of the Faculty of Law and Public Administration, has focused on human rights issues for Palestinians in host countries. After systematically documenting the human rights situation for Palestinians in Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria, he concludes:\nThe point this approach is stresses, I believe, is not that UNRWA is not necessary or that Palestinian refugeehood is not unique and special, but rather that UNRWA is not currently capable of ensuring necessary protection for Palestinian refugees, and that host Arab states cannot use the uniqueness of Palestinian refugeehood to continue upholding discriminatory laws and policies towards Palestinian refugees. ...\nThe global financial crisis may result in decreasing international funds to UNRWA, and UNRWA may be pushed towards reducing its services. Such a scenario will be felt by Palestinian refugees in particular ways, seeing the absence of alternative sources of income and the restrictive laws and policies that exist in some host countries. UNRWA is a main service provider for Palestinian refugees in host countries. It provides jobs for thousands of refugees, education, health care, and various other services that are extremely valuable and necessary.\n... The issue at stake here is that UNRWA is not enough, but the alternative is not the replacement of UNRWA by\nUNHCR, rather the enhancement of the protection role of UNRWA, or the extension of protection mandate of UNHCR\nto Palestinian refugees besides (not instead) existing agencies dealing with Palestinian refugees ...\nTextbook issues.\nIn 2005 Nathan Brown, Professor of Political Science at George Washington University, reviewed textbooks used by Palestinians, focusing especially on changes starting in 1994.\nThe Oslo agreements resulted in the dismantling of the Israeli office responsible for censorship of textbooks. Administration of the education system for all Palestinian students in the West Bank and Gaza was taken over by the Palestinian Authority. Other Palestinian schools administered by UNRWA in neighboring countries were unaffected. With the end of UNESCO monitoring of the books, UNRWA moved to develop supplementary materials to teach tolerance in the schools it administered.\nIt is the PA textbooks used in UNRWA schools in the West Bank, Gaza, and East Jerusalem that have been most extensively studied. In the beginning, the PA used books from Jordan and Egypt. In 2000 it started issuing its own books. Brown has pointed out that research into Palestinian textbooks conducted by the Centre for Monitoring the Impact of Peace in 1998 is misleading because it evaluates the old books; and in 2000, its research mixed old and new books. Brown investigated the differences between the new PA books and the ones being replaced.\nRegarding the Palestinian Authority's new textbooks, he states:\nThe new books have removed the anti-Semitism present in the older books while they tell history from a Palestinian point of view, they do not seek to erase Israel, delegitimize, it or replace it with the \"State of Palestine\"; each book contains a foreword describing the West Bank and Gaza as \"the two parts of the homeland\"; the maps show some awkwardness but do sometimes indicate the 1967 line and take some other measures to avoid indicating borders; in this respect they are actually more forthcoming than Israeli maps; the books avoid treating Israel at length but do indeed mention it by name; the new books must be seen as a tremendous improvement from a Jewish, Israeli, and humanitarian view; they do not compare unfavorably to the material my son was given as a fourth-grade student in a school in Tel Aviv\".\nIn 2002, the United States Congress requested the United States Department of State to commission a reputable NGO to conduct a review of the new Palestinian curriculum. The Israel/Palestine Center for Research and Information (IPCRI) was thereby commissioned by the US Embassy in Tel Aviv and the US Consul General in Jerusalem to review the textbooks. Its report was completed in March 2003 and delivered to the State Department for submission to Congress. Its executive summary states: \"The overall orientation of the curriculum is peaceful despite the harsh and violent realities on the ground. It does not openly incite against Israel and the Jews. It does not openly incite hatred and violence. Religious and political tolerance is emphasized in a good number of textbooks and in multiple contexts.\"\nIPCRI's June 2004 follow-up report notes that \"except for calls for resisting occupation and oppression, no signs were detected of outright promotion of hatred towards Israel, Judaism, or Zionism\" and that \"tolerance, as a concept, runs across the new textbooks\". The report also stated that \"textbooks revealed numerous instances that introduce and promote the universal and religious values and concepts of respect of other cultures, religions, and ethnic groups, peace, human rights, freedom of speech, justice, compassion, diversity, plurality, tolerance, respect of law, and environmental awareness\".\nHowever, the IPCRI noted a number of deficiencies in the curriculum.\nThe practice of 'appropriating' sites, areas, localities, geographic regions, etc. inside the territory of the State of Israel as Palestine/Palestinian observed in our previous review, remains a feature of the newly published textbooks (4th and 9th Grade) laying substantive grounds to the contention that the Palestinian Authority did not in fact recognize Israel as the State of the Jewish people. ...\nThe summary also states that the curriculum asserts a historical Arab presence in the region, while:\nThe Jewish connection to the region, in general, and the Holy Land, in particular, is virtually missing. This lack of reference is perceived as tantamount to a denial of such a connection, although no direct evidence is found for such a denial.\" It also notes that \"terms and passages used to describe some historical events are sometimes offensive in nature and could be construed as reflecting hatred of and discrimination against Jews and Judaism.\"\nThe US State Department has similarly raised concerns about the content of textbooks used in PA schools. In its 2009 Human Rights report, the US Department of State wrote that after a 2006 revision of textbooks by the PA Ministry of Education and Higher Education, international academics concluded that books did not incite violence against Jews but showed imbalance, bias, and inaccuracy. The examples given were similar to those given by IPCRI.\nIn 2013 the results of a rigorous study, which also compared Israeli textbooks to PA textbooks, came out. The study was launched by the Council for Religious Institutions in the Holy Land, an interfaith association of Jewish, Christian, and Muslim leaders in Israel and the Occupied Territories. The study was overseen by an international Scientific Advisory Panel and funded by the US State Department The Council published a report \"Victims of Our Own Narratives? Portrayal of the 'Other' in Israeli and Palestinian School Books\". Most books were found to be factually accurate except, for example, through presenting maps that present the area from the river to the sea as either Palestine or Israel. Israeli schoolbooks were deemed superior to Palestinian ones with regard to preparing children for peace, although various depictions of the \"other\" as enemy occurred in 75% of Israeli, and in 81% of Palestinian textbooks. The study praised both Israel and the Palestinian Authority for producing textbooks almost completely unblemished by \"dehumanizing and demonizing characterizations of the other\". Yet many troubling examples were given of both sides failing to represent each other in a positive or even adequate way. And the problem was more pronounced in PA textbooks.\nIn response to a critical report written in 2009 by former UNRWA general counsel James G. Lindsay, fellow researcher for Washington Institute for Near East Policy John Ging, head of UNRWA Gaza, said: \"As for our schools, we use textbooks of the Palestinian Authority. Are they perfect? No, they're not. I can't defend the indefensible.\"\nUNRWA has taken many steps since 2000 to supplement the PA curriculum with concepts of human rights, nonviolent conflict resolution, and tolerance. According to the UNRWA website:\nWe have been delivering human rights education in our schools since 2000 to promote non-violence, healthy communication skills, peaceful conflict resolution, human rights, tolerance, and good citizenship. In May 2012, the Agency endorsed its new Human Rights, Conflict Resolution and Tolerance (HRCRT) Policy to further strengthen human rights education in UNRWA. This policy builds upon past successes, but also draws from international best practices and paves the way to better integrate human rights education in all our schools. The HRCRT Policy reflects the UNRWA mandate of quality education for Palestine refugees and sets out a common approach among all UNRWA schools for the teaching and learning of human rights, conflict resolution and tolerance. The vision of the policy is to \"provide human rights education that empowers Palestine refugee students to enjoy and exercise their rights, uphold human rights values, be proud of their Palestinian identity, and contribute positively to their society and the global community.\"In 2021, the Australian and Canadian governments started investigating UNRWA, and the British government found that UNRWA had produced and disseminated textbooks inciting violence. UNRWA blocked public access to its website contents in response. Phillipe Lazzarini admitted to the European Parliament that the study materials in UNRWA's schools featured incitement to violence, glorification of acts of terror, and antisemitism, but insisted that the agency takes steps to prevent the material from being taught.\nA review performed in 2024 names using \"host-country textbooks with problematic content\" as one of the issues with UNRWA's neutrality. The review states \"Three international assessments of PA textbooks in recent years have provided a nuanced picture..Two identified presence of bias and antagonistic content, but did not provide evidence of antisemitic content. The third assessment, by the [German-based] Georg Eckert Institute, studied 156 PA textbooks and identified two examples that it found to display antisemitic motifs but noted that one of them had already been removed, the other has been altered.\"\nRelationship with Hamas.\nIn October 2004, UNRWA Commissioner-General Peter Hansen caused controversy in Canada when he said in an interview with CBC TV:\nOh I am sure that there are Hamas members on the UNRWA payroll and I don't see that as a crime. Hamas as a political organization does not mean that every member is a militant and we do not do political vetting and exclude people from one persuasion as against another.\nWe demand of our staff, whatever their political persuasion is, that they behave in accordance with UN standards and norms for neutrality.\nHansen later specified that he had been referring not to active Hamas members, but to Hamas sympathizers within UNRWA. In a letter to the Agency's major donors, he said he was attempting to be honest because UNRWA has over 8,200 employees in the Gaza Strip. Given that opinion polls show 30% support of Hamas in Gaza at the time, and UNRWA's workforce of 11,000 Palestinians, at least some Hamas sympathizers were likely to be among UNRWA's employees. The important thing, he wrote, was that UNRWA's strict rules and regulations ensured that its staff remained impartial UN servants. Hansen was retired from United Nations service against his will on 31 March 2005 after the United States blocked his reappointment.\nUNRWA has come under criticism from Hamas for teaching Palestinian students Western values. According to Hazem Balousha, some Hamas officials objected to UNRWA organized trips for Palestinian students to visit Holocaust remembrance sites. Hamas officials also opposed other UNRWA organized trips for Palestinian students to the US and Europe. According to \"The Guardian\", Hamas has in some cases threatened UN staff in Gaza. James G. Lindsay, a former UNRWA general counsel and affiliated with the pro-Israel Washington Institute for Near East Policy published a report for WINEP in 2009 in which he said UNRWA did not take enough steps to detect and prevent members of Hamas from joining the organization.\nAccording to \"The Jerusalem Post\", Hamas won a teachers union election for UN schools in Gaza in 2009. UNRWA has strongly denied this and pointed out that \"Staff elections are conducted on an individual \u2013 not party list \u2013 basis for unions that handle normal labour relations \u2013 not political \u2013 issues.\" In addition, John Ging, the Gaza head of operations, said in a letter dated 29 March 2009 that employees must not \"be under the influence of any political party in the conduct of their work.\"\nIsraeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth stated in 2012 that a staff union election resulted in 25 of the 27 seats going to Palestinians who were either Islamist or sympathetic towards Hamas. More than 9,500 UNRWA employees in the Gaza Strip participated; this represented more than 80% turnout. The professional list won three UNRWA workers groups: the employees', teachers', and services' unions. According to the Israeli government , UNRWA employed at least 24 members of Hamas or Islamic Jihad in 24 of its schools; the majority were principals or deputy principals, and several were fighters in the Qassam Brigades. Also, Israel provided intelligence about 18 UNRWA workers it accused of participating in the 7 October 2023, attacks. In April 2024, following a withdrawal of funding to UNRWA, NPR said that an independent inquiry found \"no evidence for Israel's claims\" regarding the relationship between the aid agency and Hamas.\nOn 30 September 2024, UNRWA confirmed that Fatah Sharif, a top Hamas commander killed in an Israeli airstrike in Lebanon, had formerly been on its payroll as a school principal and head of the teachers' union in Lebanon. UNRWA said it had suspended Sharif and started an investigation in March when it learned of the allegation that Sharif was a member of the political wing of Hamas. It was not aware that he was a Hamas commander. Hamas praised him posthumously for his \"educational and jihadist work.\" In February 2025, former hostage Emily Damari alleged she was held in a UNRWA facility for some of her 15-month captivity by Hamas. UNRWA said there were times when it did not have access to its facilities and that most were converted to shelters. It called for an independent investigation into the misuse of its facilities.\nHamas interference.\nIt has been reported that Hamas has interfered with curriculum and textbooks in UNRWA schools. For example, in 2009 it caused UNRWA to suspend a decision to introduce Holocaust studies in its schools. One of UNRWA's flagships has been gender-equality and integration. But Hamas militants have firebombed UNRWA mixed-gender summer camps, and in 2013 Hamas passed a law requiring gender segregation in schools for all pupils nine years of age and older in Gaza. The law does not apply to UNRWA schools.\nElhanen Miller, the Arab affairs reporter for \"The Times of Israel\", wrote in February 2014 that Hamas was \"bashing\" UNRWA's human rights curriculum, saying that it included too many examples and values foreign to Palestinian culture and had too much emphasis on peaceful resistance rather than armed resistance. In this case UNRWA refused to be swayed. Spokesman Chris Gunness said:\nUNRWA has no plans to change its education programs in Gaza ... human rights are taught in all UNRWA schools from grades 1 through 9, discussing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nUNRWA's education system takes as its basis the curriculum taught by the PA and so we use PA textbooks in preparing children in Gaza for public examinations. ... In addition, we enrich our education programs in Gaza with an agreed human rights curriculum which has been developed with the communities we serve: with educationalists, parents groups, teachers associations, staff members and others. We have done our utmost in developing these materials to be sensitive to local values while also being true to the universal values that underpin the work of the United Nations.\nHowever, after a few days, UNRWA consented to temporarily suspending the use of only the books used in grades 7\u20139 (continuing to use the books used in grades 1\u20136) pending further discussions.\nOperation of summer camps.\nHamas has denounced UNRWA and Ging, accusing them of using their summer camps to corrupt the morals of Palestinian youth. Hamas also advised UNRWA to re-examine its curriculum to ensure its suitability for Palestinian society, due to the mixing of genders at the camps. In September 2011 it was reported that, under pressure from Hamas, UNRWA has made all its summer camps single-sex. Hamas has its own network of summer camps and the two organizations are regarded to be vying for influence with Gazan youth. Islamic Jihad has also run summer camps since 2013. UNRWA did not operate its summer camps for summer 2012 and summer 2014 due to a lack of available funding. Hamas has filled this void and now is the direct provider of summer activities for about 100,000 children and youths. In 2013, UNRWA canceled its planned marathon in Gaza after Hamas rulers prohibited women from participating in the race.\nIn 2013, Israeli media outlets aired a video documenting UNRWA-funded summer camps where children are being taught to engage in violence with Israelis. The video airs speakers telling campers \"With God's help and our own strength we will wage war. And with education and Jihad we will return to our homes!\" A student is also shown on camera describing that \"the summer camp teaches us that we have to liberate Palestine.\" UNRWA denies that the video shows UNRWA summer camps and instead shows footage of camps that were not operated by UNRWA, and stated that the film was \"grossly misleading\" and that \"the film-maker concerned has a history of making baseless claims about UNRWA, all of which we have investigated and demonstrated to be patently false.\" It stated that the 'summer camp' shown in the West Bank was not affiliated with or organized by UNRWA, and that footage from the camp in Gaza \"revealed that absolutely nothing anti-Semitic or inflammatory was done or said\".\nSexual violence.\nIn September 2025, AP News reported that women in Gaza during the Gaza War were being exploited by local men, including those affiliated with UNRWA, who promised them aid or employment in exchange for sexual favours.\nInvestigations and calls for accountability and reform.\nMany critics of UNRWA, while generally recognizing the importance of its work and the infeasibility of disbanding it, believe it requires more transparency, oversight, and support. Writing in the \"Middle East Monitor\" in April 2012, Karen Koning AbuZayd, a former Commissioner-General of the UNRWA (2005\u20132009), argued that \"UNRWA needs support not brickbats\". She concluded that:\n... even those who scrutinise [UNRWA] most closely and challenge it most severely are those who also ensure that its programmes receive adequate funding. They, like others who view the agency more positively, realise that UNRWA makes a major contribution to stability in the Middle East.\nWriting in the \"Times of Israel\" on 31 July 2014, David Horovitz argued that Israel had many legitimate complaints against UNRWA, including that its definition of \"refugee\" included the descendants of the original Palestinian refugees, that it was \"closely watched by Hamas for signs that it is not sufficiently critical of Israel\", and that its facilities frequently harbored Hamas operatives and their weaponry. But, he noted, while Israeli officials privately argued for its abolishment, with no other credible party able to take over the agency's duties, including administering the more than 200,000 Gazans internally displaced during the then-ongoing 2014 Gaza War, Israel had never \"launched a no-holds-barred effort to bring UNRWA down\". That changed after the 7 October 2023 attack on Israel, as Horovitz described in a January 2025 piece titled \"Gaza after UNRWA\". In addition to cataloguing ties between UNRWA and Hamas, including revelations of its staff's \"complicity in the mass murder in Israel that caused the war and devastation in Gaza\", Horovitz excoriated the agency for having \"perpetuated a fundamental intolerance for the simple fact of Israel\u2019s existence\" and having \"helped Hamas and by extension doomed Gaza\".\nRepeated calls for investigation by the United States.\nThe United States government financed a programme of \"Operations Support Officers\" whose responsibilities including undertaking random and unannounced inspections of UNRWA facilities to ensure their sanctity from militant operations. In 2004, the U.S. Congress asked the General Accounting Office (GAO) to investigate media claims that government funding given to UNRWA had been used to support individuals involved in militant activities. During its investigation, the GAO discovered several irregularities in its processing and employment history.\nIn August 2014, several US Senators demanded an impartial investigation into UNRWA's alleged participation in the 2014 Gaza-Israel conflict, accusing UNRWA of being complicit with Hamas.\n... While the letter does not call on the State Department to cut aid, the senators write that the American taxpayers \"deserve to know if UNRWA is fulfilling its mission or taking sides in this tragic conflict.\"\n... Responding to the letter, a State Department spokesman said that the UN is taking \"proactive steps to address this problem,\" including deploying munitions experts to the strip in search of more weapons caches.\n\"The international community cannot accept a situation where the United Nations \u2013 its facilities, staff, and those it is protecting \u2013 are used as shields for militants and terrorist groups,\" State Department spokesone Edgar Vasquez told \"The Jerusalem Post\". \"We remain in intensive consultations with UN leadership about the UN's response.\"\n\"There are few good solutions given the exceptionally difficult situation in Gaza,\" Vasquez continued, \"but nonetheless we are in contact with the United Nations, other UNRWA donors, and concerned parties \u2013 including Israel \u2013 on identifying better options for protecting the neutrality of UN facilities and ensuring that weapons discovered are handled appropriately and do not find their way back to Hamas or other terrorist groups.\"In 2018, citing a \"failure to mobilize adequate and appropriate burden sharing,\" the Trump administration stopped funding UNRWA, calling its fundamental business model and fiscal practices \"simply unsustainable\". Secretary of State Mike Pompeo maintained that \"most Palestinians under UNRWA's jurisdiction aren't refugees, and UNRWA is a hurdle to peace.\" The Biden administration restarted funding in April 2021 and as of 2024 provided almost $1 billion to UNRWA. In 2024, during the Gaza war, the Biden administration halted funding for UNRWA after the Israeli government alleged that some UNRWA staffers took part in the October 7 attacks.\nJames G. Lindsay.\nOn the basis of his 2009 analyses for WINEP, referred to in previous sections, former UNRWA general-counsel James G. Lindsay and fellow researcher for Washington Institute for Near East Policy made the following suggestions for improvement: \nUNRWA should make the following operational changes: halt its one-sided political statements and limit itself to comments on humanitarian issues; take additional steps to ensure the agency is not employing or providing benefits to terrorists and criminals; and allow the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), or some other neutral entity, to provide balanced and discrimination-free textbooks for UNRWA schools.\nAndrew Whitley, director of the UNRWA representative office at UN headquarters in New York, criticized the report as biased and relying on limited sources. Additionally, he noted: \"Someone reading this paper with no background would assume that the Israeli government was a benign actor. No mention is made of the occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.\"\nUNRWA's Jerusalem spokesperson Chris Gunness stated that UNRWA rejects Lindsay's report and its findings and said that the study was inaccurate and misleading, since it \"makes selective use of source material and fails to paint a truthful portrait of UNRWA and its operations today\".\nIn response to the criticism of his report from UNRWA, Lindsay writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite repeated requests from the author, the agency declined to identify the alleged weaknesses on the grounds that \"our views\u2014and understanding\u2014of UNRWA's role, the refugees and even U.S. policy are too far apart for us to take time (time that we do not have) to enter into an exchange with little likelihood of influencing a narrative which so substantially differs from our own.\" Thus, the paper has not benefited from any input by UNRWA, whether a discussion of policy or even correction of alleged errors.\nReform initiative.\nAn initiative to reform UNRWA was announced by the Center for Near East Policy Research in March 2014. The center carries out research and (through its \"Israel Resource News Agency\") investigative journalism and research in cooperation with a wide variety of organisations and researchers, such as The Middle East Forum, which has published an entire issue of Middle East Quarterly discussing the challenges facing UNRWA.\nThe main thrust of the UNRWA Reform Initiative is to present documentation of problems with UNRWA to sponsor nations and organisations with the aim of increasing sponsor demands for accountability. UNRWA has stated on multiple occasions that the head of this initiative, David Bedein, fabricates the information he publishes.\nEU conditions funding 2021.\nIn September 2021, the European Parliament's Budgetary Control Committee approved withholding 20 million Euros in aid to UNRWA if immediate changes to UNRWA's education curriculum are not made. According to the resolution, the Parliament \"is concerned about the hate speech and violence taught in Palestinian school textbooks and used in schools by UNRWA... [and] insists that UNRWA acts in full transparency... to ensure that content adheres to UN values and does not encourage hatred.\"\nFunding for UNRWA was reinstated by the EU on 1 March 2024.\n2025 lawsuit.\nIn April 2025, the Trump administration Department of Justice reversed a Biden administration position that UNRWA held immunity from lawsuits in United States courts due to its affiliation with the United Nations. In July 2025, more than 200 plaintiffs sued UNRWA in a Washington, D.C., district court, accusing the organization of violating US anti-terrorism laws by supporting Hamas and Hezbollah. They also accused agency staff of direct involvement in terrorist attacks. UNRWA called the suit \"meritless, absurd, dangerous, and morally reprehensible\" in a press release.\nRelations with Israel.\nAfter Israel captured the West Bank and Gaza in the Six-Day War, it requested that the UNRWA continue its operations there, which it would facilitate. Since then the relationship has been characterized by two-state advocate Baruch Spiegel, as \"an uneasy marriage of convenience between two unlikely bedfellows that have helped perpetuate the problem both have allegedly sought to resolve.\"\nImmediately following the Six-Day War, on 14 June UNRWA Commissioner-General Dr. Laurence Michelmore and political advisor to the Israeli Foreign Minister Michael Comay exchanged letters that has since served as much of the basis for the relationship between Israel and UNRWA. Commonly referred to the Comay-Michelmore Exchange of Letters, the initial letter from Michelmore reiterates a verbal conversation between the two, stating that:\nat the request of the Israel Government, UNRWA would continue its assistance to the Palestine refugees, with the full co-operation of the Israel authorities, in the West Bank and Gaza Strip areas. For its part, the Israel Government will facilitate the task of UNRWA to the best of its ability, subject only to regulations or arrangements which may be necessitated by considerations of military security. \nIn his responding letter, Comay wrote:\nI agree that your letter and this reply constitute a provisional agreement between UNRWA and the Government of Israel, to remain in force until replaced or cancelled.\nUNRWA has been criticised by the Israeli government and politicians for alleged involvement with Palestinian militant groups, such as Hamas. Israeli media organizations have claimed that Peter Hansen, UNRWA's former Commissioner-General (1996\u20132005) \"consistently adopted a trenchant anti-Israel line\" which resulted in biased and exaggerated reports against Israel.\nIsraeli ban and ICJ case.\nOn 28 October 2024, the Knesset passed legislation that orders UNRWA to cease \"any activity\" in territories claimed by Israel within 90 days. The Israeli government, for its part, declared that it will terminate all collaboration, communication and contact with UNRWA beginning on 30 January 2025. On 30 January, Israel's UNRWA ban went into effect.\nAs a result of the ban on UNRWA, the UN General Assembly voted to request an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice (ICJ) regarding \"Obligations of Israel in relation to the Presence and Activities of the United Nations, Other International Organizations and Third States in and in relation to the Occupied Palestinian Territory\" in December 2024. Israel\u2019s foreign minister, Gideon Sa'ar, criticized the decision saying that \"it is not Israel that should be on trial. It is the UN and Unrwa\".\nIn October 2025, the ICJ issued an advisory opinion finding that Israel's claims that UNRWA had been infiltrated by Hamas were unsubstantiated. The court also ruled that Israel's decision to end cooperation with UNRWA and restrict humanitarian aid to Gaza breached its obligations under the Geneva Conventions and the UN Charter. It furthermore found that Israel's Gaza Humanitarian Foundation was not an adequate substitute, noting that more than 2,100 Palestinians had been killed near its distribution points and that conditions in Gaza had deteriorated to the point that international experts declared a famine in some areas in August. The ICJ further held that the mass transfer or deportation of civilians within occupied territory is prohibited, citing Israeli measures that forced large populations into overcrowded areas and severely restricted UN access. It also ruled that the two Knesset laws ending cooperation with UNRWA in the occupied territories were unlawful, noting that 360 UNRWA staff had been killed during the conflict. The court concluded that Israel, as an occupying power, had unlawfully impeded aid delivery, used starvation as a method of warfare, and failed to respect the immunities of UN personnel and premises. The opinion required Israel to allow UNRWA and other UN agencies to operate freely in the Occupied Palestinian Territories and to permit the International Committee of the Red Cross access to Palestinian prisoners held inside Israel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32272", "revid": "525074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32272", "title": "UNIDO", "text": ""}
{"id": "32273", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32273", "title": "German submarine U-155 (1941)", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-155\" was a Type IXC U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" built for service during World War II. Her keel was laid down on 1 October 1940 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser in Bremen as yard number 997. She was launched on 12 May 1941 and commissioned on 23 August with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Adolf Piening in command. Piening was relieved in February 1944 (after being promoted to \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\"), by \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Johannes Rudolph.\nDesign.\nGerman Type IXC submarines were slightly larger than the original Type IXBs. \"U-155\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40/46 supercharged four-stroke, nine-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/34 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-155\" was fitted with six torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and two at the stern), 22 torpedoes, one SK C/32 naval gun, 180 rounds, and a SK C/30 as well as a C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of forty-eight.\nService history.\n\"Leutnant zur See\" Ludwig von Friedeburg relieved Rudolph from August to November 1944, when Rudolph resumed command for another month. During these four months, \"U-155\" had the youngest U-boat commander during the war since Von Friedeburg was only 20 years old. In December, \"Kptlt.\" Erwin Witte took over, and was relieved in April 1945 by \"Oblt.z.S.\" Friedrich Altmeier. Altmeier commanded the boat for one month before the German surrender; \"U-155\" was then scuttled by the Royal Navy. The wreck was located, largely intact, in 2001.\n\"U-155\" conducted ten patrols, sinking 25 ships totalling \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT), one warship of 13,785 tons and damaging one auxiliary warship of \u00a0GRT. She was a member of one wolfpack. She sank a warship and a troop transport ship, and damaged a cargo ship, with one salvo of four torpedoes on 15 November 1942 during her fourth patrol, and shot down a P-51 Mustang aircraft on her final patrol.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-155\" left Kiel on her first patrol on 7 February 1942. Her route took her 'up' the North Sea, through the gap between the Faroe and Shetland Islands and into the Atlantic. South of Cape Farewell in Greenland, she sank and \"Adellen\" on the 22nd.\nShe then moved on to the US east coast, sinking the about off Cape Hatteras, North Carolina on 7 March. On the tenth, the First Watch Officer (1WO) \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Gert Rentrop was washed overboard.\nThe boat docked at the Lorient U-boat base on the Atlantic coast of German-occupied France on March 27.\nSecond patrol.\nHaving left Lorient on 24 April 1942, \"U-155\" steamed to the eastern Caribbean Sea and the portion of the Atlantic adjacent to it. She attacked \"Brabant\" southwest of Grenada on 14 May. The ship sank in eight minutes.\nThe U-boat sank another six ships; one of them, \"Sylvan Arrow\", was torpedoed on 20 May, but did not go down until the 28th, following a salvage attempt.\nThe submarine returned to Lorient on 14 June.\nThird patrol.\n\"U-155\"'s third and most successful foray was conducted in similar waters to her second effort, beginning in Lorient on 9 July. She sank \"Barbacena\" with torpedoes east of Barbados, but others, such as \"Piave\", went to the bottom with the more economic deck gun. Another victim, \"Cranford\", met her end within three minutes. Part of her cargo was 6,600 tons of chrome ore. Two injured survivors were treated on \"U-155\" before water, supplies and directions were handed over to their colleagues.\nThe submarine's skipper apologized for sinking one ship (\"Empire Arnold\" on 4 August), to the Chief Officer, who told him it was a bad business and wished it [the war] was over. Piening replied: \"So do I\".\n\"Maschinengefreiter\" Konrad Garneier was lost overboard during an air attack on 19 August.\nIn all, the boat sank ten ships, a total of 43,514 GRT.\nFourth patrol.\nThree of a spread of four torpedoes hit targets, one \"aal\" (eel: U-boat slang for torpedo), damaged , a US Navy-requisitioned cargo transport; two others sank escort carrier and the British troop transport \"Ettrick\" on 15 November 1942 northwest of Gibraltar. Of 526 men on \"Avenger\", there were 12 survivors. \"Ettrick\"'s master was awarded the Order of the British Empire (OBE).\nThe boat also sank \"Serroskerk\" in mid-Atlantic. There were no survivors.\nFifth patrol.\n\"U-155\"'s fifth sortie involved her move to the western Caribbean and southern Florida, USA. She sank \"Lysefjord\" west of Havana on 2 April 1943, and on 3 April sank the oil tanker \"Gulfstate\" about east northeast of Marathon Key, Florida (in 2013 the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats (RULET) project found the sunken \"Gulfstate\" to be a potential source of oil pollution.)\nOn the return journey \"U-155\" was attacked by an unknown aircraft on 27 April northwest of Cape Finisterre, Spain.\nSixth patrol.\nTo try and counter the air threat, \"U-155\" was grouped together with , , and in the Bay of Biscay. The formation was attacked by four de Havilland Mosquito aircraft on 14 June \u2014 three from No. 307 Polish Night Fighter Squadron and one from No. 410 Squadron RCAF. One Mosquito, hit in the port engine, was forced to break off its attack and return to base where it made a belly landing. Five men in the boat's crew were wounded; they were treated by \"U-68\"'s doctor on their return to Lorient on 16 June.\nSeventh and eighth patrols.\nPatrol number seven was as long as any of the others, to a point northeast of the Cape Verde Islands; but the boat did not find any targets.\nThe submarine's eighth patrol took her toward the northeast coast of Brazil. While sinking \"Siranger\" she took the third mate prisoner (he had been wounded, and was operated-on by the boat's doctor). He was taken back to Lorient and was eventually transferred to the POW camp at Milag Nord near Bremen.\nNinth and tenth patrols.\n\"U-155\"'s ninth patrol was, at 105 days, her longest, but like her seventh, found no targets. On 4 May 1944, the boat shot down a North American P-51 Mustang aircraft of No. 126 Squadron RAF and on 23 June 1944, Mosquitos of 248 Squadron attacked, killing \"Matrosenobergefreiter\" Karl Lohmeier and \"Mechanikerobergefreiter\" Friedrich Feller and wounding seven others. Her patrol terminated at Lorient the same day.\nHer tenth and final patrol left Lorient on 9 September 1944, the last by a U-boat from the base. The patrol was uneventful; she returned to Germany by a circuitous route, and docked at Flensburg on 21 October.\nFate.\nOn 22 June 1945, after the German surrender, she was transferred from Wilhelmshaven to Loch Ryan, Scotland for Royal Navy Operation Deadlight, the scuttling of surrendered German U-boats, and sunk on 21 December the same year.\nPost war.\n\"U-155\" was located and identified in 2001 by a team of divers led by nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney, revealing the wreck was lying upright on the sea bed, largely intact, at a depth of .\nHer crew held their 25th reunion in 1995 with former \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Johannes Rudolph and one of the Mosquito pilots who attacked the boat in June 1944 'on board'.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32274", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32274", "title": "German submarine U-556", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-556\" was a Type VIIC U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II. She was laid down on 2 January 1940 at the Blohm &amp; Voss yard in Hamburg as yard number 532, launched on 7 December 1940, and commissioned on 6 February 1941 under the command of \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Herbert Wohlfarth, who commanded her for her entire career that lasted less than five months. \"U-556\" conducted only two patrols, sinking six ships totalling \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT) and damaging one other of 4,986 GRT, before she was sunk on 27 June 1941.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-556\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie GG UB 720/8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-556\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and a C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\nFirst patrol.\n\"U-556\" sailed from Kiel for her first patrol on 1 May 1941. She headed out into the waters of the northern Atlantic, south of Greenland. She made her first kill on 6 May, sinking the 166 GRT Faroese fishing trawler \"Emanuel\" with her deck gun west of the Faroe Islands.\nOn 10 May she joined the wolfpack \"West\" attacking Convoy OB 318 south-east of Cape Farewell. Her first victim was the 4,986 GRT British merchant ship \"Aelybryn\", hit by one of the torpedoes fired by the U-boat at 04:42. Badly damaged, but suffering only a single casualty, the ship was towed to Reykjav\u00edk by .\nThe convoy scattered, but at 07:52 \"U-556\" torpedoed and sank the 4,861 GRT British merchant ship . Nine crew members and two gunners were later picked up by , but the master, 31 crewmen, and two gunners were lost.\nThe U-boat had her third success of the day at 20:37, sinking the 5,086 GRT Belgian merchant ship \"Gand\". One crew member was lost and another wounded. The master, 38 crewmen and four gunners were rescued by .\nTen days later, on 20 May, the wolfpack attacked Convoy HX 126. Between 14:48 and 15:16 \"U-556\" fired torpedoes at the convoy and sank two British merchant ships, the 4,974 GRT \"Darlington Court\" and the 5,995 GRT \"Cockaponset\", and the 8,470 GRT tanker \"British Security\". Loaded with 11,200 tons of benzine and kerosene, the tanker caught fire and burned for three days before sinking. There were no survivors from her crew of 53.\nThe sinking of \"Bismarck\".\nOn 26 May, while returning from patrol, low on fuel and having fired all her torpedoes, \"U-556\" was ordered to reconnoitre the most recently reported position of the battleship .\n\"U-556\" and \"Bismarck\" had been neighbours in the ways at Blohm &amp; Voss and their construction was completed at about the same time. (\"Bismarck\" was commissioned on 24 August 1940.) In January 1941, as \"U-556\"'s commissioning ceremony approached, Wohlfarth wanted a band for the celebration, but could not afford to hire one. \"Kapit\u00e4n\" Ernst Lindemann, commanding officer of \"Bismarck\", lent him his ship's band.\nAs thanks, Wohlfarth drew up a humorous \"Patenschaftsurkunde\" (\"Certificate of Sponsorship\") promising that \"U-556\" would protect \"Bismarck\". A drawing shows Wohlfarth as the knight Parzival [Percival] (his nickname) on the deck of \"U-556\" simultaneously bringing down planes with a sword and reaching underwater to stop a torpedo with his thumb. A second drawing then shows the submarine towing the battleship to safety.\nThe text accompanying the drawing reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Wir U556 (500 to) erkl\u00e4ren hiermit vor Neptun, dem Herrscher \u00fcber Ozeane, Meere, Seen, Fl\u00fcsse, B\u00e4che, Teiche und Rinnsale da\u00df wir unserem grossen Bruder, dem Schlachtschiff Bismarck (42.000 to) in jeder Lage, zu Wasser, unter Wasser, zu Lande wie in der Luft beistehen wollen.\"\n\"Hamburg, den 28. Januar 1941\"\n\"Kommandant u\"\n\"Besatzung U556\"\nWe, \"U-556\" (500 tons), hereby declare before Neptune, Lord over oceans, seas, lakes, rivers, brooks, ponds, and rivulets, that we will provide any desired assistance to our Big Brother, the battleship \"Bismarck\" (42,000 tons), at any place on the water, underwater, on land, or in the air.\nHamburg, 28 January 1941\nCommander &amp;\nCrew U556\nAround 19:50, Wohlfahrt saw the battlecruiser and the aircraft carrier coming out of the mist at high speed. He recorded in his log, \"Enemy bows on, 10 degrees to starboard, without destroyers, without zigzagging,\" but without any torpedoes, could only submerge and avoid them. Wohlfahrt saw activity on \"Ark Royal\"'s flight deck, which transpired to be the launching of the second, fatal attack on \"Bismarck\". At 20:39, Wohlfahrt surfaced and transmitted, \"Enemy in view, a battleship, an aircraft carrier, course 115, enemy is proceeding at high speed. Position 48\u00b0\u00a020\u2032\u00a0N, 16\u00b0\u00a020\u2032\u00a0W.\" \"Renown\"'s and \"Ark Royal\"'s course toward \"Bismarck\" coincided almost exactly with his own; he proceeded on the surface at full speed behind them.\nWohlfahrt's War Diary contains these entries for 27 May 1941:\n00:00, (wind) north-west 5, seaway 5, rain squalls, moderate visibility, very dark night. Surfaced. What can I do for Bismarck? I can see star shells being fired and flashes from Bismarck's guns. It is a terrible feeling to be near and not to be able to do anything. All I can do is reconnoitre and lead in boats that have torpedoes. I am keeping contact at the limit of visibility, reporting the position, and sending directional signals to call up the other boats.\n03:52: I am moving around on the east side to the south, in order to be in the direction of the activity. I soon reach the limit of what I can do in view of my fuel supply. Otherwise, I won't get home.\n04:00: The seas are rising ever higher. Bismarck still fighting. Reported weather for the Luftwaffe.\nAround 06:30 Wohlfahrt sighted and transferred the mission of maintaining contact with \"Bismarck\" to \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Eitel-Friedrich Kentrat. He gave Kentrat \"Bismarck\"'s position based on his observations of the star shells fired during the night, adding: \"I have not seen her directly. You assume contact. I have no more fuel.\" Wohlfahrt then submerged and did not surface again until noon, a time at which radio signals were routinely repeated. That was when he heard for the first time the order radioed to him between 07:00 and 08:00 to pick up \"Bismarck\"'s War Diary. He replied to the \"Befehlshaber der U-Boote\" (\"Commander-in-Chief for Submarines\") Karl D\u00f6nitz, asking that this mission be transferred to Kentrat, who received the radio order, \"U-boat Kentrat pick up Bismarck War Diary,\" but was unable to locate \"Bismarck\". The battleship had been sunk before Wohlfahrt had received the first message at noon.\n\"U-556\" arrived at Lorient, in occupied France on 30 May 1941 after 30 days at sea, where Wohlfahrt received the Knight's Cross (\"Ritterkreuz\") from D\u00f6nitz personally.\nSecond patrol.\n\"U-556\" departed from Lorient on 19 June 1941, and once more headed out into the Atlantic. However, on 27 June, she was sunk south-west of Iceland, in position , by depth charges from the British s , and . Five of the crew were killed and 41 survived.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-556\" took part in one wolfpack, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32276", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32276", "title": "German submarine U-81", "text": "U-81 may refer to one of the following German submarines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32278", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32278", "title": "US Attorney General", "text": ""}
{"id": "32279", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32279", "title": "Mother Shipton", "text": "Legendary English soothsayer and prophetess\nUrsula Southeil (c. 1487 \u2013 1561); also variously spelt as Southill, Soothtell, Sontheil, or Sonthiel, popularly known as Mother Shipton, was an English soothsayer and prophetess according to English folklore.\nShe has sometimes been described as a witch and is associated with folklore involving the origin of the Rollright Stones of Oxfordshire. A king and his men were said to have transformed to stone after failing her test, as reported by William Camden in a rhyming account in 1610.\nThe first known edition of her prophecies was printed in 1641, eighty years after her reported death. This timing suggests that what was published was a legendary or mythical account. It contained numerous mainly regional predictions and only two prophetic verses.\nOne of the most notable editions of her prophecies was published in 1684. It gave her birthplace as Knaresborough, Yorkshire, in a cave now known as Mother Shipton's Cave. The book reputed Shipton to be hideously ugly, and that she had married Toby Shipton, a local carpenter, near York in 1512, and told fortunes and made predictions throughout her life.\nEarly life.\nMother Shipton was born Ursula Southeil or Sonthiel, in 1486 or 1488 (though some sources claim she was born as early as 1448)to 15-year-old Agatha Soothtale, allegedly in a cave outside the town of Knaresborough in North Yorkshire. The earliest sources of the legends of her birth and life were collected in 1667 by author and biographer Richard Head and later by J. Conyers in 1686.\nBoth sources\u20141667 and 1686\u2014state that Shipton was born during a violent thunderstorm, and was deformed and ugly, born with a hunchback and bulging eyes. The sources also state that Shipton cackled instead of crying after having been born, and as she did so, the previously raging storms ceased.\nThe sources report Ursula's mother Agatha as a poor and desolate 15-year-old orphan, left with no means to support herself; having fallen under the influences of the Devil, Agatha engaged in an affair, resulting in the birth of Ursula. Variations of this legend claim Agatha herself was a witch and summoned the Devil to conceive a child.\nThe true origin of Ursula's father is unknown, with Agatha refusing to reveal him; at one point, Agatha was forcibly brought before the local magistrate, but still refused to disclose his identity. The scandalous nature of Agatha's life and Ursula's birth meant the two were ostracised from society and forced to live alone, in the same cave Ursula was born, for the first two years of Ursula's life.\u00a0Rumours that Agatha was a witch and Ursula the spawn of Satan were perpetuated, due to the cave's well-known skull-shaped pool, which turned things to stone. The cave is known today as Mother Shipton's Cave; though the effects of the cave's pool are not those of true petrification, they closely resemble the process by which stalactites are formed, coating objects left in the cave with layers of minerals, and in essence hardening porous objects until they become hard and stone-like.\nAccording to 17th-century sources, after two years living alone in the Forest of Knaresborough, the abbot of Beverley intervened. The abbot removed them from the cave and secured Agatha a place in the Convent of the order of St. Bridget in Nottinghamshire, and Ursula a foster family in Knaresborough. Agatha and Ursula would never see each other again.\nDeveloped from contemporary descriptions and depictions of her, it is likely Ursula had a large crooked nose and suffered from a hunchback and crooked legs. Physical differences acted as a visual reminder of the secretive events of her birth and the townspeople never forgot. She found acceptance with her foster family and a few friends, but Ursula was ultimately ostracised from the larger portion of people in town. She found sanctuary in the woods like her mother had and spent most of her childhood learning of plants and herbs and their medicinal properties.\nLegends of her childhood.\nIt was claimed that when Ursula was two years old, she was left alone at home while her foster mother left to run errands. Her mother returned to find the front door wide open. Afraid of what might still be in the house, she called to her neighbours for assistance, and the group heard a loud wailing, like \"a thousand cats in consort\"\u00a0throughout the house. Ursula's cradle was found empty. After a frantic search throughout the house, her mother looked up to see Ursula naked and cackling, perched on top of the iron bar where the pot hooks were fastened above the fireplace.\nThe source dating to 1686 tells of an event where the chief members of the parish were gathered together in a meeting. Ursula walked past the group running an errand for her mother, and the men stopped to mock her, calling out \"hag face\" and \"The Devil's bastard\". Ursula kept walking to continue her errands but as the men sat back down, the ruff on the neck of one of the principal yeomen transformed and a toilet seat clapped down around his neck. The man next to him began to laugh, and as he did the hat he was wearing was suddenly replaced with a chamber pot. The gathered members of the parish began to laugh loudly enough that the Master of the house came running to see what was happening; when he tried to run through the door, he found himself blocked by a large pair of horns that had grown suddenly from his head. The source reports that the strange occurrences reverted to normal shortly afterwards, and that the townspeople took them as a sign not to publicly mock Ursula.\nAdulthood.\nAs Ursula grew so did her knowledge of plants and herbs and she became an invaluable resource for the townspeople as a herbalist. The respect she earned from her work gave her the opportunity to expand her social circle and it was then she met the local carpenter Toby Shipton.\nWhen Ursula was 24 years old she and Toby Shipton were married. From this point on Ursula adopted her husband's surname and became Mother Shipton. The people in town were shocked at their union and whispered of how he must have been bewitched to marry her.\nAbout a month into her marriage a neighbour came to the door and asked for her help, saying she had left her door open and a thief had come in and stole a new smock and petticoat. Without hesitation Mother Shipton calmed her neighbour and said she knew exactly who stole the clothing and would retrieve it the next day. The next morning Mother Shipton and her neighbour went to the market cross. The woman who had stolen the clothing couldn't stop herself from putting the smock on over her clothes, the petticoat in her hand, and marching through town. When she arrived at the market cross she began dancing and danced straight for Mother Shipton and her neighbour all the while singing \"I stole my Neighbours Smock and Coat, I am a Thief, and here I show't.\" When she reached Mother Shipton she took off the smock, handed it over, curtsied and left.\nTwo years later, in 1514, Toby Shipton died, and the town believed Ursula to have been responsible for his death. The grief of losing her husband and the harsh words of the town prompted Ursula Shipton to move into the woods, and the same cave she had been born in, for peace. Here she continued to create potions and herbal remedies for people. Mother Shipton's name slowly became more and more well known, and people would travel great distances to see her and receive potions and spells.\nAs her popularity grew she grew bolder and revealed she could see the future. She started by making small prophecies involving her town and the people within, and as her prophecies came true she began telling prophecies of the monarchy and the future of the world. In 1537 King Henry VIII wrote a letter to the Duke of Norfolk where he mentions a \"witch of York\", believed by some to be a reference to Shipton.\nProphecies.\nRiver Ouse.\n\"Water shall come over Ouse Bridge, and a windmill shall be set upon a Tower, and a Elm Tree shall lie at every man's door\".The River Ouse was the river next to York, and Ouse Bridge was the bridge over the river. This prophecy meant nothing to the people of York until the town got a piped water system. The system brought water across Ouse Bridge in pipes to a windmill that drew up the water into the pipes. The pipes they used were made out of Elm trees and the pipes came to every man's door delivering water throughout the town.\"Before Ouse Bridge and Trinity Church meet, what is built in the day shall fall in the night, till the highest stone in the church be the lowest stone of the bridge.\"Not long after Mother Shipton uttered this prophecy did a huge storm fall on York. During the storm the steeple on the top of Trinity Church fell and a portion of the Ouse Bridge was destroyed and swept away by the river. Later when making repairs to the bridge, pieces that had previously been the steeple of the church were used as the foundation of the new section of the bridge. Effectively making Trinity Church and the Ouse Bridge what was built in the day and fell in the night, and the steeple from Trinity Church, the highest stone, be the foundation of the bridge, the lowest stone of the bridge.\nProphecy of the end of times.\nThe most famous claimed edition of Mother Shipton's prophecies foretells many modern events and phenomena. Widely quoted today as if it were the original, it contains over a hundred prophetic rhymed couplets. But the language is notably non-16th century. This edition includes the now-famous lines:&lt;poem&gt;\n\"The world to an end shall come\"\n\"In eighteen hundred and eighty one.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nThis version was not published until 1862. In 1873 Charles Hindley of Brighton admitted to \"Notes and Queries\" that he had composed the rhyme and ten others added to the 1862 edition.\nThis fictional prophecy was published over the years with different dates and in (or about) several countries. The booklet \"The Life and Prophecies of Ursula Sontheil better known as Mother Shipton\" (1920s, and repeatedly reprinted) predicted the world would end in 1991. (In the late 1970s, many news articles were published about Mother Shipton and her prophecy that the world would end\u2014these accounts said it would occur in 1981.)\nTechnology.\nAmong other well-known lines from Charles Hindley's fictional version (often quoted as if they were original) are:\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"Carriages without horses shall go;\n\"And accidents fill the world with woe...\n\"Iron in the water shall float,\n\"As easy as a wooden boat.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nThese lines hint at inventions not known in Shipton's time\u2014but a reality in Hindley's\u2014such as trains and iron ships, as well as at events such as wars and conflicts.\nHistoricity.\nBased on contemporary references to her and countless resources detailing the events of her life, historians believe Mother Shipton was a real woman, born in 1488 to an orphan fifteen-year-old girl named Agatha Soothtale in a cave in North Yorkshire outside of the town Knaresborough. Based on how every contemporary record of her from the time references her appearance, she probably suffered from a hunchback and a large crooked nose, although much else regarding her appearance is conjecture. She made potions, herbal remedies, cast spells and prophesied the future.\nIn a possible reference to her existence, in 1537 Yorkshire, while Catholic people were rebelling against the dissolution of Catholic monasteries, Henry VIII wrote a letter to the Duke of Norfolk where he refers to a \"witch of York\". It is believed that this letter is the earliest reference to the real Mother Shipton who would have been prophesying about Henry VIII at this time. In 1666 Samuel Pepys recorded in his diaries that, whilst surveying the damage to London caused by the 1666 Great Fire in the company of the Royal family, he heard them discuss Mother Shipton's prophecy of the event.\nThe earliest account of Mother Shipton's prophecies was published in 1641, eighty years after her death. The story goes that the document of Mother Shipton's life was recorded by a woman named Joane Waller who heard the story as a young girl and transcribed it as Mother Shipton spoke of her life. Mother Shipton never wrote anything down or published anything during her lifetime.\nThe cave where she lived is known as England's oldest tourist attraction and for hundreds of years people have trekked to see the cave where she was born. This cave's water has a mineral content so high anything placed in the pool will slowly be covered in layers of stone. Tourists will place items in the pool to later return and see it turned to stone. It is assumed that many of her prophecies were never written down, and many legends and prophecies accredited to her were created after her death to enhance the folk legend she had become.\nLegacy.\nThe figure of Mother Shipton accumulated considerable folklore and legendary status. Her name became associated with many tragic events and strange goings-on recorded in the UK, North America and Australia throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Many fortune-tellers used her effigy and statue, presumably for purposes of association marketing. Many English pubs were named after her. Only two survive, one near her purported birthplace in Knaresborough and the other in Portsmouth. The latter has a statue of her above the door.\nA caricature of Mother Shipton was used in early pantomime. Her appearance in pantomime was mentioned in a song from Yorkshire that was transcribed in the 18th century, and which reads (in part): \"Of all the pretty pantomimes/ That have been seen or sung in rhimes,/Since famous Johnny Rich's times,/There's none like Mother Shipton.\" \nThe Mother Shipton moth (\"Callistege mi\") is named after her. Each wing's pattern resembles a hag's head in profile.\nA fundraising campaign was started in 2013 to raise \u00a335,000 to erect a statue of Shipton in Knaresborough. Completed in October 2017, the statue sits on a bench in the town's Market Square close to a statue of John Metcalf, an 18th-century road engineer known as Blind Jack.\nMother Shipton is referred to in Daniel Defoe's \"A Journal of the Plague Year\" (1722), referring to the year 1665, when the bubonic plague erupted in London: \n\"These terrors and apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish, and wicked things, which they wanted not a sort of people really wicked to encourage them to: and this was running about to fortune-tellers, cunning-men, and astrologers to know their fortune, or, as it is vulgarly expressed, to have their fortunes told them, their nativities calculated, and the like... And this trade grew so open and so generally practised that it became common to have signs and inscriptions set up at doors: 'Here lives a fortune-teller', 'Here lives an astrologer', 'Here you may have your nativity calculated', and the like; and Friar Bacon's brazen-head, which was the usual sign of these people's dwellings, was to be seen almost in every street, or else the sign of Mother Shipton...\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32280", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32280", "title": "US Coast Guard", "text": ""}
{"id": "32281", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32281", "title": "U.S. Coast Guard", "text": ""}
{"id": "32282", "revid": "1041004589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32282", "title": "Unchaste", "text": ""}
{"id": "32283", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32283", "title": "German submarine U-74", "text": "U-74 may refer to one of the following German submarines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "32284", "revid": "1098778750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32284", "title": "Ulrich Zwingli", "text": ""}
{"id": "32285", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32285", "title": "German submarine U-2511", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-2511\" was a Type XXI submarine of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II. The \"Elektroboot\" submarine was laid down on 7 July 1944 at the Blohm &amp; Voss yard at Hamburg, launched on 2 September 1944, and commissioned on 29 September 1944 under the command of \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Adalbert Schnee.\nDesign.\nLike all Type XXI submarines, \"U-2511\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of (o/a), a beam of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two MAN SE supercharged six-cylinder M6V40/46KBB diesel engines each providing , two Siemens-Schuckert GU365/30 double-acting electric motors each providing , and two Siemens-Schuckert silent running GV232/28 electric motors each providing .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a submerged speed of . When running on silent motors the boat could operate at a speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate at for ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-2511\" was fitted with six torpedo tubes in the bow and four C/30 anti-aircraft guns. She could carry 23 torpedoes or 17 torpedoes and 12 naval mine. The complement was five officers and 52 men.\nService history.\nAfter training with 31st U-boat Flotilla, \"U-2511\" was transferred to 11th U-boat Flotilla at Bergen, Norway, for front-line service on 15 March 1945.\n\"U-2511\" conducted one patrol. On the evening of 30 April 1945 (coincidentally the date of Hitler's death), \"U-2511\" set out from Bergen, Norway for the Caribbean, but on 4 May Schnee received the end-of-the-war cease-fire order. The commander of \"U-2511\" claimed the U-boat had a British cruiser in her sights on 4 May when news of the German cease-fire was received. He further claimed she made a practice attack before leaving the scene undetected.\nFate.\nOn 17 June 1945, \"U-2511\" was transferred from Bergen, and arrived at Londonderry Port on 21 June for Operation Deadlight. The U-boat was sunk on 7 January 1946 at 7:40 pm in position . She was sunk by gunfire after her towing cable parted.\nThe wreck lies at a depth . She had been visited by divers at least three times, in 1999 and 2001, and circa 2012 for 'Dig WW2 with Dan Snow', revealing she is largely intact except for a large blast hole caused by the shellfire that sank her.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32286", "revid": "48648218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32286", "title": "Ukulele", "text": "Musical instrument of the guitar family\nThe ukulele ( ; ), also called a uke (informally), is a member of the lute (ancient guitar) family of instruments. The ukulele is of Portuguese origin and was popularized in Hawaii. The tone and volume of the instrument vary with size and construction. Ukuleles commonly come in four sizes: soprano, concert, tenor, and baritone.\nUkuleles generally have four nylon strings tuned to GCEA (except baritone, which is normally tuned DGBE). They have 16\u201322 frets depending on the size.\nHistory.\nDeveloped in the 1880s, the ukulele is based on several small, guitar-like instruments of Portuguese origin, the , and , introduced to the Hawaiian Islands by Portuguese immigrants from Madeira, the Azores, and Cape Verde. Three immigrants in particular, Madeiran cabinet makers Manuel Nunes, Jos\u00e9 do Esp\u00edrito Santo, and Augusto Dias, are generally credited as the first ukulele makers. Two weeks after they disembarked from the SS \"Ravenscrag\" in late August 1879, the \"Hawaiian Gazette\" reported that \"Madeira Islanders recently arrived here, have been delighting the people with nightly street concerts.\"\nOne of the most important factors in establishing the ukulele in Hawaiian music and culture was the ardent support and promotion of the instrument by King Kal\u0101kaua. A patron of the arts, he incorporated it into performances at royal gatherings.\nIn the Hawaiian language the word ukulele roughly translates as 'jumping flea', perhaps because of the movement of the player's fingers. Legend attributes it to the nickname of Englishman Edward William Purvis, one of King Kal\u0101kaua's officers, because of his small size, fidgety manner, and playing expertise. One of the earliest appearances of the word \"ukulele\" in print (in the sense of a stringed instrument) is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art's \"Catalogue of the Crosby Brown Collection of Musical Instruments of All Nations\" published in 1907. The catalog describes two ukuleles from Hawaii\u2014one that is similar in size to a modern soprano ukulele, and one that is similar to a tenor (see ).\nCanada.\nIn the 1960s, educator J. Chalmers Doane dramatically changed school music programs across Canada, using the ukulele as an inexpensive and practical teaching instrument to foster musical literacy in the classroom. At its peak, 50,000 schoolchildren and adults learned the ukulele through the Doane program. \"Ukulele in the Classroom\", a revised program created by James Hill and Doane in 2008, is a staple of music education in Canada.\nJapan.\nThe ukulele arrived in Japan in 1929 after Hawaiian-born Yukihiko Haida returned to the country upon his father's death and introduced the instrument. Haida and his brother Katsuhiko formed the Moana Glee Club, enjoying rapid success in an environment of growing enthusiasm for Western popular music, particularly Hawaiian and jazz. During World War II, authorities banned most music from the West, but fans and players kept it alive in secret, and it resumed popularity after the war. In 1959, Haida founded the Nihon Ukulele Association. Japan has since become a second home for Hawaiian musicians and ukulele virtuosos.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBritish singer and comedian George Formby was a ukulele player, though he often played a banjolele, a hybrid instrument consisting of an extended ukulele neck with a banjo resonator body. Demand surged in the new century because of its relative simplicity and portability. Another British ukulele player was Tony Award-winner Tessie O'Shea, who appeared in numerous movies and stage shows, and was twice on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", including the night The Beatles debuted in 1964.\nThe Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain tours globally, and the George Formby Society, established in 1961, continues to hold regular conventions.\nGeorge Harrison, Paul McCartney, and John Lennon all played the ukulele.&lt;ref name=\"Jackson_8/5/2021\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Harrison, who was a Formby fan, was a great lover of the instrument and often gave them to friends, including Tom Petty, whom he taught to play.&lt;ref name=\"Whatley_4/20/2020\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nUnited States mainland.\nPre\u2013World War II.\nThe ukulele was popularized for a stateside audience during the Panama\u2013Pacific International Exposition, held from spring to autumn of 1915 in San Francisco. The Hawaiian Pavilion featured a guitar and ukulele ensemble, George E. K. Awai and his Royal Hawaiian Quartet, along with ukulele maker and player Jonah Kumalae. The popularity of the ensemble with visitors launched a fad for Hawaiian-themed songs among Tin Pan Alley songwriters. The ensemble also introduced both the lap steel guitar and the ukulele into U.S. mainland popular music, where it was taken up by vaudeville performers such as Roy Smeck and Cliff \"Ukulele Ike\" Edwards. On April 15, 1923, at the Rivoli Theater in New York City, Smeck appeared, playing the ukulele, in \"Stringed Harmony\", a short film made in the DeForest Phonofilm sound-on-film process. On August 6, 1926, Smeck appeared playing the ukulele in a short film \"His Pastimes\", made in the Vitaphone sound-on-disc process, shown with the feature film \"Don Juan\" starring John Barrymore.\nThe ukulele soon became an icon of the Jazz Age. Like guitar, basic ukulele skills can be learned fairly easily, and this highly portable, relatively inexpensive instrument was popular with amateur players throughout the 1920s, as evidenced by the introduction of uke chord tablature into the published sheet music for popular songs of the time (a role that was supplanted by the guitar in the early years of rock and roll). A number of mainland-based stringed-instrument manufacturers, among them Regal, Harmony, and especially Martin, added ukulele, banjolele, and tiple lines to their production to take advantage of the demand.\nThe ukulele also made inroads into early country music or old-time music parallel to the then-popular mandolin. It was played by Jimmie Rodgers and Ernest V. Stoneman, as well as by early string bands, including Cowan Powers and his Family Band, Da Costa Woltz's Southern Broadcasters, Walter Smith and Friends, The Blankenship Family, The Hillbillies, and The Hilltop Singers.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nFrom the late 1940s to the late 1960s, plastics manufacturer Mario Maccaferri turned out about 9 million inexpensive ukuleles. The ukulele remained popular, appearing in many jazz songs throughout the 50s, '60s, and '70s. Much of the instrument's popularity (particularly the baritone size) was cultivated by Arthur Godfrey on \"The Arthur Godfrey Show\" on television. In 1959 the Ukulele made an iconic appearance played by Marilyn Monroe as the character \"Sugar Kane\" in the movie Some Like It Hot, notably during the band's rendition of Runnin' Wild. Singer-musician Tiny Tim became closely associated with the instrument after playing it on his 1968 hit \"Tiptoe Through the Tulips\".\nThe ukulele had what is considered a hibernation period from the 1960s, as the small acoustic instrument was unable to compete with the big, popular sound of rock 'n' roll.\nThe Ukulele Revival.\nThe Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain are widely thought to be behind the so called Ukulele Revival. Formed in 1985 by George Hinchcliffe and Kitty Lux, this group began to prove that the ukulele could be more than just a toy, even performing intricate guitar solos and unexpected tunes. From then and into the late 1990s, interest in the instrument reawakened. During the 1990s, new manufacturers began producing ukuleles and a new generation of musicians took up the instrument. Jim Beloff set out to promote the instrument in the early 1990s and created over two dozen ukulele music books featuring modern music and classic ukulele pieces.\nAll-time best-selling Hawaiian musician Israel Kamakawiwo\u02bbole helped repopularize the instrument, in particular with his 1993 reggae-rhythmed medley of \"Over the Rainbow\" and \"What a Wonderful World\", used in films, television programs, and commercials. The song reached number 12 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot Digital Tracks chart the week of January 31, 2004.\nThe creation of YouTube helped revive the popularity of the ukulele. One of the first videos to go viral was Jake Shimabukuro's ukulele rendition of George Harrison's \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\". The video quickly went viral, and as of September 2020, had received over 17 million views.\nIn recent years, the ukulele has also been used increasingly in music education, sometimes replacing the recorder as first musical instrument. The ukulele is used both as a solo instrument and also in ensemble pieces for two or more instruments, such as Markus Rathey's song arrangements for three ukuleles.\nConstruction.\nThe ukulele is generally made of wood, though variants have been composed partially or entirely of plastic or other materials. Cheaper ukuleles are generally made from plywood or laminated woods, in some cases with a soundboard of a tonewood such as spruce. More expensive ukuleles are made of solid hardwoods such as mahogany. The traditionally preferred wood for ukuleles is a type of acacia endemic to Hawaii, called \"koa\".\nTypically, ukuleles have a figure-eight body shape similar to that of a small acoustic guitar. They are also often seen in nonstandard shapes, such as cutaway and oval, usually called a \"pineapple\" ukulele (see image below), invented by the Kamaka Ukulele company, or a boat-paddle shape, and occasionally a square shape, often made out of an old wooden cigar box.\nThese instruments usually have four strings; some strings may be paired in courses, giving the instrument a total of six or eight strings (primarily for greater strumming volume.) The strings themselves were originally made of catgut. Modern ukuleles use strings made from nylon polymers, synthetic gut, or fluorocarbon or wound strings composed of a (typically) nylon core wound with metal or polymers, including aluminium and silver-plated copper.\nInstruments with six or eight strings in four courses are often called taropatches, or taropatch ukuleles. They were once common in the concert size, but now the tenor size is more common for six-string taropatch ukuleles. The six-string, four-course version, has two single and two double courses, and is sometimes called a \"lili\u2018u\", though this name also applies to the eight-string version. Eight-string baritone taropatches exist, and 5-string tenors have also been made.\nSize and range.\nCommon types of ukuleles include soprano (standard ukulele), concert, tenor, and baritone. Less common are the sopranino (also called piccolo, bambino, or \"pocket uke\"), bass, and contrabass ukuleles. Other types of ukuleles include banjo ukuleles and electric ukuleles. Of the standard ukuleles, the soprano, often called \"standard\" in Hawaii, is the second smallest and was the original size. The concert size was developed in the 1920s as an enhanced soprano, slightly larger and louder with a deeper tone. Shortly thereafter, the tenor was created, having more volume and a deeper bass tone. The baritone (resembling a smaller tenor guitar) was created in the 1940s, and the contrabass and bass are recent innovations (2010 and 2014, respectively).\nThe following chart shows the range of notes of standard ukulele types. Note that the range varies with the tuning and size of the instruments. The examples shown in the chart reflect the range of each instrument from the lowest standard tuning to the highest fret in the highest standard tuning.\nTuning.\nOne of the most common tunings for the standard or soprano ukulele is C6 tuning: G4\u2013C4\u2013E4\u2013A4, which is often remembered by the notes in the \"My dog has fleas\" jingle (see sidebar). The G string is tuned an octave higher than might be expected, so this is often called \"high G\" tuning. This is known as a \"reentrant tuning\"; it enables uniquely close-harmony chording.\nMore rarely used with the soprano ukulele (but more common on larger sizes) is C6 linear tuning, or \"low G\" tuning, which has the G in sequence an octave lower: G3\u2013C4\u2013E4\u2013A4, which is equivalent to playing the top four strings (DGBE) of a guitar with a capo on the fifth fret.\nAnother common tuning for the soprano ukulele is the higher string-tension D6 tuning (or simply D tuning), A4\u2013D4\u2013F\u266f4\u2013B4, one step higher than the G4\u2013C4\u2013E4\u2013A4 tuning. Once considered standard, this tuning was commonly used during the Hawaiian music boom of the early 20th century, and is often seen in sheet music from this period, as well as in many method books through the 1980s. D6 tuning is said by some to bring out a sweeter tone in some ukuleles, generally smaller ones. D6 tuning with a low fourth string, A3\u2013D4\u2013F\u266f4\u2013B4, is sometimes called \"Canadian tuning\" after its use in the Canadian school system, mostly on concert or tenor ukuleles, and extensive use by James Hill and J. Chalmers Doane.\nWhether C6 or D6 tuning should be the \"standard\" tuning is a matter of long and ongoing debate. There are historic and popular ukulele methods that have used each.\nFor the concert and tenor ukuleles, both reentrant and linear C6 tunings are standard; linear tuning in particular is widely used for the tenor ukulele, more so than for the soprano and concert instruments.\nThe baritone ukulele usually uses linear G6 tuning: D3\u2013G3\u2013B3\u2013E4, the same as the highest four strings of a standard 6-string guitar.\nBass ukuleles are tuned similarly to the bass guitar and double bass: E1\u2013A1\u2013D2\u2013G2 for U-Bass style instruments (sometimes called contrabass), or an octave higher, E2\u2013A2\u2013D3\u2013G3, for Ohana type metal-string basses.\nSopranino ukulele tuning is less standardized. They are usually tuned re-entrant, but frequently at a higher pitch than C; for example, re-entrant G6 tuning: D5\u2013G4\u2013B4\u2013E5.\nAs is commonly the case with string instruments, other tunings may be preferred by individual players. For example, special string sets are available to tune the baritone ukulele in linear C6. Some players tune ukuleles like other four-string instruments such as the mandolin, Venezuelan cuatro, or dotara. Ukuleles may also be tuned to open tunings, similar to the Hawaiian slack-key style.\nRelated instruments.\nUkulele varieties include hybrid instruments such as the guitalele (also called guitarlele), banjo ukulele (also called banjolele), harp ukulele, lap steel ukulele, and the ukelin. It is very common to find ukuleles mixed with other stringed instruments because of the number of strings and the easy playing ability. There is also an electrically amplified variant of the ukulele. The resonator ukulele produces sound by one or more spun aluminum cones (resonators) instead of the wooden soundboard, giving it a distinct and louder tone. The Tahitian ukulele, another variant, is usually carved from a single piece of wood, and does not have a hollow soundbox, although the back is open. The Tahitian ukulele generally has eight strings made from fishing line, tuned the same as a Hawaiian ukulele in four courses, although the middle two courses are an octave higher than its Hawaiian cousin. Inspired by the Tahitian ukulele, there is the Motu Nui variant, from France, which has just four strings made from fishing line and the hole in the back is designed to produce a wah-wah effect. Mario Maccaferri invented an automatic chording device for the ukulele, called Chord Master.\nClose cousins of the ukulele include the Portuguese forerunners, the \"cavaquinho\" (also commonly known as \"machete\" or \"braguinha\") and the slightly larger \"raj\u00e3o\". Other relatives include the Venezuelan cuatro, the Colombian \"tiple\", the \"timple\" of the Canary Islands, the Spanish \"vihuela\", the Mexican requinto jarocho, and the Andean \"charango\" traditionally made of an armadillo shell. In Indonesia, a similar Portuguese-inspired instrument is the kroncong.\nUke Bass is close cousin to leona, a traditional bass instrument in son jarocho genre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32287", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32287", "title": "Upright bass", "text": ""}
{"id": "32288", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32288", "title": "Usability testing", "text": "Technique in user-centered interaction design\nUsability testing is a technique used in user-centered interaction design to evaluate a product by testing it on users. This can be seen as an irreplaceable usability practice, since it gives direct input on how real users use the system. It is more concerned with the design intuitiveness of the product and tested with users who have no prior exposure to it. Such testing is paramount to the success of an end product as a fully functioning application that creates confusion amongst its users will not last for long. This is in contrast with usability inspection methods where experts use different methods to evaluate a user interface without involving users.\nUsability testing focuses on measuring a human-made product's capacity to meet its intended purposes. Examples of products that commonly benefit from usability testing are food, consumer products, websites or web applications, computer interfaces, documents, and devices. Usability testing measures the usability, or ease of use, of a specific object or set of objects, whereas general human\u2013computer interaction studies attempt to formulate universal principles.\nWhat it is not.\nSimply gathering opinions on an object or a document is market research or qualitative research rather than usability testing. Usability testing usually involves systematic observation under controlled conditions to determine how well people can use the product. However, often both qualitative research and usability testing are used in combination, to better understand users' motivations/perceptions, in addition to their actions.\nRather than showing users a rough draft and asking, \"Do you understand this?\", usability testing involves watching people trying to \"use\" something for its intended purpose. For example, when testing instructions for assembling a toy, the test subjects should be given the instructions and a box of parts and, they should be asked to assemble the toy, rather than just comment on the parts of materials. Instruction phrasing, illustration quality, and the toy's design all affect the assembly process.\nHistory.\nUsability testing didn't start with websites and apps. It first emerged through the study of how people used machines in the 1940s, such as airplane controls during World War II. Later, in the 1980s, when personal computers became the norm, a new field known as Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) established usability testing as a standard practice in technology design.\nIn the 1990s, people began setting up special labs where they could observe individuals using computers and identify areas where they were experiencing difficulties. As the internet and smartphones gained popularity in the 2000s and 2010s, usability testing expanded to websites and apps. It began to occur online, allowing companies to test with people from anywhere.\nUsability testing has become a standard part of product design, particularly in fast-moving technology environments. New tools, remote testing, and emerging technologies, such as AI and virtual reality, make the process faster and more sophisticated. Still, the objective remains the same: to make technology easier for real people.\nUsability Labs.\nUsability labs, in contrast to field testing or remote testing, are spaces designed specifically for conducting usability testing. They provide conditions conducive to testing through access to resources, testing equipment, and a dedicated space which can be formatted and upgraded according to the specifications of the usability test. A typical usability lab often includes a desk, chair, and computer, along with any additional elements specific to the test.\nMethods.\nSetting up a usability test involves carefully creating a scenario, or a realistic situation, wherein the person performs a list of tasks using the product being tested while observers watch and take notes (dynamic verification). Usability testing follows a structured process that allows researchers to observe how users interact with a product while performing tasks. In addition to direct observation, researcher may use several other test instruments such as scripted instructions, paper prototypes, and pre- and post-test questionnaires are also used to gather feedback on the product being tested (static verification). For example, to test the attachment function of an e-mail program, a scenario would describe a situation where a person needs to send an e-mail attachment, and asking them to undertake this task. The aim is to observe how people function in a realistic manner, so that developers can identify the problem areas and fix them. Techniques popularly used to gather data during a usability test include think aloud protocol, co-discovery learning and eye tracking.\nGuerrilla Usability Testing.\nGuerrilla usability testing, also known as hallway testing or pop-up research, is a quick and cheap method of usability testing that consists of short informal interviews in public spaces that are frequented by people most likely to use your product or service.\nThis unorthodox method is primarily used in the early stages of a design process to receive direct and immediate feedback from a wide cross-section of the general public; significantly cutting the cost and testing time required in traditional testing. Guerrilla testing can help designers to identify core usability problems with the product and target \"specific user groups that may be difficult to reach - for example, care home residents, homeless people or A level students.\"\nThis type of testing is an example of convenience sampling and thus the results are potentially biased. Limitations of this method can include: in-comprehensive data, lack of willing participants, or needing to be paired with other methods of usability testing to produce more detailed results.\nRemote usability testing.\nIn a scenario where usability evaluators, developers and prospective users are located in different countries and time zones, conducting a traditional lab usability evaluation creates challenges both from the cost and logistical perspectives. These concerns led to research on remote usability evaluation, with the user and the evaluators separated over space and time. Remote testing, which facilitates evaluations being done in the context of the user's other tasks and technology, can be either synchronous (moderated) or asynchronous (unmoderated). The former involves real time one-on-one communication between the evaluator and the user, while the latter involves the evaluator and user working separately. The increasing need for remote testing stems from its capacity to improve accessibility to essential services and communication for individuals with limited mobility, due to factors-such as susceptibility to illness, disability, or limited transportation resources. Numerous tools are available to address the needs of both these approaches.\nSynchronous (moderated) usability testing methodologies involve video conferencing or employ remote application sharing tools such as WebEx. WebEx is a commonly used technology to conduct a synchronous remote usability test. This form of remote testing allows for real-time communication between moderators and participants, which is valuable to older adults or individuals who are homebound due to health, mobility, or environmental conditions. Unlike traditional usability testing, remote is able to reach participants who deal with the complications listed. As dependency on remote services such as telemedicine, online shopping, and remote banking continue to grow, moderated remote usability testing plays a crucial role in ensuring these technologies meet the needs of high-risk populations while being cost-efficient.\nHowever, synchronous remote testing may lack the immediacy and sense of \"presence\" desired to support a collaborative testing process. Moreover, managing interpersonal dynamics across cultural and linguistic barriers may require approaches sensitive to the cultures involved. Other disadvantages include having reduced control over the testing environment and the distractions and interruptions experienced by the participants in their native environment. One of the newer methods developed for conducting a synchronous remote usability test is by using virtual worlds.\nAsynchronous (unmoderated) methodologies include automatic collection of user's click streams, user logs of critical incidents that occur while interacting with the application and subjective feedback on the interface by users. Similar to an in-lab study, an asynchronous remote usability test is task-based and the platform allows researchers to capture data automatically by auto-logging which collects pages visited, time spent on each page, and interface actions. Hence, for many large companies, this allows researchers to better understand visitors' intents when visiting a website or mobile site. The tests are carried out in the user's own environment (rather than labs) helping further simulate real-life scenario testing. By eliminating the need to conduct individual sessions, asynchronous remote testing can include a larger number of participants, making it more flexible and cost-effective than traditional lad-based studies. Conducting usability testing asynchronously has also become prevalent and allows testers to provide feedback in their free time and from the comfort of their own home.\nExpert review.\nExpert review is another general method of usability testing. As the name suggests, this method relies on bringing in experts with experience in the field (possibly from companies that specialize in usability testing) to evaluate the usability of a product.\nA heuristic evaluation or usability audit is an evaluation of an interface by one or more human factors experts. Evaluators measure the usability, efficiency, and effectiveness of the interface based on usability principles, such as the 10 usability heuristics originally defined by Jakob Nielsen in 1994.\nNielsen's usability heuristics, which have continued to evolve in response to user research and new devices, include:\nAutomated expert review.\nSimilar to expert reviews, automated expert reviews provide usability testing but through the use of programs given rules for good design and heuristics. Though an automated review might not provide as much detail and insight as reviews from people, they can be finished more quickly and consistently. The idea of creating surrogate users for usability testing is an ambitious direction for the artificial intelligence community.\nA/B testing.\nIn web development and marketing, A/B testing or split testing is an experimental approach to web design (especially user experience design), which aims to identify changes to web pages that increase or maximize an outcome of interest (e.g., click-through rate for a banner advertisement). As the name implies, two versions (A and B) are compared, which are identical except for one variation that might impact a user's behavior. Version A might be the one currently used, while version B is modified in some respect. For instance, on an e-commerce website the purchase funnel is typically a good candidate for A/B testing, as even marginal improvements in drop-off rates can represent a significant gain in sales. Significant improvements can be seen through testing elements like copy text, layouts, images and colors.\nAreas typically improved through A/B testing include algorithms, visuals, and workflow processes.\nMultivariate testing or bucket testing is similar to A/B testing but tests more than two versions at the same time.\nNumber of participants.\nIn the early 1990s, Jakob Nielsen, at that time a researcher at Sun Microsystems, popularized the concept of using numerous small usability tests\u2014typically with only five participants each\u2014at various stages of the development process. His argument is that, once it is found that two or three people are totally confused by the home page, little is gained by watching more people suffer through the same flawed design. \"Elaborate usability tests are a waste of resources. The best results come from testing no more than five users and running as many small tests as you can afford.\"\nThe claim of \"Five users is enough\" was later described by a mathematical model which states for the proportion of uncovered problems U\nformula_1\nwhere p is the probability of one subject identifying a specific problem and n the number of subjects (or test sessions). This model shows up as an asymptotic graph towards the number of real existing problems (see figure below).\nIn later research Nielsen's claim has been questioned using both empirical evidence and more advanced mathematical models. Two key challenges to this assertion are:\nNielsen does not advocate stopping after a single test with five users; his point is that testing with five users, fixing the problems they uncover, and then testing the revised site with five different users is a better use of limited resources than running a single usability test with 10 users. In practice, the tests are run once or twice per week during the entire development cycle, using three to five test subjects per round, and with the results delivered within 24 hours to the designers. The number of users actually tested over the course of the project can thus easily reach 50 to 100 people. Research shows that user testing conducted by organisations most commonly involves the recruitment of 5-10 participants.\nIn the early stage, when users are most likely to immediately encounter problems that stop them in their tracks, almost anyone of normal intelligence can be used as a test subject. In stage two, testers will recruit test subjects across a broad spectrum of abilities. For example, in one study, experienced users showed no problem using any design, from the first to the last, while naive users and self-identified power users both failed repeatedly. Later on, as the design smooths out, users should be recruited from the target population.\nWhen the method is applied to a sufficient number of people over the course of a project, the objections raised above become addressed: The sample size ceases to be small and usability problems that arise with only occasional users are found. The value of the method lies in the fact that specific design problems, once encountered, are never seen again because they are immediately eliminated, while the parts that appear successful are tested over and over. While it's true that the initial problems in the design may be tested by only five users, when the method is properly applied, the parts of the design that worked in that initial test will go on to be tested by 50 to 100 people.\nExamples.\nExample A: Medical Device Testing (2015).\nThe 2015 edition of Usability Testing of Medical Devices defines usability testing as: \"a means to determine whether a given medical device will meet its intended users' needs and preferences,\" and as a way \"to judge if a medical device is more or less vulnerable to dangerous use errors.\" \nThe testing process typically proceeds in this fashion:\nThrough this process, researchers gain critical insight into human interaction with medical devices, enabling designers to correct usability issues prior to the products' release.\nExample B: Apple Computers (1982).\nA 1982 Apple Computer manual for developers advised on usability testing:\nApple advised developers, \"You should begin testing as soon as possible, using drafted friends, relatives, and new employees\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our testing method is as follows. We set up a room with five to six computer systems. We schedule two to three groups of five to six users at a time to try out the systems (often without their knowing that it is the software rather than the system that we are testing). We have two of the designers in the room. Any fewer, and they miss a lot of what is going on. Any more and the users feel as though there is always someone breathing down their necks.\nDesigners must watch people use the program in person, because\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ninety-five percent of the stumbling blocks are found by watching the body language of the users. Watch for squinting eyes, hunched shoulders, shaking heads, and deep, heart-felt sighs. When a user hits a snag, he will assume it is \"on account of he is not too bright\": he will not report it; he will hide it ... Do not make assumptions about why a user became confused. Ask him. You will often be surprised to learn what the user thought the program was doing at the time he got lost.\nEducation.\nUsability testing has been a formal subject of academic instruction in different disciplines. Usability testing is important to composition studies and online writing instruction (OWI). Scholar Collin Bjork argues that usability testing is \"necessary but insufficient for developing effective OWI, unless it is also coupled with the theories of digital rhetoric.\"\nSurvey research.\nSurvey products include paper and digital surveys, forms, and instruments that can be completed or used by the survey respondent alone or with a data collector. Usability testing is most often done in web surveys and focuses on how people interact with survey, such as navigating the survey, entering survey responses, and finding help information. Usability testing complements traditional survey pretesting methods such as cognitive pretesting (how people understand the products), pilot testing (how will the survey procedures work), and expert review by a subject matter expert in survey methodology.\nIn translated survey products, usability testing has shown that \"cultural fitness\" must be considered in the sentence and word levels and in the designs for data entry and navigation, and that presenting translation and visual cues of common functionalities (tabs, hyperlinks, drop-down menus, and URLs) help to improve the user experience.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32289", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32289", "title": "U.S.A.", "text": ""}
{"id": "32290", "revid": "29239079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32290", "title": "Cabinet of the United States", "text": "Principal advisory body to the president of the United States\nThe Cabinet of the United States is the principal official advisory body to the president of the United States. The Cabinet generally meets with the president in a room adjacent to the Oval Office in the West Wing of the White House. The president chairs the meetings but is not formally a member of the Cabinet. The vice president of the United States serves in the Cabinet by statute. The heads of departments, appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate, are members of the Cabinet, and acting department heads also participate in Cabinet meetings whether or not they have been officially nominated for Senate confirmation. Members of the Cabinet are political appointees and administratively operate their departments. As appointed officers heading federal agencies, these Cabinet secretaries are executives with full administrative control over their respective departments. The president may designate heads of other agencies and non-Senate-confirmed members of the Executive Office of the President as members of the Cabinet.\nThe Cabinet does not have any collective executive powers or functions of its own, and no votes need to be taken. There are 26 members: the vice president, 15 department heads, and 10 Cabinet-level officials, all except three of whom require Senate confirmation. During Cabinet meetings, the members sit in the order in which their respective department was created, with the earliest being closest to the president and the newest farthest away. However, the vice president does not have any authority over the president's cabinet and all cabinet officials directly report to the president.\nThe members of the Cabinet whom the president appoints serve at the pleasure of the president. The president can dismiss them from office at any time without the approval of the Senate or downgrade their Cabinet membership status. The vice president of the United States is elected, not appointed, and serves in the Cabinet by statute. Functionally, the president may give wide latitude to department heads and often it is legally possible for a Cabinet member to exercise certain powers over their own department against the president's wishes, but in practice this is highly unusual due to the threat of dismissal. The president also has the authority to organize the Cabinet, such as instituting committees. Like all federal public officials, Cabinet members are also subject to impeachment by the House of Representatives and trial in the Senate for \"treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors\".\nThe Constitution of the United States does not explicitly establish a Cabinet. The Cabinet's role is inferred from the language of the Opinion Clause (ArticleII, Section2, Clause1) of the Constitution for principal officers of departments to provide advice to the president. Additionally, the Twenty-fifth Amendment authorizes the vice president, together with a majority of the heads of the executive departments, to declare the president \"unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office\". The heads of the executive departments are\u2014if eligible\u2014in the presidential line of succession. The highest-ranking cabinet member (after the vice president) is the secretary of state, who is fourth in line of succession to the president, following the vice president, the speaker of the House of Representatives and the president pro tempore of the Senate.\nHistory.\nThe tradition of the Cabinet arose out of the debates at the 1787 Constitutional Convention regarding whether the president would exercise executive authority solely or collaboratively with a cabinet of ministers or a privy council. As a result of the debates, the Constitution (ArticleII, Section1, Clause1) vests \"the executive power\" in the president singly, and authorizes\u2014but does not compel\u2014the president (ArticleII, Section2, Clause1) to \"require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices\". The Constitution does not specify what the executive departments will be, how many there will be, or what their duties will be.\nGeorge Washington, the first president of the United States, organized his principal officers into a Cabinet, and it has been part of the executive branch structure ever since. Washington's Cabinet consisted of five members: himself, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of War Henry Knox and Attorney General Edmund Randolph. Vice President John Adams was not included in Washington's Cabinet because the position was initially regarded as a legislative officer (president of the Senate). Furthermore, until there was a vacancy in the presidency (which did not occur until the death of William Henry Harrison in 1841) it was not certain that a vice president would be allowed to serve as president for the duration of the original term as opposed to merely acting as president until new elections could be held. It was not until the 20th century that vice presidents were regularly included as members of the Cabinet and came to be regarded primarily as a member of the executive branch.\nPresidents have used Cabinet meetings of selected principal officers but to widely differing extents and for different purposes. During President Abraham Lincoln's administration, Secretary of State William H. Seward advocated the use of a parliamentary-style Cabinet government. However, Lincoln rebuffed Seward. While Woodrow Wilson was a professor he also advocated a parliamentary-style Cabinet but after becoming president he did not implement it in his administration. In recent administrations, Cabinets have grown to include key White House staff in addition to department and various agency heads. President Ronald Reagan formed seven sub-cabinet councils to review many policy issues, and subsequent presidents have followed that practice.\nFederal law.\nIn \u00a0https:// with regard to delegation of authority by the president, it is provided that \"nothing herein shall be deemed to require express authorization in any case in which such an official would be presumed in law to have acted by authority or direction of the president.\" This pertains directly to the heads of the executive departments as each of their offices is created and specified by statutory law (hence the presumption) and thus gives them the authority to act for the president within their areas of responsibility without any specific delegation.\nUnder \u00a0https:// (also known as the 1967 Federal Anti-Nepotism statute), federal officials are prohibited from appointing their immediate family members to certain governmental positions, including those in the Cabinet.\nUnder the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, an administration may appoint acting heads of department from employees of the relevant department. These may be existing high-level career employees, from political appointees of the outgoing administration (for new administrations), or sometimes lower-level appointees of the administration.\nConfirmation process.\nThe heads of the executive departments and all other federal agency heads are nominated by the president and then presented to the Senate for confirmation or rejection by a simple majority (although before the use of the \"nuclear option\" during the 113th United States Congress, they could have been blocked by filibuster, requiring cloture to be invoked by &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20445 supermajority to further consideration). If approved, they receive their commission scroll, are sworn in, and begin their duties. When the Senate is not in session, the president can appoint acting heads of the executive departments, and do so at the beginning of their term.\nAn elected vice president does not require Senate confirmation, nor does the White House chief of staff, which is an appointed staff position of the Executive Office of the President.\nSalary.\nThe heads of the executive departments and most other senior federal officers at cabinet or sub-cabinet level receive their salary under a fixed five-level pay plan known as the Executive Schedule, which is codified in Title\u00a05 of the United States Code. Twenty-one positions, including the heads of the executive departments and others, receiving LevelI pay are listed in \u00a0https://, and those forty-six positions on LevelII pay (including the number two positions of the executive departments) are listed in \u00a0https://. As of January\u00a02025[ [update]], the LevelI annual pay was set at $250,600.\nThe annual salary of the vice president is $235,300. The salary level was set by the Government Salary Reform Act of 1989, which provides an automatic cost of living adjustment for federal employees. The vice president receives the same pension as other members of Congress as the president of the Senate.\nCurrent Cabinet and Cabinet-rank officials.\nThe individuals listed below were nominated by President Donald Trump to form his Cabinet and were confirmed by the United States Senate on the date noted or are serving as acting department heads by his request, pending the confirmation of his nominees.\nVice president and the heads of the executive departments.\nThe Cabinet permanently includes the vice president and the heads of 15 executive departments, listed here according to their order of succession to the presidency. The speaker of the House and the president \"pro tempore\" of the Senate follow the vice president and precede the secretary of state in the order of succession, but both are in the legislative branch and are not part of the Cabinet.\nCabinet-level officials.\nThe president may designate additional positions to be members of the Cabinet, which can vary under each president. They are not in the line of succession and are not necessarily officers of the United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32291", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32291", "title": "Universal House of Justice", "text": "Elected institution governing the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community\nThe Universal House of Justice is the nine-member supreme ruling body of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. It was envisioned by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, as an institution that could legislate on issues not already addressed in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings, providing flexibility for the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith to adapt to changing conditions. It was first elected in 1963, and subsequently every five years, by delegates consisting of the members of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed National Spiritual Assemblies throughout the world.\nThe Universal House of Justice, as the head of the religion, has provided direction to the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community primarily through a series of multi-year plans, as well as through annual messages delivered during the Ridv\u00e1n festival. The messages have focused on increasing the number of Local Spiritual Assemblies, translating Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed literature, establishing Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Centres, completing Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Houses of Worship, holding international conferences, and developing educational systems to enhance literacy, the role of women, spirituality for children and youth, family life, social and economic development, and communal worship. The Universal House of Justice has also played a role in responding to systemic persecution of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in Iran by garnering worldwide media attention.\nThe books and documents published by the Universal House of Justice are considered authoritative, and its decisions are regarded as infallible by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Although it is empowered to legislate on matters that are not addressed in the Baha'i holy writings, the Universal House of Justice has rarely exercised this function.\nThe Seat of the Universal House of Justice and its members reside in Haifa, Israel, on the slope of Mount Carmel. The most recent election was 29 April 2023. Although all other elected and appointed roles in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith are open to men and women, membership on the Universal House of Justice is male-only; the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings indicate that the reason for this will become clear in the future.\nHistory.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, in his book the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" first ordains the institution of the House of Justice and defines its functions. The institution's responsibilities are also expanded on and referred to in several other of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's writings including in his \"Tablets of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\". In those writings Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h writes that the Universal House of Justice would assume authority over the religion and would consider matters that had not been covered by himself; he stated that the members of the institution would be assured of divine inspiration, and have the regard for all peoples and safe-guard their honour.\nLater, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's son and successor, in his Will and Testament, elaborated on its functioning, its composition and outlined the method for its election. He wrote that the Universal House of Justice would be under Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's protection, that it would be freed of error, and that obedience to it would be obligatory. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 first used the term \"Universal House of Justice\" to distinguish the supreme body from those local 'Houses of Justice' to be established in each community, and the secondary 'Houses of Justice,' which are the current Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed National Spiritual Assemblies. He also stated that the institution's decisions could be by majority vote, but that unanimous decisions were preferred, and that it would be elected by the members of the secondary Houses of Justice. He also confirmed Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's statements that although women and men are spiritually equal, membership on the Universal House of Justice would be confined to men, and that the wisdom behind this decision would become apparent in the future (see Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith and gender equality).\nWhile both \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and Shoghi Effendi, heads of the religion after Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, considered establishing the Universal House of Justice, they both declined to do so. Shoghi Effendi's reason was due to his belief in the weakness of the existing Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed institutions \u2014 there were a very limited number of national spiritual assemblies and local spiritual assemblies. Thus during his lifetime, Shoghi Effendi prepared for the election of the Universal House of Justice, by establishing a strong administrative structure at the local and national levels. In 1951 when there were 9 National Spiritual Assemblies, Shoghi Effendi appointed members to the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council, and described it as an embryonic international House of Justice. After Shoghi Effendi's unexpected death in 1957, the Hands of the Cause directed the affairs of the religion and announced that the election of the Universal House of Justice would occur in 1963 at the end of the Ten Year Crusade, an international teaching plan instituted by Shoghi Effendi.\nIn 1961 the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council was changed to an elected body, with members of all National Spiritual Assemblies voting for its members. Then in April 1963, the first Universal House of Justice was elected, six years after the passing of Shoghi Effendi, by 56 National Spiritual Assemblies. The date of the election coincided with the completion of the Ten Year Crusade and also with the first centenary anniversary of the public declaration of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h in the Garden of Ridv\u00e1n in April 1863. Since then the Universal House of Justice has acted as the head of the religion \u2013 individual members have no authority, only as an assembly do they have authority. In 1972 it published its constitution.\nElection process.\nThe Universal House of Justice is elected through secret ballot and plurality vote in a three-stage election by adult Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds throughout the world. The House of Justice is elected without nominations or campaigning and all adult male members of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith are eligible for election to the House. The body is elected every five years during a convention of the members of the various National Spiritual Assemblies (NSAs) across the world. Each member of the various NSAs, who were themselves elected by the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of their country, votes for nine adult male Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Absentee ballots are mailed or carried by delegates. The nine people who have the most votes are elected onto the Universal House of Justice.\nIn 2013, in addition to those present in Haifa, approximately 400 absentee ballots were cast, taking the total number of ballots cast to over 1500. This election marked the 50th anniversary of the first election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963.\nThe most recent full election was on 29 April 2023.\nResponsibilities.\nThe Universal House of Justice today guides the growth and development of the global Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community. The general functions of the Universal House of Justice, as stated by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, include to promulgate the cause of God, to preserve the law, to administer social affairs, to educate the people's souls, to guarantee the education of children, to make the entire world prosperous (eliminate extremes of wealth and poverty), and to care for the elderly and the ill who are in poverty. According to the constitution of the Universal House of Justice, some of its powers and duties include:\nFurthermore, the Universal House of Justice is instructed by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h to exert a positive influence on the general welfare of humankind, to promote a permanent peace among the nations of the world, ensure the \"training of peoples, the up building of nations, the protection of man and the safeguarding of his honour\".\nJurisdiction.\nThe Universal House of Justice is also given the responsibility of adapting the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as society progresses, and is thus given the power to legislate on matters not explicitly covered in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed sacred texts. While the Universal House of Justice is authorized to change or repeal its own legislation as conditions change, it cannot dissolve or change any of the laws which are explicitly written in the sacred texts.\nPublications.\nWhile being empowered to legislate on matters, the Universal House of Justice has, since its inception in 1963, limited its exercise of this function. Instead, it has provided general guidance to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds around the world, and not specific laws; this guidance has generally been through the form of letters and messages, much like Shoghi Effendi's communications. Many of these letters have been published in compilations and are regarded as divinely empowered and authoritative; its decisions are considered infallible to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. The letters cover a range of subjects including teaching, prayer, family life, education and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed administration. Each year on the first day of Ridv\u00e1n (which may be on April 20 or 21 depending on the dating of Naw-R\u00faz), the Universal House of Justice addresses a message to the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, known as Ridv\u00e1n messages.\nThe institution has also collected and published extracts from the writings of the B\u00e1b, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. In 1992 they published the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's book of laws in English, and further translations have since been published. During these endeavours, they established departments of research and archives at the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre, and, as of 1983, have collected over 60,000 letters of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and Shoghi Effendi. These collected works have been used as a base in the deliberations of the Universal House of Justice.\nStatement addressed \"To the Peoples of the World\", presented to over 160 heads of state and government. It outlines the major prerequisites for, as well as the obstacles working against, the establishment of world peace.\nMarking the centenary of the passing of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, this statement is a review of his life and work.\nA statement on the concept of global prosperity in the context of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Teachings.\nReview of the 20th century, focusing on dramatic changes and the emergence of the Baha'i Faith from obscurity.\nLetter addressing the disease of sectarian hatreds. Calling on all religious movements to \"rise above fixed conceptions inherited from a distant past.\"\nDocument primarily intended for a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed audience, in which it identifies as a major challenge for the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community the inculcation of the principle of the oneness of religion and the overcoming of religious prejudices.\nCurrent members.\nThe current members of the Universal House of Justice are:\nPast members.\nThe initial election in 1963 drew five members from the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council, two from the National Spiritual Assembly (NSA) of the United States, one from the NSA of Britain, and one from the NSA of India.\nMembers are entered in the table under the year when they were first elected. Starting with the first election in 1963, regular elections of the entire membership have occurred every five years, and there have been five by-elections, noted in the table with \"italics\", in 1982, 1987, 2000, 2005 and 2010. All members have continued to serve after re-election in subsequent conventions. Amoz Gibson, Charles Wolcott, and Adib Taherzadeh died while in office while the other former members were allowed to retire.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32292", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32292", "title": "U.S. Army", "text": ""}
{"id": "32293", "revid": "50632993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32293", "title": "United States Secretary of State", "text": "Head of the United States Department of State\nThe United States secretary of state (SecState) is a member of the executive branch of the federal government of the United States and the head of the U.S. Department of State. \nThe secretary of state serves as the principal advisor to the president of the United States on all foreign affairs matters. The secretary carries out the president's foreign policies through the U.S Department of State, which includes the Foreign Service, Civil Service, and U.S. Agency for International Development. The office holder is the second-highest-ranking member of the president's cabinet, after the vice president, and ranks fourth in the presidential line of succession; and is first amongst cabinet secretaries.\nCreated in 1789 with Thomas Jefferson as its first office holder, the secretary of state represents the United States to foreign countries, and is therefore considered analogous to a secretary or minister of foreign affairs in other countries. The secretary of state is nominated by the president of the United States and, following a confirmation hearing before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, is confirmed by the Senate. The secretary of state, along with the secretary of the treasury, secretary of defense, and attorney general, are generally regarded as the four most crucial Cabinet members because of the importance of their respective departments.\nThe secretary of state is a Level I position in the Executive Schedule and thus earns the salary prescribed for that level, $250,600 as of January\u00a02025[ [update]].\nHistory.\nThe secretary of state originates from the government under the Articles of Confederation. The Congress of the Confederation established the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1781 and created the office of secretary of foreign affairs. After the Constitution of the United States was ratified, the 1st United States Congress reestablished the department, renaming it the Department of State, and created the office of secretary of state to lead the department.\nDuties and responsibilities.\nThe stated duties of the secretary of state are to supervise the United States foreign service and immigration policy and administer the Department of State. The secretary must also advise the president on U.S. foreign matters such as the appointment of diplomats and ambassadors, advising the president of the dismissal and recall of these people. The secretary of state can conduct negotiations, interpret, and terminate treaties relating to foreign policy. The secretary also can participate in international conferences, organizations, and agencies as a representative of the United States. The secretary communicates issues relating to the U.S. foreign policy to Congress and citizens. The secretary also provides services to U.S. citizens living or traveling abroad such as providing credentials in the form of passports. Doing this, the secretary also ensures the protection of citizens, their property, and interests in foreign countries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat are the Qualifications of a Secretary of State? He ought to be a Man of universal Reading in Laws, Governments, History. Our whole terrestrial Universe ought to be summarily comprehended in his Mind.\n \u2014John Adams\nSecretaries of state also have domestic responsibilities. Most of the historical domestic functions of the Department of State were gradually transferred to other agencies by the late 19th century as part of various administrative reforms and restructurings. Those that remain include storage and use of the Great Seal, performance of protocol functions for the White House, and the drafting of certain proclamations. The secretary also negotiates with the individual states over the extradition of fugitives to foreign countries. Under federal law, the resignation of a president or of a vice president is valid only if declared in writing, in an instrument delivered to the office of the secretary of state. Accordingly, the resignations of President Richard Nixon and of Vice President Spiro Agnew were formalized in instruments delivered to then-Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.\nAlthough they have historically decreased over time, Congress may occasionally add to the responsibilities of the secretary of state. One such instance occurred in 2014, when Congress passed the Sean and David Goldman International Child Abduction Prevention and Return Act which mandated actions the secretary of state must take in order to facilitate the return of abducted children from nations who are party to the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.\nAs the highest-ranking member of the cabinet, the secretary of state is the third-highest official of the executive branch of the U.S. federal government, after the president and vice president, and is fourth in line to succeed the presidency, after the vice president, the speaker of the House of Representatives, and the president pro tempore of the Senate.\nSix past secretaries of state\u00a0\u2013 Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, John Quincy Adams, Van Buren and Buchanan\u00a0\u2013 have gone on to be elected president. Others, including Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, Lewis Cass, John C. Calhoun, John M. Clayton, William L. Marcy, William Seward, Edward Everett, Jeremiah S. Black, James Blaine, Elihu B. Washburne, Thomas F. Bayard, John Sherman, Walter Q. Gresham, William Jennings Bryan, Philander C. Knox, Charles Evans Hughes, Elihu Root, Cordell Hull, Edmund Muskie, Alexander Haig, John Kerry, Hillary Clinton, and Marco Rubio have also campaigned as presidential candidates, either before or after their term of office as secretary of state, but were ultimately unsuccessful. The position of secretary of state has therefore been viewed to be a consolation prize for failed presidential candidates.\nTimeline of secretaries of state.\nThe following timeline depicts the progression of the secretaries of state and their political affiliation at the time of assuming office.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32295", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32295", "title": "Universal Coordinated Time", "text": ""}
{"id": "32298", "revid": "50494174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32298", "title": "USS Constitution", "text": "1797 heavy frigate of the U.S. Navy\nUSS \"Constitution, also known as Old Ironsides\", is a three-masted wooden-hulled heavy frigate of the United States Navy. She is the world's oldest commissioned warship still afloat. She was launched in 1797, one of six original frigates authorized for construction by the Naval Act of 1794 and the third constructed. The name \"Constitution\" was among ten names submitted to President George Washington by Secretary of War Timothy Pickering in March or May for the frigates that were to be constructed. Joshua Humphreys designed the frigates to be the young Navy's capital ships, and so \"Constitution\" and her sister ships were larger and more heavily armed and built than standard frigates of the period. She was built at Edmund Hartt's shipyard in the North End of Boston, Massachusetts. Her first duties were to provide protection for American merchant shipping during the Quasi-War with France and to defeat the Barbary pirates in the First Barbary War.\n\"Constitution\" is most noted for her actions during the War of 1812 with the United Kingdom, when she captured numerous British merchantmen and five warships: , , , , and . The capture of \"Guerriere\" earned her the nickname \"Old Ironsides\", adding on the public adoration that had repeatedly saved her from scrapping. She continued to serve as flagship in the Mediterranean and African squadrons, and she circled the world in the 1840s. During the American Civil War, she served as a training ship for the United States Naval Academy. She carried American artwork and industrial displays to the Paris Exposition of 1878.\n\"Constitution\" was retired from active service in 1881 and served as a receiving ship until being designated a museum ship in 1907. In 1934, she completed a three-year, 90-port tour of the nation. She sailed under her own power for her 200th birthday in 1997, and again in August 2012 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of her victory over \"Guerriere\".\n\"Constitution\"'s stated mission today is to promote understanding of the Navy's role in war and peace through educational outreach, historical demonstration, and active participation in public events as part of the Naval History and Heritage Command. As she is a fully commissioned Navy ship, her crew of 75 officers and sailors participate in ceremonies, educational programs, and special events while keeping her open to visitors year round and providing free tours. The officers and crew are all active-duty Navy personnel, and the assignment is considered to be special duty. She is usually berthed at Pier 1 of the former Charlestown Navy Yard at one end of Boston's Freedom Trail.\nConstruction.\nIn 1785, Barbary pirates, most notably from Algiers, began to seize American merchant vessels in the Mediterranean Sea. In 1793 alone, 11 American ships were captured and their crews and stores held for ransom. To combat this problem, proposals were made for warships to protect American shipping, resulting in the Naval Act of 1794. The act provided funds to construct six frigates, but it included a clause that the construction of the ships would be halted if peace terms were agreed to with Algiers.\nJoshua Humphreys' design was unusual for the time, being deep, long on keel, narrow of beam (width), and mounting very heavy guns. The design called for diagonal\nriders intended to restrict hogging and sagging while giving the ships extremely heavy planking. This design gave the hull a greater strength than a more lightly built frigate. It was based on Humphrey's realization that the fledgling United States could not match the European states in the size of their navies, so they were designed to overpower any other frigate while escaping from a ship of the line.\nHer keel was laid down on 1 November 1794 at Edmund Hartt's shipyard in Boston, Massachusetts, under the supervision of Captain Samuel Nicholson, master shipwright Colonel George Claghorn and Foreman Prince Athearn of the Martha's Vineyard Athearns. \"Constitution\"'s hull was built thick and her length between perpendiculars was , with a length overall and a width of . In total, of trees were needed for her construction. Primary materials consisted of pine and oak, including southern live oak which was cut from Gascoigne Bluff and milled near St. Simons Island, Georgia. Enslaved workers were used to harvest the oak used for the ship's construction, and USS Constitution Museum historian Carl Herzog stated that \"the forced labor of enslaved people was an expediency that Navy officials and contractors saw as fundamental to the job... enslaved people were essential to the construction of naval warships built to secure the very American freedoms they were denied.\"\nA peace accord was announced between the United States and Algiers in March 1796, and construction was halted in accordance with the Naval Act of 1794. After some debate and prompting by President Washington, Congress agreed to continue funding the construction of the three ships nearest to completion: , , and \"Constitution\". \"Constitution\"'s launching ceremony on 20 September 1797 was attended by President John Adams and Massachusetts Governor Increase Sumner. Upon launch, she slid down the ways only before stopping; her weight had caused the ways to settle into the ground, preventing further movement. An attempt two days later resulted in only of additional travel before the ship again stopped. After a month of rebuilding the ways, \"Constitution\" finally slipped into Boston Harbor on 21 October 1797, with Captain James Sever breaking a bottle of Madeira wine on her bowsprit.\nArmament.\n\"Constitution\" was rated as a 44-gun frigate, but she often carried more than 50 guns at a time. Ships of this era had no permanent battery of guns such as those of modern Navy ships. The guns and cannons were designed to be completely portable and often were exchanged between ships as situations warranted. Each commanding officer outfitted armaments to his liking, taking into consideration factors such as the overall weight of stores, complement of personnel aboard, and planned routes to be sailed. Consequently, the armaments on ships changed often during their careers, and records of the changes were not generally kept.\nIn a letter dated 14 November 1804, she is listed as having thirty 24-pounders, fourteen 12-pounders, and eight 32-pounder carronades, a total of 52 guns.\nDuring the War of 1812, \"Constitution\"'s battery of guns typically consisted of 30 long 24-pounder (11\u00a0kg) cannons, with 15 on each side of the gun deck. Twenty-two more guns were deployed on the spar deck, 11 per side, each a short 32-pounder (15\u00a0kg) carronade. Four chase guns were also positioned, two each at the stern and bow.\nAll of the guns aboard \"Constitution\" have been replicas since her 1927\u20131931 restoration. Most were cast in 1930, but two carronades on the spar deck were cast in 1983. A modern saluting gun was hidden inside the forward long gun on each side during her 1973\u20131976 restoration in order to restore the capability of firing ceremonial salutes.\nQuasi-War.\nPresident John Adams ordered all Navy ships to sea in late May 1798 to patrol for armed French ships and to free any American ship captured by them. \"Constitution\" was still not ready to sail and eventually had to borrow sixteen 18-pound (8.2\u00a0kg) cannons from Castle Island before finally being ready. She put to sea on the evening of 22 July 1798 with orders to patrol the Eastern seaboard between New Hampshire and New York. She was patrolling between Chesapeake Bay and Savannah, Georgia, a month later when Nicholson found his first opportunity for capturing a prize. They intercepted \"Niger\" off the coast of Charleston, South Carolina, on 8 September, a 24-gun ship sailing with a French crew en route from Jamaica to Philadelphia which claimed to have been under British orders. Nicholson had the crewmen imprisoned, perhaps not understanding his orders correctly. He placed a prize crew aboard \"Niger\" and brought her into Norfolk, Virginia.\n\"Constitution\" sailed south again a week later to escort a merchant convoy, but her bowsprit was severely damaged in a gale and she returned to Boston for repairs. In the meantime, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Stoddert determined that \"Niger\" had been operating under British orders as claimed, and the ship and her crew were released to continue their voyage. The American government paid a restitution of $11,000 () to Britain.\n\"Constitution\" departed Boston on 29 December. Nicholson reported to Commodore John Barry, who was flying his flag in \"United States\" near the island of Dominica for patrols in the West Indies. On 15 January 1799, \"Constitution\" intercepted the English merchantman \"Spencer\", which had been taken prize by the French frigate \"L'Insurgente\" a few days prior. Technically, \"Spencer\" was a French ship operated by a French prize crew; but Nicholson released the ship and her crew the next morning, perhaps hesitant after the affair with \"Niger\". Upon joining Barry's command, \"Constitution\" almost immediately had to put in for repairs to her rigging due to storm damage, and it was not until 1 March that anything of note occurred. On this date, she encountered , whose captain was an acquaintance of Nicholson's. The two agreed to a sailing duel, which the English captain was confident he would win. But after 11 hours of sailing, \"Santa Margarita\" lowered her sails and admitted defeat, paying off the bet with a cask of wine to Nicholson. Resuming her patrols, \"Constitution\" managed to recapture the American sloop \"Neutrality\" on 27 March. On 4 April 1799 she recaptured His Majesty's Packet \"Carteret\" that had been captured by the French on 29 March. Secretary Stoddert had other plans, however, and recalled \"Constitution\" to Boston. She arrived there on 14 May, and Nicholson was relieved of command.\nChange of command.\nCaptain Silas Talbot was recalled to duty to command \"Constitution\" and serve as Commodore of operations in the West Indies. After repairs and resupply were completed, \"Constitution\" departed Boston on 23 July with a destination of Saint-Domingue via Norfolk and a mission to interrupt French shipping. She departed Norfolk on 14 August. She recaptured the Hamberg ship \"Amelia\" from a French prize crew on 15 September, and Talbot sent the ship back to New York City with an American prize crew. The ship was sold but the Court ordered the money returned to her owners. \"Constitution\" arrived at Saint-Domingue on 15 October and rendezvoused with , , and . No further incidents occurred over the next six months, as French depredations in the area had declined. \"Constitution\" busied herself with routine patrols, and Talbot made diplomatic visits. On 2 February 1800 put men aboard an unidentified American schooner and had her sent to New York for possible illegal trading. It was not until April 1800 that Talbot investigated an increase in ship traffic near Puerto Plata, Santo Domingo, and discovered that the French privateer \"Sandwich\" had taken refuge there. On 8 May the squadron captured the sloop \"Sally\", and Talbot hatched a plan to capture \"Sandwich\" by utilizing the familiarity of \"Sally\" to allow the Americans access to the harbor. On 9 May her Tender \"Amphitheatre\" engaged a French privateer schooner that, after a short action, was run aground and abandoned by her crew. The privateer was captured and refloated and her two prizes, brig \"Nymph\" and schooner \"Esther\", were recaptured. First Lieutenant Isaac Hull led 90 sailors and Marines into Puerto Plata without challenge on 11 May, capturing \"Sandwich\" and spiking the guns of the nearby Spanish fort. However, it was later determined that \"Sandwich\" had been captured from a neutral port; she was returned to the French with apologies, and no prize money was awarded to the squadron.\nRoutine patrols again occupied \"Constitution\" for the next two months, until 13 July, when the mainmast trouble of a few months before recurred. The ship put into Cape Fran\u00e7ois for repairs. While leaving the roads of Cape Francois on 22 July she struck a reef and was pulled off 45 minutes later. With the terms of enlistment soon to expire for the sailors aboard her, she made preparations to return to the United States and was relieved of duty by \"Constellation\" on 23 July. \"Constitution\" escorted 12 merchantmen to Philadelphia on her return voyage, and on 25 August arrived in President Roads, off Boston, and put in quarantine. She received new masts, sails, and rigging. Even though peace was imminent between the United States and France, \"Constitution\" again sailed for the West Indies on 17 December as squadron flagship, rendezvousing with , , , , and . Although no longer allowed to pursue French shipping, the squadron was assigned to protect American shipping and continued in that capacity until April 1801, when arrived with orders for the squadron to return to the United States. \"Constitution\" returned to Boston. Captain Talbot resigned his Commission 8 September 1801 and Lt.Isaac Hull was ordered to take command in a letter dated 21 September 1801. She was finally scheduled for an overhaul, Captain Samuel Nicholson was ordered to supervise the work in a letter dated 1 April 1802. It was canceled in a letter dated 18 June with the crew ordered discharged, Capt. Nicholson was relieved by her Sailing Master Nathaniel Harden. She was placed in ordinary on 2 July 1802.\nFirst Barbary War.\nThe United States paid tribute to the Barbary States during the Quasi-War to ensure that American merchant ships were not harassed and seized. In 1801, Yusuf Karamanli of Tripoli was dissatisfied that the United States was paying him less than they paid Algiers, and he demanded an immediate payment of $250,000 (). In response, Thomas Jefferson sent a squadron of frigates to protect American merchant ships in the Mediterranean and to pursue peace with the Barbary States.\nThe first squadron under the command of Richard Dale in was instructed to escort merchant ships through the Mediterranean and to negotiate with leaders of the Barbary States. A second squadron was assembled under the command of Richard Valentine Morris in . The performance of Morris's squadron was so poor, however, that he was recalled and subsequently dismissed from the Navy in 1803.\nCaptain Edward Preble ordered to take command of \"Constitution\" in a letter dated 14 May 1803 as his flagship and made preparations to command a new squadron for a third blockade attempt. She was recommissioned on 20 May. The copper sheathing on her hull needed to be replaced and Paul Revere supplied the copper sheets necessary for the job that took 14 days, ending on 25 June. She departed Boston on 14 August, and she encountered an unknown ship in the darkness on 6 September, near the Rock of Gibraltar. \"Constitution\" went to general quarters, then ran alongside the unknown ship. Preble hailed her, only to receive a hail in return. He identified his ship as the United States frigate \"Constitution\" but received an evasive answer from the other ship. Preble replied: \"I am now going to hail you for the last time. If a proper answer is not returned, I will fire a shot into you.\" The stranger returned, \"If you give me a shot, I'll give you a broadside.\" Preble demanded that the other ship identify herself and the stranger replied, \"This is His Britannic Majesty's ship \"Donegal\", 84 guns, Sir Richard Strachan, an English commodore.\" He then commanded Preble, \"Send your boat on board.\" Preble was now devoid of all patience and exclaimed, \"This is United States ship \"Constitution\", 44 guns, Edward Preble, an American commodore, who will be damned before he sends his boat on board of any vessel.\" And then to his gun crews: \"Blow your matches, boys!\" Before the incident escalated further, however, a boat arrived from the other ship and a British lieutenant relayed his captain's apologies. The ship was in fact not \"Donegal\" but instead \"HMS Maidstone\", a 32-gun frigate. \"Constitution\" had come alongside her so quietly that \"Maidstone\" had delayed answering with the proper hail while she readied her guns. This act began the strong allegiance between Preble and the officers under his command, known as \"Preble's boys\", as he had shown that he was willing to defy a presumed ship of the line.\n\"Constitution\" arrived at Gibraltar on 12 September, where Preble waited for the other ships of the squadron. His first order of business was to arrange a treaty with Sultan Slimane of Morocco, who was holding American ships hostage to ensure the return of two vessels that the Americans had captured. \"Constitution\" and departed Gibraltar on 3 October and arrived at Tangier on the 4th. \"Adams\" and arrived the next day. With four American warships in his harbor, the Sultan was glad to arrange the transfer of ships between the two nations, and Preble departed with his squadron on 14 October, heading back to Gibraltar.\nBattle of Tripoli Harbor.\n ran aground off Tripoli on 31 October under the command of William Bainbridge while pursuing a Tripoline vessel. The crew was taken prisoner; \"Philadelphia\" was refloated by the Tripolines and brought into their harbor. To deprive the Tripolines of their prize, Preble planned to destroy \"Philadelphia\" using the captured ship \"Mastico\", which was renamed . \"Intrepid\" entered Tripoli Harbor on 16 February 1804 under the command of Stephen Decatur, disguised as a merchant ship. Decatur's crew quickly overpowered the Tripoline crew and set \"Philadelphia\" ablaze.\nPreble withdrew the squadron to Syracuse, Sicily, and began planning for a summer attack on Tripoli. He procured a number of smaller gunboats that could move in closer to Tripoli than was feasible for \"Constitution\", given her deep draft. \"Constitution\", , , , , the six gunboats, and two bomb ketches arrived the morning of 3 August and immediately began operations. Twenty-two Tripoline gunboats met them in the harbor; \"Constitution\" and her squadron severely damaged or destroyed the Tripoline gunboats in a series of attacks over the coming month, taking their crews prisoner. \"Constitution\" primarily provided gunfire support, bombarding the shore batteries of Tripoli\u2014yet Karamanli remained firm in his demand for ransom and tribute, despite his losses.\nPreble outfitted \"Intrepid\" as a \"floating volcano\" with of gunpowder aboard in a final attempt of the season. She was to sail into Tripoli harbor and blow up in the midst of the corsair fleet, close under the walls of the city. \"Intrepid\" made her way into the harbor on the evening of 3 September under the command of Richard Somers, but she exploded prematurely, killing Somers and his entire crew of thirteen volunteers.\n\"Constellation\" and \"President\" arrived at Tripoli on the 9th with Samuel Barron in command; Preble relinquish his command of the squadron to Barron, who was senior in rank. On 11 September Barron ordered Capt. Stephen Decatur to relieve Preble as Captain so Preble could return to the US. \"Constitution\" was ordered to Malta on the 11th for repairs as she was very leaky, and, while en route, on 12 September, captured two Greek vessels attempting to deliver wheat into Tripoli. Also on the 12th, a collision with \"President\" severely damaged \"Constitution\"'s bow, stern, and figurehead of Hercules. The collision was attributed to an act of God in the form of a sudden change in wind direction.\nPeace treaty.\nOn 24 September Captain Stephan Decatur was ordered by Preble to sail to Malta and take command of \"Constitution\". Captain Decatur took command from Capt. Preble at Malta on 28 October and Capt. Preble took up quarters on shore. Captain John Rodgers assumed command of \"Constitution\" on 9 November 1804 while she underwent repairs and resupply in Malta. She resumed the blockade of Tripoli on 5 April 1805. On 25 April 1805 she captured a Tripoline privately owned armed xebec, along with two Neapolitan prizes that the xebec had captured. On 10 May 1805 she captured a ketch leaving Tripoli. Meanwhile, Commodore Barron gave William Eaton naval support to bombard Derne, while a detachment of US Marines under the command of Presley O'Bannon was assembled to attack the city by land. They captured it on 27 April. A peace treaty with Tripoli was signed aboard \"Constitution\" on 3 June, in which she embarked the crew members of \"Philadelphia\" and returned them to Syracuse. She was then dispatched to Tunis and arrived there on 30 July. Seventeen additional American warships had gathered in its harbor by 1 August: \"Congress\", \"Constellation\", \"Enterprise\", , , , , \"Nautilus\", \"Syren\", and eight gunboats. Negotiations went on for several days until a short-term blockade of the harbor finally produced a peace treaty on 14 August.\nRodgers remained in command of the squadron, sending warships back to the United States when they were no longer needed. Eventually, all that remained were \"Constitution\", \"Enterprise\", and \"Hornet\". They performed routine patrols and observed the French and Royal Navy operations of the Napoleonic Wars. Rodgers turned over the command of the squadron and \"Constitution\" to Captain Hugh G. Campbell on 29 May 1806.\nJames Barron sailed \"Chesapeake\" out of Norfolk on 15 May 1807 to replace \"Constitution\" as the flagship of the Mediterranean squadron, but he encountered , resulting in the \"Chesapeake\"\u2013\"Leopard\" affair and delaying the relief of \"Constitution\". \"Constitution\" continued patrols, unaware of the delay. She arrived in late June at Leghorn, where she took aboard the disassembled Tripoli Monument for transport back to the United States. Campbell learned the fate of \"Chesapeake\" when he arrived at M\u00e1laga, and he immediately began preparing \"Constitution\" and \"Hornet\" for possible war against Britain. The crew became mutinous upon learning of the delay in their relief and refused to sail any farther unless the destination was the United States. Campbell and his officers threatened to fire a cannon loaded with grapeshot at the crewmen if they did not comply, thereby putting an end to the conflict. Campbell and the squadron were ordered home on 18 August and set sail for Boston on 8 September, arriving there on 14 October. \"Constitution\" had been gone for more than four years.\nWar of 1812.\n\"Constitution\" was recommissioned in December with Captain John Rodgers again taking command to oversee a major refitting. She was overhauled at a cost just under $100,000; however, Rodgers inexplicably failed to clean her copper sheathing, leading him to later declare her a \"slow sailer\". She spent most of the following two years on training runs and ordinary duty. Isaac Hull took command in June 1810, and he immediately recognized that she needed her bottom cleaned. \"Ten waggon loads\" of barnacles and seaweed were removed.\nHull departed for France on 5 August 1811, transporting the new Ambassador Joel Barlow and his family; they arrived on 1 September. Hull remained near France and the Netherlands through the winter months, continually holding sail and gun drills to keep the crew ready for possible hostilities with the British. Tensions were high between the United States and Britain after the events of the \"Little Belt\" affair the previous May, and \"Constitution\" was shadowed by British frigates while awaiting dispatches from Barlow to carry back to the United States. They arrived home on 18 February 1812.\nWar was declared on 18 June and Hull put to sea on 12 July, attempting to join the five ships of a squadron under the command of Rodgers in \"President\". He sighted five ships off Egg Harbor, New Jersey, on 17 July and at first believed them to be Rodgers' squadron but, by the following morning, the lookouts determined that they were a British squadron out of Halifax: , , , , and . They had sighted \"Constitution\" and were giving chase.\nConstitution was becalmed and unable to run from the five British ships, but Hull acted on a suggestion from his First Lieutenant Charles Morris. He ordered the crew to put boats over the side to tow the ship out of range, using kedge anchors to draw the ship forward and wetting the sails to take advantage of every breath of wind. The British ships soon imitated the tactic of kedging and remained in pursuit. The resulting 57-hour chase in the July heat forced the crew of \"Constitution\" to employ myriad tactics to outrun the squadron, finally pumping overboard of drinking water. Cannon fire was exchanged several times, though the British attempts fell short or overshot their mark, including an attempted broadside from \"Belvidera\". On 19 July, \"Constitution\" pulled far enough ahead of the British that they abandoned the pursuit.\n\"Constitution\" arrived in Boston on 27 July and remained there just long enough to replenish her supplies. Hull sailed without orders on 2 August to avoid being blockaded in port, heading on a northeast route towards the British shipping lanes near Halifax and the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. \"Constitution\" captured three British merchantmen, which Hull burned rather than risk taking them back to an American port. On 16 August, he learned of a British frigate to the south and sailed in pursuit.\n\"Constitution\" vs. \"Guerriere\".\nA frigate was sighted on 19 August and subsequently determined to be (38) under Captain James Dacres with the words \"Not The Little Belt\" painted on her foretopsail. \"Guerriere\" opened fire upon entering range of \"Constitution\", doing little damage. After a few exchanges of cannon fire between the ships, Captain Hull maneuvered \"Constitution\" into an advantageous position within of \"Guerriere\". He then ordered a full double-loaded broadside of grape and round shot, which took out \"Guerriere\"'s mizzenmast. \"Guerriere\"'s maneuverability decreased with her mizzenmast dragging in the water, and she collided with \"Constitution\", entangling her bowsprit in \"Constitution\"'s mizzen rigging. This left only \"Guerriere\"'s bow guns capable of effective fire. Hull's cabin caught fire from the shots, but it was quickly extinguished. With the ships locked together, both Hull and Dacres ordered boarding parties into action, but the sea was heavy and neither party was able to board the opposing ship.\nAt one point, the two ships rotated together counter-clockwise, with \"Constitution\" continuing to fire broadsides. When the two ships pulled apart, the force of the bowsprit's extraction sent shock waves through \"Guerriere\"'s rigging. Her foremast collapsed, and that brought the mainmast down shortly afterward. \"Guerriere\" was now a dismasted, unmanageable hulk with close to a third of her crew wounded or killed, while \"Constitution\" remained largely intact. Dacres was eventually brought onto \"Constitution\" where he presented his sword to Hull as a sign of surrender, but Hull refused to accept it saying he could not accept the sword from a man who had fought so gallantly.\nHull had surprised the crew of \"Guerriere\" with his ship's heavier broadsides and sailing ability. Adding to their astonishment, many of \"Guerriere\"'s shots had rebounded harmlessly off \"Constitution\"'s hull. An American sailor reportedly exclaimed \"Huzzah! Her sides are made of iron!\" and \"Constitution\" acquired the nickname \"Old Ironsides\". The battle left \"Guerriere\" so badly damaged that she was not worth towing to port, and Hull ordered her to be burned the next morning, after transferring the British prisoners onto \"Constitution\". \"Constitution\" arrived back in Boston on 30 August, where Hull and his crew found that news of their victory had spread fast, and they were hailed as heroes.\n\"Constitution\" vs \"Java\".\nWilliam Bainbridge, senior to Hull, took command of \"Old Ironsides\" on 8 September and prepared her for another mission in British shipping lanes near Brazil, sailing with on 27 October. They arrived near S\u00e3o Salvador on 13 December, sighting in the harbor. \"Bonne Citoyenne\" was reportedly carrying $1.6 million in spice to England, and her captain refused to leave the neutral harbor lest he lose his cargo. \"Constitution\" sailed offshore in search of prizes, leaving \"Hornet\" to await the departure of \"Bonne Citoyenne\". On 29 December, she met with under Captain Henry Lambert. At the initial hail from Bainbridge, \"Java\" answered with a broadside that severely damaged \"Constitution\"'s rigging. She was able to recover, however, and returned a series of broadsides to \"Java\". A shot from \"Java\" destroyed \"Constitution\"'s helm (wheel), so Bainbridge directed the crew to steer her manually using the tiller for the remainder of the engagement. Bainbridge was wounded twice during the battle. \"Java\"'s bowsprit became entangled in \"Constitution\"'s rigging, as in the battle with \"Guerriere\", allowing Bainbridge to continue raking her with broadsides. \"Java\"'s foremast collapsed, sending her fighting top crashing down through two decks below.\nBainbridge drew off to make emergency repairs and re-approached \"Java\" an hour later. She was a shambles, an unmanageable wreck with a badly wounded crew, and she surrendered. Bainbridge determined that \"Java\" was far too damaged to retain as a prize and ordered her burned, but not before having her helm salvaged and installed on \"Constitution\". \"Constitution\" returned to S\u00e3o Salvador on 1 January 1813 to disembark the prisoners of \"Java\", where she met with \"Hornet\" and her two British prizes. Bainbridge ordered \"Constitution\" to sail for Boston on 5 January, being far away from a friendly port and needing extensive repairs, leaving \"Hornet\" behind to continue waiting for \"Bonne Citoyenne\" in the hopes that she would leave the harbor, though she did not. \"Java\" was the third British warship in three months to be captured by U.S. Navy, and \"Constitution\"'s victory prompted the British Admiralty to order all Royal Navy frigates not to engage the heavier American frigates one-on-one; only British ships of the line or squadrons were permitted to attack them. \"Constitution\" arrived in Boston on 15 February to even greater celebrations than Hull had received a few months earlier.\nMarblehead and blockade.\nBainbridge determined that \"Constitution\" required new spar deck planking and beams, masts, sails, and rigging, as well as replacement of her copper bottom. However, personnel and supplies were being diverted to the Great Lakes, causing shortages that kept her in Boston intermittently with her sister ships \"Chesapeake\", \"Congress\", and \"President\" for the majority of the year. Charles Stewart took command on 18 July and struggled to complete the construction and recruitment of a new crew, finally making sail on 31 December. She set course for the West Indies to harass British shipping and had captured five merchant ships and the 14-gun by late March 1814. She also pursued and HMS \"Pique\", though both ships escaped after realizing that she was an American frigate.\nHer mainmast split off the coast of Bermuda on 27 March, requiring immediate repair. Stewart set a course for Boston, where British ships and commenced pursuit on 3 April. Stewart ordered drinking water and food to be cast overboard to lighten her load and gain speed, trusting that her mainmast would hold together long enough for her to make her way into Marblehead, Massachusetts. The last item thrown overboard was the supply of spirits. Upon \"Constitution\"'s arrival in the harbor, the citizens of Marblehead rallied in support, assembling what cannons they possessed at Fort Sewall, and the British called off the pursuit. Two weeks later, \"Constitution\" made her way into Boston, where she remained blockaded in port until mid-December.\nHMS \"Cyane\" and HMS \"Levant\".\nCaptain George Collier of the Royal Navy received command of the 50-gun and was sent to North America to deal with the American frigates targeting British shipping. Meanwhile, Charles Stewart saw his chance to escape from Boston Harbor and made her good on the afternoon of 18 December, and \"Constitution\" again set course for Bermuda. Collier gathered a squadron consisting of \"Leander\", , and and set off in pursuit, but he was unable to overtake her. On 24 December, \"Constitution\" intercepted the merchantman \"Lord Nelson\" and placed a prize crew aboard. \"Constitution\" had left Boston not fully supplied, but \"Lord Nelson\"'s stores supplied a Christmas dinner for the crew.\n\"Constitution\" was cruising off Cape Finisterre on 8 February 1815 when Stewart learned that the Treaty of Ghent had been signed. He realized, however, that a state of war still existed until the treaty was ratified, and \"Constitution\" captured the British merchantman \"Susanna\" on 16 February; her cargo of animal hides was valued at $75,000.\nOn 20 February, \"Constitution\" sighted the small British ships \"Cyane\" and sailing in company and gave chase. \"Cyane\" and \"Levant\" began a series of broadsides against her, but Stewart outmaneuvered both of them and forced \"Levant\" to draw off for repairs. He concentrated fire on \"Cyane\", which soon struck her colors. \"Levant\" returned to engage \"Constitution\" but she turned and attempted to escape when she saw that \"Cyane\" had been defeated. \"Constitution\" overtook her and, after several more broadsides, she struck her colors. Stewart remained with his new prizes overnight while ordering repairs to all ships. \"Constitution\" had suffered little damage in the battle, though it was later discovered that she had twelve 32-pound British cannonballs embedded in her hull, none of which had penetrated. The trio then set a course for the Cape Verde Islands and arrived at Porto Praya on 10 March.\nThe next morning, Collier's squadron was spotted on a course for the harbor, and Stewart ordered all ships to sail immediately; he had been unaware until then of Collier's pursuit. \"Cyane\" was able to elude the squadron and make sail for America, where she arrived on 10 April, but \"Levant\" was overtaken and recaptured. Collier's squadron was distracted with \"Levant\" while \"Constitution\" made another escape from overwhelming forces.\n\"Constitution\" set a course towards Guinea and then west towards Brazil, as Stewart had learned from the capture of \"Susanna\" that was transporting gold bullion back to England, and he wanted her as a prize. \"Constitution\" put into Maranh\u00e3o on 2 April to offload her British prisoners and replenish her drinking water. While there, Stewart learned by rumor that the Treaty of Ghent had been ratified, and set course for America, receiving verification of peace at San Juan, Puerto Rico, on 28 April. He then set course for New York and arrived home on 15 May to large celebrations. \"Constitution\" emerged from the war undefeated, though her sister ships \"Chesapeake\" and \"President\" were not so fortunate, having been captured in 1813 and 1815 respectively. \"Constitution\" was moved to Boston and placed in ordinary in January 1816, sitting out the Second Barbary War.\nMediterranean Squadron.\nCharlestown Navy Yard's commandant Isaac Hull directed a refitting of \"Constitution\" to prepare her for duty with the Mediterranean Squadron in April 1820. They removed Joshua Humphreys' diagonal riders to make room for two iron freshwater tanks, and they replaced the copper sheathing and timbers below the waterline. At the direction of Secretary of the Navy Smith Thompson, she was also subjected to an unusual experiment in which manually operated paddle wheels were fitted to her hull. The paddle wheels were designed to propel her at up to if she was ever becalmed, by the crew using the ship's capstan. Initial testing was successful, but Hull and \"Constitution\"'s commanding officer Jacob Jones were reportedly unimpressed with paddle wheels on a US Navy ship. Jones had them removed and stowed in the cargo hold before he departed on 13 May 1821 for a three-year tour of duty in the Mediterranean. On 12 April 1823, she collided with the British merchant ship \"Bicton\" in the Mediterranean Sea, and \"Bicton\" sank with the loss of her captain.\n\"Constitution\" otherwise experienced an uneventful tour, sailing in company with and , until crew behavior during shore leave gave Jones a reputation as a commodore who was lax in discipline. The Navy grew weary of receiving complaints about the crews' antics while in port and ordered Jones to return. \"Constitution\" arrived in Boston on 31 May 1824, and Jones was relieved of command. Thomas Macdonough took command and sailed on 29 October for the Mediterranean under the direction of John Rodgers in . With discipline restored, \"Constitution\" resumed uneventful duty. Macdonough resigned his command for health reasons on 9 October 1825. \"Constitution\" put in for repairs during December and into January 1826, until Daniel Todd Patterson assumed command on 21 February. By August, she had been put into Port Mahon, suffering decay of her spar deck, and she remained there until temporary repairs were completed in March 1827. \"Constitution\" returned to Boston on 4 July 1828 and was placed in reserve.\nOld Ironsides.\n\"Constitution\" was built in an era when a ship's expected service life was 10 to 15 years. Secretary of the Navy John Branch made a routine order for surveys of ships in the reserve fleet, and commandant of the Charlestown Navy Yard Charles Morris estimated a repair cost of over $157,000 for \"Constitution\". On 14 September 1830, an article appeared in the Boston \"Advertiser\" which erroneously claimed that the Navy intended to scrap \"Constitution\". Two days later, the poem \"Old Ironsides\" by Oliver Wendell Holmes was published in the same newspaper and, soon, republished throughout the country. The poem ignited public indignation and inciting efforts to save \"Old Ironsides\" from the scrap yard. Secretary Branch approved the costs, and \"Constitution\" began a leisurely repair period while awaiting completion of the dry dock then under construction at the yard. In contrast to the efforts to save \"Constitution\", another round of surveys in 1834 found her sister ship \"Congress\" unfit for repair; she was unceremoniously broken up in 1835.\nOn 24 June 1833, \"Constitution\" entered dry dock. Captain Jesse Elliott, the new commander of the Navy yard, oversaw her reconstruction. \"Constitution\" had of hog in her keel and remained in dry dock until 21 June 1834. This was the first of many times that souvenirs were made from her old planking; Isaac Hull ordered walking canes, picture frames, and even a phaeton, which was presented to President Andrew Jackson.\nMeanwhile, Elliott directed the installation of a new figurehead of President Jackson under the bowsprit, which became a subject of much controversy due to Jackson's political unpopularity in Boston at the time. Elliot was a Jacksonian Democrat, and he received death threats. Rumors circulated about the citizens of Boston storming the navy yard to remove the figurehead themselves.\nA merchant captain named Samuel Dewey accepted a small wager as to whether he could complete the task of removal. Elliot had posted guards on \"Constitution\" to ensure the safety of the figurehead, but Dewey crossed the Charles River in a small boat, using the noise of thunderstorms to mask his movements, and managed to saw off most of Jackson's head. The severed head made the rounds between taverns and meeting houses in Boston until Dewey personally returned it to Secretary of the Navy Mahlon Dickerson; it remained on Dickerson's library shelf for many years. The addition of busts to her stern escaped controversy of any kind, depicting Isaac Hull, William Bainbridge, and Charles Stewart; the busts remained in place for the next 40 years.\nMediterranean and Pacific Squadrons.\nElliot was appointed captain of \"Constitution\" and got underway in March 1835 to New York, where he ordered repairs to the Jackson figurehead, avoiding a second round of controversy. Departing on 16 March \"Constitution\" set a course for France to deliver Edward Livingston to his post as Minister. She arrived on 10 April and began the return voyage on 16 May. She arrived back in Boston on 23 June, then sailed on 19 August to take her station as flagship in the Mediterranean, arriving at Port Mahon on 19 September. Her duty over the next two years was uneventful as she and \"United States\" made routine patrols and diplomatic visits. From April 1837 into February 1838, Elliot collected various ancient artifacts to carry back to America, adding various livestock during the return voyage. \"Constitution\" arrived in Norfolk on 31 July. Elliot was later suspended from duty for transporting livestock on a Navy ship.\nAs the flagship of the Pacific Squadron under the command of Captain Daniel Turner, she began her next voyage on 1 March 1839 with the duty of patrolling the western coast of South America. Often spending months in one port or another, she visited Valpara\u00edso, Callao, Paita, and Puna while her crew amused themselves with the beaches and taverns in each locality. The return voyage found her at Rio de Janeiro, where Emperor Pedro II of Brazil visited her about 29 August 1841. Departing Rio, she returned to Norfolk on 31 October. On 22 June 1842, she was recommissioned under the command of Foxhall Alexander Parker for duty with the Home Squadron. After spending months in port she put to sea for three weeks during December, then was again put in ordinary.\nAround the world.\nIn late 1843, she was moored at Norfolk, serving as a receiving ship. Naval Constructor Foster Rhodes calculated that it would require $70,000 to make her seaworthy. Acting Secretary David Henshaw faced a dilemma. His budget could not support such a cost, yet he could not allow the country's favorite ship to deteriorate. He turned to Captain John Percival, known in the service as \"Mad Jack\". The captain traveled to Virginia and conducted his own survey of the ship's needs. He reported that the necessary repairs and upgrades could be done at a cost of $10,000. On 6 November, Henshaw told Percival to proceed without delay, but stay within his projected figure. After several months of labor, Percival reported \"Constitution\" ready for \"a two or even a three-year cruise.\"\nShe got underway on 29 May 1844 carrying Ambassador to Brazil Henry A. Wise and his family, arriving at Rio de Janeiro on 2 August after making two port visits along the way. She sailed again on 8 September, making port calls at Madagascar, Mozambique, and Zanzibar, and arriving at Sumatra on 1 January 1845. Many of her crew began to suffer from dysentery and fevers, causing several deaths, which led Percival to set course for Singapore, arriving there 8 February. While in Singapore, Commodore Henry Ducie Chads of HMS \"Cambrian\" paid a visit to \"Constitution\", offering what medical assistance his squadron could provide. Chads had been the Lieutenant of \"Java\" when she surrendered to William Bainbridge 33 years earlier. The relationship between the United States and Brunei began on 6 April, when she was anchored in Brunei Bay in which a Treaty of Peace, Friendship, Commerce and Navigation was formed.\nLeaving Singapore, \"Constitution\" arrived at Turon, Cochinchina (present-day Da Nang, Vietnam), on 10 May. Not long after, Percival was informed that French missionary Dominique Lef\u00e8bvre was being held captive under sentence of death. He went ashore with a squad of Marines to speak with the local Mandarin. Percival demanded the return of Lef\u00e8bvre and took three local leaders hostage to ensure that his demands were met. When no communication was forthcoming, he ordered the capture of three junks, which were brought to \"Constitution\". He released the hostages after two days, attempting to show good faith towards the Mandarin, who had demanded their return. During a storm, the three junks escaped upriver; a detachment of Marines pursued and recaptured them. The supply of food and water from shore was stopped, and Percival gave in to another demand for the release of the junks in order to keep his ship supplied, expecting Lef\u00e8bvre to be released. He soon realized that no return would be made, however, and Percival ordered \"Constitution\" to depart on 26 May.\nShe arrived at Canton, China, on 20 June and spent the next six weeks there, while Percival made shore and diplomatic visits. Again the crew suffered from dysentery due to poor drinking water, resulting in three more deaths by the time that she reached Manila on 18 September, spending a week there preparing to enter the Pacific Ocean. She then sailed on 28 September for the Hawaiian Islands, arriving at Honolulu on 16 November. She found Commodore John D. Sloat and his flagship there; Sloat informed Percival that \"Constitution\" was needed in Mexico, as the United States was preparing for war after the Texas annexation. She provisioned for six months and sailed for Mazatl\u00e1n, arriving there on 13 January 1846. She sat at anchor for more than three months until she was finally allowed to sail for home on 22 April, rounding Cape Horn on 4 July. Arriving in Rio de Janeiro, the ship's party learned that the Mexican War had begun on 13 May, soon after their departure from Mazatl\u00e1n. She arrived home in Boston on 27 September and was mothballed on 5 October.\nMediterranean and African Squadrons.\n\"Constitution\" began a refitting in 1847 for duty with the Mediterranean Squadron. The figurehead of Andrew Jackson that caused so much controversy 15 years earlier was replaced with another likeness of Jackson, this time without a top hat and with a more Napoleonic pose. Captain John Gwinn commanded her on this voyage, departing on 9 December 1848 and arriving at Tripoli on 19 January 1849. She received King Ferdinand II and Pope Pius IX on board at Gaeta on 1 August, giving them a 21-gun salute. This was the first time that a Pope set foot on American territory or its equivalent.\nAt Palermo on 1 September, Captain Gwinn died of chronic gastritis and was buried near Lazaretto on the 9th. Captain Thomas Conover assumed command on the 18th and resumed routine patrolling for the rest of the tour, heading home on 1 December 1850. She was involved in a severe collision with the English brig \"Confidence\", cutting her in half, which sank with the loss of her captain. The surviving crew members were carried back to America, where \"Constitution\" was put in ordinary once again, this time at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, in January 1851.\n\"Constitution\" was recommissioned on 22 December 1852 under the command of John Rudd. She carried Commodore Isaac Mayo for duty with the African Squadron, departing the yard on 2 March 1853 on a leisurely sail towards Africa and arriving there on 18 June. Mayo made a diplomatic visit in Liberia, arranging a treaty between the Gbarbo and the Grebo tribes. Mayo resorted to firing cannons into the village of the Gbarbo in order to get them to agree to the treaty. About 22 June 1854, he arranged another peace treaty, between the leaders of Grahway and Half Cavally. On 31 July 1854, he arranged a compact with the King of Lagos.\n\"Constitution\" took the American ship \"H.N. Gambrill\" as a prize near Angola on 3 November. \"H.N. Gambrill\" was involved in the slave trade and proved to be \"Constitution\"'s final capture. The rest of her tour passed uneventfully and she sailed for home on 31 March 1855. She was diverted to Havana, Cuba, arriving there on 16 May and departing on the 24th. She arrived at Portsmouth Navy Yard and was decommissioned on 14 June, ending her last duty on the front lines.\nCivil War.\nSince the formation of the US Naval Academy in 1845, there had been a growing need for quarters in which to house the students (midshipmen). In 1857, \"Constitution\" was moved to dry dock at the Portsmouth Navy Yard for conversion into a training ship. Some of the earliest known photographs of her were taken during this refitting, which added classrooms on her spar and gun decks and reduced her armament to only 16 guns. Her rating was changed to a \"2nd rate ship\". She was recommissioned on 1 August 1860 and moved from Portsmouth to the Naval Academy.\nAt the outbreak of the Civil War in April 1861, \"Constitution\" was ordered to relocate farther north after threats had been made against her by Confederate sympathizers. Several companies of Massachusetts volunteer soldiers were stationed aboard for her protection. towed her to New York City, where she arrived on 29 April. She was subsequently relocated, along with the Naval Academy, to Fort Adams in Newport, Rhode Island, for the duration of the war. Her sister ship \"United States\" was abandoned by the Union and then captured by Confederate forces at the Gosport Shipyard, leaving \"Constitution\" the only remaining frigate of the original six.\nThe Navy launched an ironclad on 10 May 1862 as part of the South Atlantic Blockading Squadron, and they bestowed on her the name to honor \"Constitution\"'s tradition of service. However, \"New Ironsides\"' naval career was short, as she was destroyed by fire on 16 December 1865. In August 1865, \"Constitution\" moved back to Annapolis, along with the rest of the Naval Academy. During the voyage, she was allowed to drop her tow lines from the tug and continue alone under wind power. Despite her age, she was recorded running at and arrived at Hampton Roads ten hours ahead of the tug. Andersonville Prisoners- \"Thorp and his fellow soldiers were transported to Jacksonville, Fla., then on USS Constitution to \"Camp Parole\" in Annapolis, Md. There, they were issued rations, clothing and back pay before being sent to their respective regimental headquarters for discharge.\"\nAs \"Constitution\" settled in again at the academy, a series of upgrades was installed that included steam pipes and radiators to supply heat from shore, along with gas lighting. From June to August each year, she would depart with midshipmen for their summer training cruise and then return to operate for the rest of the year as a classroom. In June 1867, her last known plank owner William Bryant died in Maine. George Dewey assumed command in November; he served as her commanding officer until 1870. In 1871, her condition had deteriorated to the point where she was retired as a training ship, and then towed to the Philadelphia Navy Yard, where she was placed in ordinary on 26 September.\nParis Exposition.\n\"Constitution\" was overhauled beginning in 1873 in order to participate in the centennial celebrations of the United States. Work began slowly and was intermittently delayed by the transition of the Philadelphia Navy Yard to League Island. By late 1875, the Navy opened bids for an outside contractor to complete the work, and \"Constitution\" was moved to Wood, Dialogue, and Company in May 1876, where a coal bin and a small boiler for heat were installed. The Andrew Jackson figurehead was removed at this time and given to the Naval Academy Museum, where it remains today. Her construction dragged on during the rest of 1876 until the centennial celebrations had long passed, and the Navy decided that she would be used as a training and school ship for apprentices.\nOscar C. Badger took command on 9 January 1878 to prepare her for a voyage to the Paris Exposition of 1878, transporting artwork and industrial displays to France. Three railroad cars were lashed to her spar deck and all but two cannons were removed when she departed on 4 March. While docking at Le Havre, she collided with \"Ville de Paris\", which resulted in \"Constitution\" entering dry dock for repairs and remaining in France for the rest of 1878. She got underway for the United States on 16 January 1879, but poor navigation ran her aground the next day near Bollard Head, Dorset, United Kingdom. She was refloated with the assistance of the tugs \"Commodore\", \"Lightning\", \"Lothair\", \"Royal Albert\", \"Malta\" and \"Telegraph\". She was towed into the Portsmouth Naval Dockyard, Hampshire, England, where only minor damage was found and repaired.\nHer problem-plagued voyage continued on 13 February when her rudder was damaged during heavy storms, resulting in a total loss of steering control, with the rudder smashing into the hull at random. Three crewmen went over the stern on ropes and boatswain's chairs and secured it. The next morning, they rigged a temporary steering system. Badger set a course for the nearest port, and she arrived in Lisbon on 18 February. Slow dock services delayed her departure until 11 April and her voyage home did not end until 24 May. Carpenter's Mate Henry Williams, Captain of the Top Joseph Matthews, and Captain of the Top James Horton received the Medal of Honor for their actions in repairing the damaged rudder at sea. \"Constitution\" returned to her previous duties of training apprentice boys, and Ship's Corporal James Thayer received a Medal of Honor for saving a fellow crew member from drowning on 16 November.\nOver the next two years, she continued her training cruises, but it soon became apparent that her overhaul in 1876 had been of poor quality, and in 1881 she was determined to be unfit for service. Funds were lacking for another overhaul, so she was decommissioned, ending her days as an active-duty naval ship. She was moved to the Portsmouth Navy Yard and used as a receiving ship. There, she had a housing structure built over her spar deck, and her condition continued to deteriorate, with only a minimal amount of maintenance performed to keep her afloat. In 1896, Massachusetts Congressman John F. Fitzgerald became aware of her condition and proposed to Congress that funds be appropriated to restore her enough to return to Boston. She arrived at the Charlestown Navy Yard under tow on 21 September 1897 and, after her centennial celebrations in October, she lay there with an uncertain future.\nMuseum ship.\nIn 1900, Congress authorized the restoration of \"Constitution\" but did not appropriate any funds for the project; funding was to be raised privately. The Massachusetts Society of the United Daughters of the War of 1812 spearheaded an effort to raise funds, but they ultimately failed. In 1903, the Massachusetts Historical Society's president Charles Francis Adams requested of Congress that \"Constitution\" be rehabilitated and placed back into active service.\nIn 1905, Secretary of the Navy Charles Joseph Bonaparte suggested that \"Constitution\" be towed out to sea and used as target practice, after which she would be allowed to sink. Moses H. Gulesian read about this in a Boston newspaper; he was a businessman from Worcester, Massachusetts, and he offered to purchase her for $10,000. The State Department refused, but Gulesian initiated a public campaign which began from Boston and ultimately \"spilled all over the country.\" The storms of protest from the public prompted Congress to authorize $100,000 (~$ in 2024) in 1906 for the ship's restoration. First to be removed was the barracks structure on her spar deck, but the limited amount of funds allowed just a partial restoration. By 1907, \"Constitution\" began to serve as a museum ship, with tours offered to the public. On 1 December 1917, she was renamed \"Old Constitution\" to free her name for a planned new . The name \"Constitution\" was originally destined for the lead ship of the class, but was shuffled between hulls until CC-5 was given the name; construction of CC-5 was canceled in 1923 due to the Washington Naval Treaty. The incomplete hull was sold for scrap and \"Old Constitution\" was granted the return of her name on 24 July 1925.\n1925 restoration and tour.\nAdmiral Edward Walter Eberle, Chief of Naval Operations, ordered the Board of Inspection and Survey to compile a report on her condition, and the inspection of 19 February 1924 found her in grave condition. Water had to be pumped out of her hold every day just to keep her afloat, and her stern was in danger of falling off. Almost all deck areas and structural components were filled with rot, and she was considered to be on the verge of ruin. Yet the Board recommended that she be thoroughly repaired in order to preserve her as long as possible. The estimated cost of repairs was $400,000. Secretary of the Navy Curtis D. Wilbur proposed to Congress that the required funds be raised privately, and he was authorized to assemble the committee charged with her restoration.\nThe first effort was sponsored by the national Elks Lodge. Programs presented to schoolchildren about \"Old Ironsides\" encouraged them to donate pennies towards her restoration, eventually raising $148,000. In the meantime, the estimates for repair began to climb, eventually reaching over $745,000 (~$ in 2024) after costs of materials were realized. In September 1926, Wilbur began to sell copies of a painting of \"Constitution\" at 50\u00a0cents per copy (). The silent film \"Old Ironsides\" portrayed \"Constitution\" during the First Barbary War. It premiered in December and helped spur more contributions to her restoration fund. The final campaign allowed memorabilia to be made of her discarded planking and metal. The committee eventually raised more than $600,000 after expenses, still short of the required amount, and Congress approved up to $300,000 to complete the restoration. The final cost of the restoration was $946,000 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024).\nLieutenant John A. Lord was selected to oversee the reconstruction project, and work began while fund-raising efforts were still underway. Materials were difficult to find, especially the live oak needed; Lord uncovered a long-forgotten stash of live oak (some ) at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida, that had been cut sometime in the 1850s for a shipbuilding program that never began. \"Constitution\" entered dry dock with a crowd of 10,000 observers on 16 June 1927. Meanwhile, Charles Francis Adams had been appointed as Secretary of the Navy, and he proposed that \"Constitution\" make a tour of the United States upon her completion, as a gift to the nation for its efforts to help restore her. She emerged from dry dock on 15 March 1930; approximately 85 percent of the ship had been \"renewed\" (i.e. replaced) to make her seaworthy. Many amenities were installed to prepare her for the three-year tour of the country, including water piping throughout, modern toilet and shower facilities, electric lighting to make the interior visible for visitors, and several peloruses for ease of navigation. of rigging was made for \"Constitution\" at Charlestown Navy Yard ropewalk.\n\"Constitution\" recommissioned on 1 July 1931 under the command of Commander Louis J. Gulliver with a crew of 60 officers and sailors, 15 Marines, and a pet monkey named Rosie as their mascot. The tour began at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, with much celebration and a 21-gun salute, scheduled to visit 90 port cities along the Atlantic, Gulf, and Pacific coasts. Due to the heavy itinerary, she was towed by the minesweeper . She went as far north as Bar Harbor, Maine, south and into the Gulf of Mexico, then through the Panama Canal Zone, and north again to Bellingham, Washington, on the Pacific Coast. \"Constitution\" returned to her home port of Boston in May 1934 after more than 4.6\u00a0million people visited her during the three-year tour.\n1934 return to Boston.\n\"Constitution\" returned to serving as a museum ship, receiving 100,000 visitors per year in Boston. She was maintained by a small crew who were berthed on the ship, requiring more reliable heating. The heating was upgraded to a forced-air system in the 1950s, and a sprinkler system was added that protects her from fire. \"Constitution\" broke loose from her dock on 21 September 1938 during the New England Hurricane and was blown into Boston Harbor, where she collided with the destroyer ; she suffered only minor damage.\nWith limited funds available, she experienced more deterioration over the years, and items began to disappear from the ship as souvenir hunters picked away at the more portable objects. \"Constitution\" and were recommissioned in 1940 at the request of President Franklin Roosevelt.\nIn early 1941, \"Constitution\" was assigned the hull classification symbol IX-21 and began to serve as a brig for officers awaiting court-martial.\nThe United States Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating \"Constitution\" in 1947, and an Act of Congress in 1954 made the Secretary of the Navy responsible for her upkeep.\nAfter World War II, \"Constitution\" remained at her berth in the Boston Navy Yard and was open to the public free of charge. She remained in commission and was an assigned a commanding officer and a crew of about 30 sailors to perform maintenance and provide guided tours to visitors. At some point, the tradition of having an annual turn around cruise on July 4 was established. The purpose of the turn around cruise was to give equal weather to each side of the ship.\nRestoration.\nIn 1970, another survey was performed on her condition, finding that repairs were required but not as extensively as needed in the 1920s. The US Navy determined that a commander was required as commanding officer\u2014typically someone with about 20 years of seniority; this would ensure the experience to organize the maintenance that she required. Funds were approved in 1972 for her restoration, and she entered dry dock in April 1973, remaining until April 1974. During this period, large quantities of red oak were removed and replaced. The red oak had been added in the 1950s as an experiment to see if it would be more durable than the live oak, but it had mostly rotted away by 1970.\nBicentennial celebrations.\nCommander Tyrone G. Martin became her captain in August 1974, as preparations began for the upcoming United States Bicentennial celebrations. He set the precedent that all construction work on \"Constitution\" was to be aimed towards maintaining her to the 1812 configuration for which she is most noted. In September 1975, her hull classification of IX-21 was officially canceled.\nThe privately run USS Constitution Museum opened on 8 April 1976, and Commander Martin dedicated a tract of land as \"Constitution Grove\" one month later, located at the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Indiana. The now supply the majority of the white oak required for repair work. On 10 July, \"Constitution\" led the parade of tall ships up Boston Harbor for Operation Sail, firing her guns at one-minute intervals for the first time in approximately 100\u00a0years. On 11 July, she rendered a 21-gun salute to Her Majesty's Yacht \"Britannia\", as Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip arrived for a state visit. The royal couple were piped aboard and privately toured the ship for approximately 30 minutes with Commander Martin and Secretary of the Navy J. William Middendorf. Upon their departure, the crew of \"Constitution\" rendered three cheers for the Queen. Over 900,000 visitors toured \"Old Ironsides\" that year.\n1992\u20131995 dry docking and reconstruction.\n\"Constitution\" entered dry dock in 1992 for an inspection and minor repair period that turned out to be her most comprehensive structural restoration and repair since she was launched in 1797. Multiple refittings over the 200 years of her career had removed most of her original construction components and design, as her mission changed from a fighting warship to a training ship and eventually to a receiving ship. In 1993, the Naval History &amp; Heritage Command Detachment Boston reviewed Humphreys' original plans and identified five main structural components that were required to prevent hogging of the hull, as \"Constitution\" had of hog at that point. Using a 1:16 scale model of the ship, they were able to determine that restoring the original components would result in a 10% increase in hull stiffness.\nThree hundred scans were completed on her timbers using radiography to find any hidden problems otherwise undetectable from the outside\u2014technology that was unavailable during previous reconstructions. The repair crew used sound-wave testing, aided by the United States Forest Service's Forest Products Laboratory, to determine the condition of the remaining timbers that might have been rotting from the inside. The of hog was removed from her keel by allowing the ship to settle naturally while in dry dock. The most difficult task was the procurement of timber in the quantity and sizes needed, as was the case during her 1920s restoration as well. The city of Charleston, South Carolina, donated live-oak trees that had been felled by Hurricane Hugo in 1989, and the International Paper Company donated live oak from its own property. The project continued to reconstruct her to 1812 specifications, even as she remained open to visitors who were allowed to observe the process and converse with workers. The $12\u00a0million project was completed in 1995.\nSailing on 200th anniversary.\nAs early as 1991, Commander David Cashman had suggested that \"Constitution\" should sail to celebrate her 200th anniversary in 1997 rather than being towed. The proposal was approved, though it was thought to be a large undertaking since she had not sailed in over 100\u00a0years. When she emerged from dry dock in 1995, a more serious effort began to prepare her for sail. As in the 1920s, education programs aimed at school children helped collect pennies to purchase the sails to make the voyage possible. Her six-sail battle configuration consisted of jibs, topsails, and driver.\nCommander Mike Beck began training the crew for the historic sail using an 1819 Navy sailing manual and several months of practice, including time spent aboard the Coast Guard cutter \"Eagle\". On 20 July, \"Constitution\" was towed from her usual berth in Boston to an overnight mooring in Marblehead, Massachusetts. En route, she made her first sail in 116 years, at a recorded .\nOn 21 July, she was towed offshore, where the tow line was dropped and Commander Beck ordered six sails set (jibs, topsails, and spanker). She then sailed for 40\u00a0minutes on a south-south-east course with true wind speeds of about , attaining a top recorded speed of . Her modern US naval combatant escorts were the guided-missile destroyer and frigate . They rendered passing honors to \"Old Ironsides\" while she was under sail, and she was overflown by the US Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron, the Blue Angels. Inbound to her permanent berth at Charlestown, she rendered a 21-gun salute to the nation off Fort Independence in Boston Harbor.\nPresent day.\nThe mission of \"Constitution\" is to promote understanding of the Navy's role in war and peace through active participation in public events and education through outreach programs, public access, and historic demonstration. Her crew of approximately 75 US Navy sailors participate in ceremonies, educational programs, and special events while keeping the ship open to visitors year-round and providing free tours. The crewmen are all active-duty members of the US Navy, and the assignment is considered to be special duty. She entered dry dock in May 2015 for a scheduled restoration, before returning to sea.\n\"Constitution\" is berthed at Pier One of the former Charlestown Navy Yard, at the terminus of Boston's Freedom Trail. She is open to the public year-round. The privately run USS \"Constitution\" Museum is nearby, located in a restored shipyard building at the foot of Pier Two. \"Constitution\" typically makes at least one \"turnaround cruise\" each year, during which she is towed into Boston Harbor to perform underway demonstrations, including a gun drill; she then returns to her dock in the opposite direction to ensure that she weathers evenly. The \"turnaround cruise\" is open to the general public based on a \"lottery draw\" of interested persons each year.\nThe Naval History and Heritage Command Detachment Boston is responsible for planning and performing her maintenance, repair, and restoration, keeping her as close as possible to her 1812 configuration. The detachment estimates that approximately 10\u201315 percent of the timber in \"Constitution\" contains original material installed during her initial construction period in the years 1795\u20131797. The Navy maintains \"Constitution\" Grove at Naval Surface Warfare Center Crane Division near Bloomington, Indiana to ensure a supply of mature white oak.\nIn 2003, the special effects crew from the production of \"\" spent several days using \"Constitution\" as a computer model for the fictional French frigate \"Acheron\", using stem-to-stern digital image scans. Lieutenant Commander John Scivier of the Royal Navy, commanding officer of , paid a visit to \"Constitution\" in November 2007, touring the local facilities with Commander William A. Bullard III. They discussed arranging an exchange program between the two ships.\n\"Constitution\" emerged from a three-year repair period in November 2010. During this time, the entire spar deck was stripped down to the support beams, and the decking overhead was replaced to restore its original curvature, allowing water to drain overboard and not remain standing on the deck. In addition to decking repairs, 50 hull planks and the main hatch were repaired or replaced. The restoration continued the focus toward keeping her appearance of 1812 by replacing her upper sides so that she now resembles what she looked like after her triumph over \"Guerriere\", when she gained her nickname \"Old Ironsides\". The crew of \"Constitution\" under Commander Matt Bonner sailed \"Constitution\" under her own power on 19 August 2012, the anniversary of her victory over \"Guerriere\". Bonner was \"Constitution\"'s 72nd commanding officer.\nOn 18 May 2015, the ship entered Dry Dock 1 in Charlestown Navy Yard to begin a two-year restoration program. The restoration planned to restore the copper sheets on the ship's hull and replace deck boards. The Department of the Navy provided the $12\u201315\u00a0million expected cost. After the restoration was complete, she was returned to the water on 23 July 2017. In November 2017, Commander Nathaniel R. Shick relieved Commander Robert S. Gerosa Jr., who had spent most of his command while the ship was dry docked, in a ceremony held on board \"Constitution\", to become the ship's 75th commanding officer.\nOn 29 February 2020, Shick was succeeded as commanding officer by Commander John Benda.\nOn 17 January 2022, Billie J. Farrell became the first woman to command \"Constitution\".\nAs of July 2025[ [update]], Crystal L. Schaefer is commander, after being appointed to the role on 21 June 2024.\nCommanders.\nSince she was first launched in 1797, there have been 78 commanders of \"Constitution\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32299", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32299", "title": "USF Constitution", "text": ""}
{"id": "32301", "revid": "30248431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32301", "title": "Anti-Masonic Party", "text": "1820s\u20131830s American political party\nThe Anti-Masonic Party was the earliest third party in the United States. Formally a single-issue party, it strongly opposed Freemasonry in the United States. It was active from the late 1820s, especially in the Northeast, and later attempted to become a major party by expanding its platform to take positions on other issues. It declined quickly after 1832 as most members joined the new Whig Party; it dissolved after 1838.\nThe party was founded following the disappearance of William Morgan, a former Mason who had become a prominent critic of the Masonic organization. Many believed that Masons had murdered Morgan for speaking out against Masonry and subsequently many churches and other groups condemned Masonry. As many Masons were prominent businessmen and politicians, the backlash against the Masons was also a form of anti-elitism. The Anti-Masons purported that Masons posed a threat to American republicanism by secretly trying to control the government. Furthermore, there was a strong fear that Masonry was hostile to Christianity.\nMass opposition to Masonry eventually coalesced into a political party. Before and during the presidency of John Quincy Adams, there was a period of political realignment. The Anti-Masons emerged as an important third-party alternative to Andrew Jackson's Democrats and Adams' National Republicans. In New York, the Anti-Masons supplanted the National Republicans as the primary opposition to the Democrats.\nAfter experiencing unexpected success in the 1828 elections, the Anti-Masons adopted positions on other issues, most notably support for internal improvements and a protective tariff. Several Anti-Masons, including William A. Palmer and Joseph Ritner, won election to prominent positions. In states such as Pennsylvania and Rhode Island, the party controlled the balance of power in the state legislature and provided crucial support to candidates for the United States Senate. In 1831, the party held the first presidential nominating convention, a practice that was subsequently adopted by all major parties. Delegates chose former U.S. attorney general William Wirt as their standard bearer in the 1832 presidential election; Wirt won 7.8% of the popular vote and carried Vermont.\nAs the 1830s progressed, many of the Anti-Masonic Party's supporters joined the Whig Party, which sought to unite those opposed to the policies of President Jackson. The Anti-Masons brought with them an intense distrust of politicians and a rejection of unthinking party loyalty, together with new campaign techniques to whip up excitement among the voters. The Anti-Masonic Party held a national convention in 1835, nominating Whig candidate William Henry Harrison, but a second convention announced that the party would not officially support a candidate. Harrison campaigned as a Whig in the 1836 presidential election and his relative success in the election encouraged further migration of Anti-Masons to the Whig Party. By 1840, the party had ceased to function as a national organization. In subsequent decades, former Anti-Masonic candidates and supporters such as Millard Fillmore, William H. Seward, Thurlow Weed and Thaddeus Stevens became prominent members of the Whig Party.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe opponents of Freemasonry formed a political movement after the Morgan affair convinced them the Masons were murdering men who spoke out against them. This key episode was the mysterious 1826 disappearance of William Morgan, a Freemason in upstate New York who had turned against the Masons.\nMorgan claimed to have been made a member of the Masons while living in Canada and he appears to have briefly attended a lodge in Rochester. In 1825, Morgan received the Royal Arch degree at Le Roy's Western Star Chapter #33, having declared under oath that he had previously received the six degrees which preceded it. Whether he actually received these degrees and if so from where has not been determined for certain.\nMorgan then attempted unsuccessfully to help establish or visit lodges and chapters in Batavia, but was denied participation in Batavia's Masonic activities by members who were uncertain about Morgan's character and claims to Masonic membership. Angered by the rejection, Morgan announced that he was going to publish an expos\u00e9 titled \"Illustrations of Masonry\", critical of the Freemasons and describing their secret degree ceremonies in detail.\nWhen his intentions became known to the Batavia lodge, an attempt was made to burn down the business of the printer who planned to publish Morgan's book. In September 1826, Morgan was arrested on flimsy allegations of failing to repay a loan and theft of a shirt and tie in an effort to prevent publication of his book by keeping him in jail. The individual who intended to publish Morgan's book paid his bail and he was released from custody. Shortly afterwards, Morgan disappeared.\nSome skeptics argued that Morgan had left the Batavia area on his own, either because he had been paid not to publish his book, or to escape Masonic retaliation for attempting to publish the book, or to generate publicity that would boost the book's sales. The generally believed version of events was that Masons killed Morgan by drowning him in the Niagara River. Whether he fled or was murdered, Morgan's disappearance led many to believe that Freemasonry was in conflict with good citizenship.\nBecause judges, businessmen, bankers and politicians were often Masons, ordinary citizens began to think of it as an elitist group. Moreover, many claimed that the lodges' secret oaths bound Masons to favor each other against outsiders in the courts and elsewhere.\nBecause some trials of alleged Morgan conspirators were mishandled and the Masons resisted further inquiries, many New Yorkers concluded that Masons controlled key offices and used their official authority to promote the goals of the fraternity by ensuring that Morgan's supposed killers escaped punishment. When a member sought to reveal its secrets, so ran the conclusion, the Freemasons had done away with him. Because they controlled the courts and other offices, they were considered capable of obstructing the investigation. True Americans, they said, had to organize and defeat this conspiracy. If good government was to be restored \"all Masons must be purged from public office\".\nParty foundation.\nThe Anti-Masonic Party was formed in Upstate New York in February 1828. Anti-Masons were opponents of Freemasonry, believing that it was a corrupt and elitist secret society which was ruling much of the country in defiance of republican principles. Many people regarded the Masonic organization and its adherents involved in government as corrupt.\nOpposition to Masonry was taken up by some evangelical Protestant churches as a religious cause, particularly in the Burned-over district of upstate New York. Many churches passed resolutions condemning ministers and lay leaders who were Masons and several denominations condemned Freemasonry, including the Presbyterian, Congregational, Methodist and Baptist churches.\nAnti-Masonry became a political issue in Western New York, where early in 1827 many mass meetings resolved not to support Masons for public office. In New York, the supporters of President John Quincy Adams, called \"Adams men\", or Anti-Jacksonians, or National Republicans, were a feeble organization. Adams supporters used the strong anti-Masonic feeling to create a new party in opposition to the rising Jacksonian Democracy nationally and the Albany Regency political organization of Martin Van Buren in New York. In this effort, they were aided by the fact that Andrew Jackson was a high-ranking Mason and frequently spoke in praise of the organization. The alleged remark of Anti-Masonic organizer Thurlow Weed (which Weed denied), that an unidentified corpse found in the Niagara River was \"a good enough Morgan\" until after the 1828 elections, summarized the value of the Morgan disappearance for the opponents of Jackson.\nPolitical rise.\nIn the elections of 1828, the new party proved unexpectedly strong. Though its candidate for governor of New York, Solomon Southwick, was defeated, the Anti-Masonic Party became the main opposition party to the Jacksonian Democrats in New York. In 1829, it broadened its issues base when it became a champion of internal improvements and the protective tariff.\nAnti-Masonic Party members expanded the use of party-affiliated newspapers for political organizing by publishing over 100, including Southwick's \"National Observer\" and Weed's \"Anti-Masonic Enquirer\". By 1829, Weed's \"Albany Journal\" had become the preeminent Anti-Masonic paper and it later became the leading Whig newspaper. The newspapers of the time reveled in partisanship and one brief paragraph in an \"Albany Journal\" article opposing Martin Van Buren included the words \"dangerous\", \"demagogue\", \"corrupt\", \"degrade\", \"pervert\", \"prostitute\", \"debauch\" and \"cursed\".\nConventions and elections.\nA national Anti-Masonic organization was planned as early as 1827, when the New York leaders attempted unsuccessfully to persuade Henry Clay to renounce his Masonic membership and head the movement.\nBy 1830, the Anti-Masonic movement's effort to broaden its appeal enabled it to spread to neighboring states, becoming especially strong in Pennsylvania and Vermont. In 1831, William A. Palmer was elected governor of Vermont on an Anti-Masonic ticket, an office he held until 1835. Palmer's brother-in-law Augustine Clarke was an Anti-Masonic presidential elector in 1832, served as Vermont state treasurer from 1833 to 1837 and was appointed to the Anti-Masonic National Committee in 1837. Other Vermont Anti-Masonic electors in 1832 included former governor Ezra Butler and former United States representative William Strong.\nThe highest elected office held by a member of the Anti-Masonic Party was governor. Besides Palmer in Vermont, Joseph Ritner was the governor of Pennsylvania from 1835 to 1839.\nIn addition to Palmer and Ritner, Silas H. Jennison, an Anti-Mason, was elected Lieutenant Governor of Vermont with Whig support in 1835. No candidate, including Palmer, received a majority of votes for governor as required by the Vermont Constitution. The contest then moved to the Vermont General Assembly, which could not choose a winner. The General Assembly then opted to allow Jennison to act as governor until the next election. He won election as governor in his own right as a Whig in 1836 and served from 1836 to 1841.\nThough the Anti-Masonic Party elected no senators and controlled no houses of a state legislature, Anti-Masons in state legislatures sometimes formed coalitions to elect senators and organize their chambers. Examples include: William Wilkins, elected to the Senate in 1830 by a coalition of pro-Adams Democrats and Anti-Masons in the Pennsylvania General Assembly; and William Sprague, elected speaker of the Rhode Island House of Representatives in 1831 by a coalition of pro-Adams Democrats and Anti-Masons.\nThe Anti-Masonic Party conducted the first presidential nominating convention in the United States history for the 1832 elections, nominating William Wirt (a former Mason) for president and Amos Ellmaker for vice president in Baltimore. Wirt won 7.8 percent of the popular vote and the seven electoral votes of Vermont. Soon the Democrats and Whigs recognized the convention's value in managing parties and campaigns and began to hold their own.\nFollowing Ritner's election in 1835, a state convention was held in Harrisburg on December 14\u201317, 1835 to choose presidential electors for the 1836 election. The convention nominated William Henry Harrison for president and Francis Granger for vice president. The Vermont state Anti-Masonic convention followed suit on February 24, 1836. Anti-Masonic leaders were unable to obtain assurance from Harrison that he was not a Mason, so they called a national convention. The second national Anti-Masonic nominating convention was held in Philadelphia on May 4, 1836. The meeting was divisive, but a majority of the delegates officially stated that the party was not sponsoring a national ticket for the presidential election of 1836 and proposed a meeting in 1837 to discuss the future of the party.\nAlthough Harrison lost the election to Democratic candidate Martin Van Buren in 1836, his strength throughout the North was hailed by Anti-Masonic leaders because the Anti-Masonic Party was the first to officially place his name in contention. By the mid-1830s, other Anti-Jacksonians had coalesced into the Whig Party, which had a broader issue base than the Anti-Masons. By the late 1830s, many of the Anti-Masonic movement's members were moving to the Whigs, regarding that party as a better alternative to the Jacksonians, by then called Democrats. The Anti-Masonic Party held a conference in September 1837 to discuss its situation\u2014one delegate was former president John Quincy Adams.\nThe Anti-Masonic Party held a third national nominating convention at Temperance Hall in Philadelphia on November 13\u201314, 1838. By this time, the party had been almost entirely supplanted by the Whigs. The Anti-Masons unanimously endorsed William Henry Harrison for president and Daniel Webster for vice president in the 1840 election. When the Whig National Convention nominated Harrison with John Tyler as his running mate, the Anti-Masonic Party did not make an alternate nomination and ceased to function, with most adherents being fully absorbed into the Whigs by 1840.\nLegacy.\nAnti-Masonry was deeply committed to conspiracy theories, primarily the claim that Masonic elites were trying to secretly control the government. As people became more mobile economically during the Industrial Revolution and began to move west, and new states were added to the Union, the growth of the Anti-Masonic movement was caused by the political and social unrest resulting from the weakening of longstanding family and community ties. With Freemasonry one of the few institutions that remained stable during this time of change, it became a natural target for protesters. As a result, the Morgan Affair became the highly visible catalyst that turned a popular movement into a political party.\nUnder the banner of Anti-Masons, able leaders united Anti-Jacksonians and others who were discontented with existing political conditions. The fact that William Wirt, their choice for the presidency in 1832, not only was a former Mason, but also defended Freemasonry in a speech before the convention that nominated him indicates that opposition to Masonry was not the Anti-Masonic movement's sole issue.\nThe Anti-Masonic movement gave rise to or expanded the use of many innovations which became accepted practice among other parties, including nominating conventions and party newspapers. In addition, the Anti-Masons aided in the rise of the Whig Party as the major alternative to the Democrats, with Anti-Masonic positions on issues including internal improvements and tariffs being adopted by the Whigs.\nSecond Anti-Masonic Party.\nA later political organization called the Anti-Masonic Party was active from 1872 until 1888. This second group had a more religious basis for its anti-Masonry and was closely associated with Jonathan Blanchard of Wheaton College.\nMembers of Congress.\nThe Anti-Masons did not elect anyone to the Senate, but elected several members of the House of Representatives.\nMassachusetts\nNew York\nOhio\nPennsylvania\nRhode Island\nVermont\nElectoral history.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCongressional elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32303", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32303", "title": "U.S.S.R.", "text": ""}
{"id": "32304", "revid": "27658600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32304", "title": "United Methodist Church", "text": "Mainline Protestant denomination\nThe United Methodist Church (UMC) is a worldwide mainline Protestant Christian denomination based in Africa, The Philippines, Europe, and the United States claiming 10 million members, and is a major part of Methodism. In the 19th century, its main predecessor, the Methodist Episcopal Church, was a leader in evangelicalism. The present denomination was founded in 1968 in Dallas by union of the Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren Church, and is shaped by the voluntary separation of 25% of the United States churches leading up to the delayed 2020 General Conference held in 2024. The UMC traces its roots back to the revival movement of John and Charles Wesley in England, as well as the Great Awakening in the United States. As such, the church's theological orientation is decidedly Wesleyan. It embraces liturgical worship, holiness, and evangelical elements. According to its Book of Discipline, \"The mission of the Church is to make disciples of Jesus Christ for the transformation of the world.\"\nThe United Methodist Church has a connectional polity, a typical feature of a number of Methodist denominations. It is organized into conferences. The highest level is called the General Conference and is the only organization which may speak officially for the UMC. The church is a member of the World Council of Churches, the World Methodist Council, and other religious associations.\nBetween 1968 and 2022, the UMC's membership has declined from 11 million to 5,424,175 members and 29,746 churches in the United States. As of 2022, it had 9,984,925 members and 39,460 churches worldwide. In 2025, the Pew Research Center estimated that 3 percent of the U.S. population, or 7.8 million adult adherents, identified with the United Methodist Church, revealing a larger number of adherents than registered members.\nOn January 3, 2020, a group of Methodist leaders proposed a plan to split the United Methodist Church over issues of sexual orientation (particularly ordination of clergy in same-sex marriage) and create a new traditionalist Methodist denomination; the Global Methodist Church was formed in 2022. Prior to the establishment of the Global Methodist Church, some Methodist congregations had already left the UMC to join the Free Methodist Church, a traditionalist Methodist denomination aligned with the Wesleyan-Holiness movement. Other former United Methodist congregations joined various conservative Methodist denominations, such as the Congregational Methodist Church, or became members of the Association of Independent Methodists. As of December 30, 2023, the number of UMC churches in the United States that were approved for disaffiliation stood at 7,660. This figure represented approximately one-quarter of the UMC churches in the United States. In May 2024, the United Methodist Church General Conference repealed bans on LGBTQ clergy and same-sex marriage. \nIn November 2025, the United Methodist Church ratified Worldwide Regionalization, a series of Constitutional Amendments passed at the 2024 General Conference to restructure the UMC designed to give equal autonomy to various regions of the church, renaming former Central (non-US) Conferences to Regional Conferences and the creation of a US Regional Conference on an equal basis, which many United Methodists believe would help decolonize the church and aid global unity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nChurch origins.\nThe movement which would become the United Methodist Church began in the mid-18th century within the Church of England. A small group of students, including John Wesley, Charles Wesley, and George Whitefield, met at Oxford University. They focused on Bible study, methodical study of scripture, and living a holy life. Other students mocked them, saying they were the \"Holy Club\" and \"the Methodists\", being methodical and exceptionally detailed in their Bible study, opinions, and disciplined lifestyle. Eventually, the so-called Methodists started individual societies or classes for members of the Church of England who wanted to live a more religious life.\nIn 1735, John and Charles Wesley went to America, hoping to teach the gospel to the Native Americans in the colony of Georgia. Instead, John became vicar of Christ Church in Savannah. His preaching was legalistic and full of harsh rules, and the congregation rejected him. After two years in America, he returned to England dejected and confused. While sailing on his original journey to America, he had been impressed with the faith of the German Moravians on board, and when he returned to England he spent time with Peter B\u00f6hler, a German Moravian who was passing through England and who believed that a person is saved solely through the grace of God and not by works. John had many conversations with B\u00f6hler about this topic. On May 25, 1738, after listening to a reading of Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle to the Romans, John came to the understanding that his good works could not save him and he could rest in God's grace for salvation. For the first time in his life, he felt peace and the assurance of salvation.\nIn less than two years, the \"Holy Club\" disbanded. John Wesley met with a group of clergy, and afterwards said \"they appeared to be of one heart, as well as of one judgment, resolved to be Bible-Christians at all events; and, wherever they were, to preach with all their might plain, old, Bible Christianity.\" The ministers nonetheless retained their membership in the Church of England. Though not always emphasized or appreciated in the Anglican churches of their day, their teaching emphasized salvation by God's grace, acquired through faith in Christ. Three teachings they saw as the foundation of Christian faith were:\nThese clergymen quickly became popular, attracting large congregations. The nickname students had used against the Wesleys was revived; they and their followers subsequently became known as \"Methodists\".\nPredecessors.\nThe English preacher Francis Asbury arrived in America in 1771. He became a \"circuit rider\", taking the gospel to the furthest reaches of the new frontier as he had done as a preacher in England . The first official organization in the United States occurred in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1784, with the formation of the Methodist Episcopal Church at the Christmas Conference with Francis Asbury and Thomas Coke as the leaders.\nThough John Wesley originally wanted the Methodists to stay within the Church of England, the American Revolution decisively separated the Methodists in the American colonies from the life and sacraments of the English Church. In 1784, after unsuccessful attempts to have the Church of England send a bishop to start a new church in the colonies, Wesley decisively appointed fellow priest Thomas Coke as Superintendent (the equivalent of a bishop) to organize a separate Methodist Society. Together with Coke, Wesley sent The Sunday Service of the Methodists, Methodism's first liturgical text and the Articles of Religion, which were received and adopted by the Baltimore Christmas Conference of 1784, officially establishing the Methodist Episcopal Church. The conference was held at the Lovely Lane Methodist Church, considered the mother church of American Methodism.\nThe new church grew rapidly in the young country as it employed circuit riders, many of whom were laymen, to travel the mostly rural nation by horseback to preach the Gospel and to establish churches until there was scarcely any village in the United States without a Methodist presence. With 4,000 circuit riders by 1844, the Methodist Episcopal Church rapidly became the largest Protestant denomination in the country.\nSt. George's United Methodist Church, located at the corner of 4th and New Streets, in the Old City neighborhood of Philadelphia, is the oldest Methodist church in continuous use in the United States, beginning in 1769. The congregation was founded in 1767, meeting initially in a sail loft on Dock Street, and in 1769 it purchased the shell of a building which had been erected in 1763 by a German Reformed congregation. At this time, Methodists had not yet broken away from the Anglican Church and the Methodist Episcopal Church was not founded until 1784.\nRichard Allen and Absalom Jones became the first African Americans ordained by the Methodist Church. They were licensed by Saint George's Church in 1784. Three years later, protesting racial segregation in worship services, Allen led most of the black members out of St. George's; eventually they founded the Mother Bethel A.M.E. Church and the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Absalom Jones became an Episcopal priest. In 1836, the church's basement was excavated to make room for a Sunday school. In the 1920s, a court case saved the church from being demolished to make way for the Benjamin Franklin Bridge. The case resulted in the bridge being relocated. Historic Saint George's welcomes visitors and is home to archives and a museum on Methodism.\nIn the more than 220 years since 1784, Methodism in the United States, like many other Protestant denominations, has seen a number of divisions and mergers. In 1830, the Methodist Protestant Church split from the Methodist Episcopal Church over the issue of laity having a voice and vote in the administration of the church, insisting that clergy should not be the only ones to have any determination in how the church was to be operated. In 1844, the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church split into two conferences because of tensions over slavery and the power of bishops in the denomination.\nThe two general conferences, Methodist Episcopal Church (the northern faction) and Methodist Episcopal Church, South remained separate until 1939. That year, the northern and southern Methodist Episcopal Churches and the majority of the Methodist Protestant Church merged to create The Methodist Church. The uniting conference took place at First Methodist Church (now First United Methodist Church) of Marion, Indiana.\n1939 merger and the Central Jurisdiction in the Methodist Church.\nIn 1844, the Methodist Episcopal Church (South) split from the Methodist Episcopal Church over slavery despite that John Wesley was against slavery. In 1939, the Methodist Episcopal Church, the Methodist Episcopal Church (South) and the Methodist Protestant Church merged to form the Methodist Church. The 1939 merger was created at the expense of African Americans. At the behest of the southern faction, the Central Jurisdiction was created as a compromise which segregated the Methodist Church.There were five administrative jurisdictions in the US that were on the basis of geography, but a sixth jurisdiction, the segregated Central Jurisdiction was exclusively for African American churches, conferences, and pastors. The Central Jurisdiction lasted from 1939 to 1968 but it took until 1972 for all conferences to be integrated. The 1968 merger with the Evangelical United Brethren church had a condition for merger, which was the abolition of the Central Jurisdiction. The merger created the United Methodist Church. In the wake of the Central Jurisdiction\u2019s abolition, the organization Black Methodists for Church Renewal and the agency the General Commission on Religion and Race were created to work for an end to racism in the church and society and to advocate for Black United Methodists.\n1968 merger and formation of the UMC.\nOn April 23, 1968, the United Methodist Church was created when the Evangelical United Brethren Church (represented by Bishop Reuben H. Mueller) and The Methodist Church (represented by Bishop Lloyd Christ Wicke) joined hands at the constituting General Conference in Dallas, Texas. With the words, \"Lord of the Church, we are united in Thee, in Thy Church and now in The United Methodist Church\" the new denomination was given birth by both churches which had distinguished histories and influential ministries in various parts of the world.\n2020\u20132024 schisms.\nPrior to the United Methodist Church's May 2024 General Conference, the UMC had rules, found in the Book of Discipline, that prohibited same-sex unions and the ordination of noncelibate homosexuals. Many progressive UMC leaders and churches, especially in the United States, are supportive of gay marriage and ignored the injunctions in the Book of Discipline. Many conservative members of the UMC did not like the trend of the UMC towards endorsing gay marriage and, hence, have initiated movements to split-off from the UMC.\nOn January 3, 2020, the denomination's leadership released a proposal to split the Church over what it described as \"fundamental differences\" over homosexuality, particularly same-sex marriage (see \u00a7 Homosexuality below). The United Methodist Church would hold a special session to repeal the ban on same-sex marriage. The proposal would need to be approved by the General Conference in order to take effect. The 2020 General Conference, originally scheduled to be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn November 2020, a small group of the progressive wing announced their intention to create a new denomination, the Liberation Methodist Connexion. It was launched on the First Sunday in Advent through an online service. However, organizers of the Liberation Methodist Connexion announced on 18 December 2021 that no progress had been made to set up a separate denomination.\nIn March 2021, conservative leaders of the UMC unveiled the name Global Methodist Church for the new traditionalist denomination, along with a new website and logo. The next General Conference was set for 2024. At that time, delegates were expected to vote on the Protocol for Reconciliation and Grace through Separation. The conservative Transitional Leadership Council said the Global Methodist Church would be officially started, with individual churches or conferences able to join, when the General Conference adopted legislation implementing the Protocol, although the Council intended to \"consider bringing the new church into existence without delay\" \"if it becomes apparent\" that leaders \"who covenanted to support the Protocol no longer do so.\" Not wanting to wait for the General Conference to occur, some conservative United Methodist congregations left the United Methodist Church to become a part of the Free Methodist Church, a traditionalist Methodist denomination aligned with the holiness movement. After the launch of the Global Methodist Church on May 1, 2022, a number of traditionalist United Methodist churches entered into the Global Methodist Church. Other former United Methodist churches that disaffiliated joined various Methodist denominations, such as the Congregational Methodist Church and Methodist Protestant Church, or became members of the Association of Independent Methodists.\nOn May 10, 2022, the Judicial Council of the United Methodist Church ruled that annual UMC conferences in the United States cannot leave the church for the Global Methodist Church; only individual churches may do so. The Romania-Bulgaria Conference has left the UMC. As of May 2022, the South Georgia and Northwest Texas conferences were making preparations to leave the UMC; however, these proposed transitions would require UMC General conference legislation.\nEarly in 2022, according to the United Methodist News Service, the United Methodist Church approved 300 requests by individual churches to leave the denomination. The Wesleyan Covenant Association, which was helping congregations join the Global Methodist Church, said that 1,000 more churches were expected to hold votes on proposed departures from the UMC later in the year and that 300 of 800 Western Pennsylvania Annual Conference churches were considering leaving. Methodist churches and congregations in Slovakia, Bulgaria, Croatia or Romania also expressed dissent and intentions to disaffiliate from the UMC due to progressive tendencies in the American leadership of the UMC. Over 100 churches in Florida and North Carolina had filed or were considering lawsuits. Some of the largest churches in Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas were planning to leave. As of 2022, any church that disaffiliated would be responsible for paying two years of apportionments and unfunded pension liabilities. Fifty-eight churches belonging to the Louisiana Annual Conference left the United Methodist Church, with seven congregations being from Baton Rouge and six from New Orleans. The disaffiliations from the conference were scheduled to take effect after December 31, 2022. St. Timothy, one of the largest Methodist churches in Louisiana, voted for disaffiliation on November 1, 2022. To prevent certain congregations from disaffiliating, the UMC ordered that certain churches be closed before disaffiliation votes could occur. Several annual conferences designated certain remaining congregations as \"lighthouse congregations\", which offer support to UMC parishioners who objected to their former congregations' disaffiliation.\nAs of December 30, 2023, the number of UMC churches in the United States that were approved for disaffiliation stood at 7,660. This figure represented approximately one-quarter of the UMC churches in the United States.\nThe 2024 General Conference, the first since the delayed 2020 conference ran from April 23 to May 3 in Charlotte, North Carolina. With no debate since many of the more conservative congregations had left, proposals approved included having separate regions outside the United States in order to allow each region to have its own policies, removing language stating \"the practice of homosexuality is incompatible with Christian teaching\", and ending bans on same-sex weddings and gay clergy.\nOn May 28, 2024, the C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire Conference voted to leave the UMC in response to the General Conference decision to allow same-sex marriages and gay clergy. With 1.2 million members, the C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire Conference was the UMC's largest single presence outside the United States.\nFrom 2024 to 2025, violence occurred in Nigeria between United Methodists and Global Methodists. 3 United Methodists were killed, and several buildings were damaged.\n2025-present: Worldwide Regionalization.\nAt the May 2024 General Conference, delegates approved a Constitutional Amendment called Worldwide Regionalization that would give Regions of the church around the world equal autonomy to adapt the Book of Discipline, create a regional hymnal, and set policies on membership, ordination, and marriage within different cultural contexts, missional needs, and legal contexts around the world. Over the course of a year and a half, Annual Conference (local) delegates around the world voted on whether to ratify the amendments. The amendments were officially and overwhelmingly ratified in November 2025. What were Central Conferences have been renamed Regional Conferences and a US Regional Conference is created by the amendments. Before regionalization, the US was unable to make adaptations to the Discipline, unlike other places in the church and any such efforts by the US required action to be taken at General Conference, a worldwide body, instead of locally. There are four Regional Conferences in Africa, three in Europe, one in the Philippines, and there will be one in the United States. Advocates for Regionalization deemed the restructuring necessary to decolonize the church and to advance church unity.\nBeliefs.\nThe United Methodist Church seeks to create disciples for Christ through outreach, evangelism, and through seeking holiness, also called sanctification, by the power of the Holy Spirit. The flame in the church logo represents the work of the Holy Spirit in the world, and the two parts of the flame also represent the predecessor denominations, the Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren, united at the base symbolizing the 1968 merger.\nThe United Methodist Church understands itself to be part of the holy catholic (or universal) church and it recognizes the historic ecumenical creeds, the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed; which are used frequently in services of worship. The Book of Discipline also recognizes the importance of the Chalcedonian Creed of the Council of Chalcedon. It upholds the concept of the \"visible and invisible Church,\" meaning that all who are truly believers in every age belong to the holy Church invisible, while the United Methodist Church is a branch of the Church visible, to which all believers must be connected as it is the only institution wherein the Word of God is preached and the Sacraments are administered.\nSome argue that the United Methodist Church can lay a claim to apostolic succession, as understood in the traditional sense. As a result of the American Revolution, John Wesley was compelled in 1784 to break with standard practice and ordain two of his lay preachers as presbyters, Thomas Vasey and Richard Whatcoat. Thomas Coke, already an Anglican priest, assisted Wesley in this action. Coke was then \"set apart\" as a Superintendent (bishop) by Wesley and dispatched with Vasey and Whatcoat to America to take charge of Methodist activities there. In defense of his action to ordain, Wesley himself cited an ancient opinion from the Church of Alexandria, which held that bishops and presbyters constituted one order and therefore, bishops are to be elected from and by the presbyterate. He knew that for two centuries the succession of bishops in the Church of Alexandria was preserved through ordination by presbyters alone and was considered valid by the Early Church. Methodists today who would argue for apostolic succession would do so on these grounds.\nAlthough United Methodist practices and interpretation of beliefs have evolved over time, these practices and beliefs can be traced to the writings of the church's founders, especially John Wesley and Charles Wesley (Anglicans), but also Philip William Otterbein and Martin Boehm (United Brethren), and Jacob Albright (Evangelical Association). With the formation of the United Methodist Church in 1968, theologian Albert C. Outler led the team which systematized denominational doctrine. Outler's work proved pivotal in the work of union, and he is largely considered the first United Methodist theologian.\nDoctrine.\nThe officially established Doctrinal Standards of United Methodism are:\nThese Doctrinal Standards are constitutionally protected and nearly impossible to change or remove. Other doctrines of the United Methodist Church are found in the \"Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church\".\nSummary of basic beliefs.\nThe basic beliefs of the United Methodist Church include:\nDistinctive Wesleyan emphases.\nThe key emphasis of Wesley's theology relates to how divine grace operates within the individual. Wesley defined the Way of Salvation as the operation of grace in at least three parts: Prevenient Grace, Justifying Grace, and Sanctifying Grace.\nPrevenient grace, or the grace that \"goes before\" us, is given to all people. It is that power which enables us to love and motivates us to seek a relationship with God through Jesus Christ. This grace is the present work of God to turn us from our sin-corrupted human will to the loving will of the Father. In this work, God desires that we might sense both our sinfulness before God and God's offer of salvation. Prevenient grace allows those tainted by sin to nevertheless make a truly free choice to accept or reject God's salvation in Christ.\nJustifying Grace or Accepting Grace is that grace, offered by God to all people, that we receive by faith and trust in Christ, through which God pardons the believer of sin. It is in justifying grace we are received by God, in spite of our sin. In this reception, we are forgiven through the atoning work of Jesus Christ on the cross. The justifying grace cancels our guilt and empowers us to resist the power of sin and to fully love God and neighbor. Today, justifying grace is also known as conversion, \"accepting Jesus as your personal Lord and Savior,\" or being \"born again.\" John Wesley originally called this experience the New Birth. This experience can occur in different ways; it can be one transforming moment, such as an altar call experience, or it may involve a series of decisions across a period of time.\nSanctifying Grace is that grace of God which sustains the believers in the journey toward Christian Perfection: a genuine love of God with heart, soul, mind, and strength, and a genuine love of our neighbors as ourselves. Sanctifying grace enables us to respond to God by leading a Spirit-filled and Christ-like life aimed toward love. Wesley never claimed this state of perfection for himself but instead insisted the attainment of perfection was possible for all Christians. Here the English Reformer parted company with both Luther and Calvin, who denied that a man would ever reach a state in this life in which he could not fall into sin. Such a man can lose all inclination to evil and can gain perfection in this life.\nWesleyan theology maintains that salvation is the act of God's grace entirely, from invitation, to pardon, to growth in holiness. Furthermore, God's prevenient, justifying, and sanctifying grace interact dynamically in the lives of Christians from birth to death.\nAccording to Wesleyan understanding, good works are the fruit of one's salvation, not the way in which that salvation was earned. Faith and good works go hand in hand in Methodist theology: a living tree naturally and inevitably bears fruit. Wesleyan theology rejects the doctrine of eternal security, believing that salvation can be rejected.&lt;ref name=\"Weber/Kalberg-Conditional preservation of the saints\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Wesley emphasized that believers must continue to grow in their relationship with Christ, through the process of Sanctification.\nA key outgrowth of this theology is the United Methodist dedication not only to the Evangelical Gospel of repentance and a personal relationship with God, but also to the Social Gospel and a commitment to social justice issues that have included abolition, women's suffrage, labor rights, civil rights, and ministry with the poor.\nCharacterization of Wesleyan theology.\nMethodist theology stands at a unique crossroads between evangelical, holiness and sacramental, as well as between liturgical and charismatic, and between Anglo-Catholic and Reformed worship. It has been characterized as Wesleyan\u2013Arminian theology with an emphasis on the work of the Holy Spirit to bring holiness into the life of the participating believer. The United Methodist Church believes in \"prima scriptura\", seeing the Bible as the primary authority in the Church and using sacred tradition, reason, and experience to interpret it, with the aid of the Holy Spirit (see Wesleyan Quadrilateral). Therefore, according to \"The Book of Discipline,\" United Methodist theology is at once \"catholic, evangelical, and reformed.\"\nToday, the UMC is generally considered one of the more moderate and tolerant denominations with respect to race, gender, and ideology, though the denomination itself includes a wide spectrum of attitudes. Comparatively, the UMC stands to the right of liberal and progressive Protestant groups such as the United Church of Christ and the Episcopal Church on certain issues (until recently regarding sexuality), but to the left of historically conservative evangelical traditions such as the Southern Baptists and Pentecostalism, in regard to theological matters such as social justice and Biblical interpretation. The UMC is made up of a broad diversity of thought, and so there are many clergy and laity within the UMC that hold differing viewpoints on such theological matters.\nDiversity within beliefs.\nIn appealing for tolerance of diversity of theological opinions, John Wesley said, \"Though we may not think alike, may we not all love alike?\" The phrase \"In essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in all things, charity\" has also become a maxim among Methodists, who have always maintained a great diversity of opinion on many matters within the Church.\nThe United Methodist Church allows for a wide range of theological and political beliefs. For example, former President George W. Bush (R-TX), former First Lady Laura Bush and former Attorney General of the United States, Jeff Sessions, are United Methodists, as are Senator Elizabeth Warren (D-MA), former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton (D-NY) and former Senator Max Cleland (D-GA).\nThe Pew Research Center's 2014 US Religious Landscape Study concluded that the political preferences of US adult members of the United Methodist Church was 54 percent Republican / lean Republican, 35 percent Democrat / lean Democrat, and 11 percent independent / no lean / other.\nSocial issues.\nAbortion.\nThe topic of abortion is complex for the United Methodist Church. The United Methodist Church affirms these two sentences in The Social Principles: \"Our belief in the sanctity of unborn human life makes us reluctant to approve abortion. But we are equally bound to respect the sacredness of the life and well-being of the mother and the unborn child.\" (Book of Discipline \u00b6161.J). The denomination is committed to \"assist[ing] the ministry of crisis pregnancy centers and pregnancy resource centers that compassionately help women find feasible alternatives to abortion.\" In 2016, the United Methodist General Conference voted to withdraw from the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (RCRC), an organization in which it formerly held membership. Annual Conferences could still choose whether to remain a part of the RCRC locally. At the same General Conference, delegates voted to delete a four-decade-old statement from the Book of Resolutions which affirmed the \"Roe v. Wade\" Supreme Court decision on the legality of abortion. A new resolution was re-adopted 56\u20132 in a resolutions subcommittee, decrying gender-selective abortion while also describing abortion as \"violent\" and opposing abortions done for \"trivial reasons.\" The resolution passed in the daily consent agenda with no debate. As an official organization, however, \"the General Board of Church and Society continues to be an advocate for a full range of safe and legal reproductive health care \u2013 including, in certain cases, the option to safely and legally end a pregnancy.\"\nNevertheless, the United Methodist Church holds that \"while we understand the need for women to have access to safe, legal abortions, we also 'mourn and are committed to promoting the diminishment of high abortion rates'.\" and they \"are equally bound to respect the sacredness of the life and well-being of the mother, for whom devastating damage may result from an unacceptable pregnancy. In continuity with past Christian teaching, we recognize tragic conflicts of life with life that may justify abortion, (in the eyes of God) and in such cases we support the legal option of abortion under proper medical procedures.\" The Church cautions that \"Governmental laws and regulations do not provide all the guidance required by the informed Christian conscience.\" The Church emphasizes the need of a supportive ministry to women who have experienced abortions: \"We further encourage local churches to make available contact information for counseling agencies that offer programs to address post-abortion stress for all seeking help.\"\nMembers of the United Methodist Church who identify with the anti-abortion position come mostly from the Confessing Movement within the denomination and have organized into the Taskforce of United Methodists on Abortion and Sexuality (TUMAS) to further their position within the denomination. On the other side, the Methodist Federation for Social Action and United Methodist Women continue to represent pro-choice views.\nAlcohol.\nHistorically, the Methodist Church has supported the temperance movement. John Wesley warned against the dangers of drinking in his famous sermon, \"The Use of Money\", and in his letter to an alcoholic. Today the United Methodist Church states that it \"affirms our long-standing support of abstinence from alcohol as a faithful witness to God's liberating and redeeming love for persons.\" In fact, the United Methodist Church uses unfermented grape juice in the sacrament of Holy Communion, thus \"expressing pastoral concern for recovering alcoholics, enabling the participation of children and youth, and supporting the church's witness of abstinence.\" Moreover, in 2011 and 2012, the United Methodist Church's General Board of Church and Society called on all United Methodists to abstain from alcohol for Lent.\nAnti-racism.\nThe United Methodist Constitution says \u201cThe United Methodist Church proclaims that from God\u2019s goodness and love, God created all persons as God\u2019s unique and beloved children. Racism opposes God\u2019s law, goodness and love and diminishes the image of God in each person. Fueled by white privilege, white supremacy and colonialism, the sin of racism has been a destructive scourge on global society and throughout the history of The United Methodist Church. It continues to destroy our communities, harm persons, obstruct unity and undermine God\u2019s work in this world. Racism must be eradicated. Therefore, The United Methodist Church commits to confronting and eliminating all forms of racism, racial inequity, colonialism, white privilege and white supremacy, in every facet of its life and in society at large.\u201d\nThis statement strengthened the United Methodist Church\u2019s commitment to ending racism, and was passed at the 2024 General Conference and ratified into its Constitution by the worldwide church in 2025. \nCapital punishment.\nThe United Methodist Church, along with some other Methodist churches, condemns capital punishment, saying that it cannot accept retribution or social vengeance as a reason for taking human life. The Church also holds that the death penalty falls unfairly and unequally upon marginalized persons including the poor, the uneducated, ethnic and religious minorities, and persons with mental and emotional illnesses. The United Methodist Church also believes that Jesus explicitly repudiated the \"lex talionis\" in \u2013 and abolished the death penalty in John 8:7. The General Conference of the United Methodist Church calls for its bishops to uphold opposition to capital punishment and for governments to enact an immediate moratorium on carrying out the death penalty sentence.\nCreation.\nThe United Methodist Church, like many mainline Protestant denominations and the Roman Catholic Church, has determined that there is no conflict between faith and the theory of evolution. Some clergy have stated that \"it's time for people of faith to accept evolution.\" Additionally, the UMC officially affirms the theory of evolution and \"opposes introducing theories such as Creationism or Intelligent Design into public school curriculum.\" In 2016, the denomination denied approval for a creationist group to be officially represented at the church's General Conference.\nEuthanasia.\nThe United Methodist Church is opposed to euthanasia and assisted suicide. The official stance mentions that \"The church has an obligation to see that all persons have access to needed pastoral and medical care and therapy in those circumstances that lead to loss of self-worth, suicidal despair, and/or the desire to seek physician-assisted suicide.\" It also states that \"If death is deliberately sought as the means to relieve suffering, that must be understood as direct and intentional taking of life\u00a0... The United Methodist tradition opposes the taking of life as an offense against God's sole dominion over life, and an abandonment of hope and humility before God.\"\nThe United Methodist Church, represented by Bishop Scott Jones of the Texas Annual Conference, on behalf of the Houston Methodist Research Institute, and the Roman Catholic Church, represented by Archbishop Vincenzo Paglia, of the Pontifical Academy for Life, signed a \"Joint Declaration on the End of Life and Palliative Care\", on 17 September 2018, reaffirming the common stance of both denominations in opposing euthanasia.\nGambling.\nThe United Methodist Church opposes gambling, believing that it is a sin which feeds on human greed and which invites people to place their trust in possessions, rather than in God, whom Christians should \"love ... with all your heart.\" It quotes the Apostle Paul who states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But those who want to be rich fall into temptation and are trapped by many senseless and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction. For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil, and in their eagerness to be rich some have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many pains.\u2014\u200a The United Methodist Church therefore holds that:\nGun control.\nThe United Methodist Church supports federal legislative efforts for strict gun control measures in the United States, and outright bans of most weapons in other nations.\nThe Church also declares all of its churches to be \"a weapon-free zone.\"\nSexuality.\nAccording to The United Methodist Book of Discipline (a new edition of which is usually approved by the United Methodist General Conference every four years), the Church \"affirm[s] that all persons are individuals of sacred worth, created in the image of God\" and encourages United Methodists to be in ministry with and for all people. During the 2024 General Conference, the United Methodist Church removed previous language prohibiting same-sex marriages and the ordination of partnered LGBTQ clergy. According to polling from Pew Research, the majority of United Methodists in the US support the inclusion of homosexual persons, 60 percent of United Methodists said \"homosexuality should be accepted by society\", and 40 percent supported same-sex marriage.\nIn 1732, the founder of Methodism, John Wesley was doing prison ministry and he met Thomas Blair, a man incarcerated for homosexuality. While not defending his actions, Wesley spoke up to the Vice Chancellor against the inhumane treatment of Thomas Blair in prison. Blair also faced the possibility of the death penalty. Wesley also defended Blair in court, and while he was found guilty, his life was spared and John Wesley raised funds to pay his fine so he could be released.\nThe United Methodist Church previously prohibited same-sex unions. Jimmy Creech was defrocked after a highly publicized church trial in 1999 on account of his participation in same-sex union ceremonies. Other ministers have been defrocked for officiating at same-sex weddings and several trials of others are scheduled. Frank Schaefer, who was defrocked and penalized because he had officiated his son's same-sex wedding, was in 2014, re-instated as \"the denomination's top court upheld a June decision by a regional appeals committee to reinstate Schaefer's ministerial credentials.\" Other clergy, who officiated at same-sex marriages, had avoided trials. In 2016, it was announced that Val Rosenquist \"will avoid a church trial and keep her job after she co-officiated with retired Bishop Melvin Talbert at the April same-gender wedding of two church members.\" In 1971, Gene Leggett was defrocked for being homosexual in southern Texas. In 1987, a United Methodist church court in New Hampshire defrocked Methodist minister Rose Mary Denman for openly living with a same-sex partner. In 2005, clergy credentials were removed from Irene Elizabeth Stroud after she was convicted in a church trial of violating church law by engaging in a lesbian relationship; this conviction was later upheld by the Judicial Council, the highest court in the denomination. The Judicial Council also affirmed that a Virginia pastor had the right to deny local church membership to a man in an openly gay relationship. This affirmation, however, was based upon a senior pastor's right to judge the readiness of a congregant to join as a full member of the church.\nOn the other hand, hundreds of United Methodist ministers had openly defied the official position of the United Methodist Church and have publicly revealed their \"lesbian, gay or bisexual\" sexual orientation, an action that could result in their suspension. The New York body also ordained the first openly gay and lesbian clergy. In addition, the Baltimore-Washington Conference of the UMC approved the appointment of an openly partnered lesbian to the diaconate. In 2016, the Western Jurisdiction elected the denomination's first openly and partnered lesbian bishop. While not elected, the UMC reported that the North Central Jurisdiction considered the nomination of an openly gay pastor for bishop.\nAlthough there is no official policy, the Judicial Council of the UMC ruled, in 2008, that ordained transgender pastors could serve in congregations within the denomination. In particular, the first openly transgender pastor within the UMC received overwhelming support from his congregation. In 2016, the South Carolina Annual Conference passed a resolution urging support for non-discrimination protections for transgender people. In 2017, the Northern Illinois Conference commissioned M Barclay as a Deacon and they became the first openly non-binary trans person commissioned in the denomination.\nOn April 28, 2017, the Judicial Council ruled that consecrating a bishop in a same-sex marriage or partnership is a violation of church law at the time and that public marriage records could be considered as evidence of self-avowed homosexuality. In regards to the specific case of Bishop Karen Oliveto, the denomination's first openly gay bishop, the Judicial Council ruled that she \"remains in good standing\" pending the outcome of any administrative or judicial processes initiated within the Western Jurisdiction, since the Judicial Council itself does not have jurisdiction to review Bishop Oliveto's status. The Judicial Council also ruled that Boards of Ordained Ministry must evaluate all candidates regarding issues of sexuality.\nOn May 7, 2018, the Council of Bishops in the United Methodist Church proposed allowing individual pastors and regional church bodies to decide whether to ordain LGBT clergy and perform same-sex weddings. However, on February 26, 2019, a special session of the General Conference rejected this proposal, and voted to strengthen its official opposition to same-sex marriages and ordaining openly LGBT clergy. The vote was 53 percent in favor of the Traditional Plan, the plan maintaining and strengthening the official position, to 47 percent opposed. The Judicial Council had already ruled some parts of the Traditional Plan to be unconstitutional. The delegates also voted to send the plan for further review by the Judicial Council. In March 2019, the German Central Conference announced that it would not be imposing the Traditional Plan. Before the denomination restructured in 2025 through Worldwide Regionalization, the US jurisdictions and Annual Conferences (local governing bodies) were unable to adapt the Book of Discipline like the (formerly-named) Central Conferences (outside the United States). Despite this, the Western Jurisdiction declared their disagreement with the 2019 Traditional Plan and vowed to maintain LGBTQ inclusive policies. In April 2019, the Judicial Council ruled on the 17 petitions of the Traditional Plan, upholding 10 as valid and rejecting 7 as unconstitutional.\nOn January 3, 2020, some denominational leaders along with various advocacy groups submitted a plan called, \"Protocol of Reconciliation and Grace through Separation,\" to split the church over what it described as \"fundamental differences\" over issues pertaining to sexual orientation and gender identity, particularly same-sex marriage. The \"Protocol of Reconciliation and Grace through Separation\" plan would create a new traditionalist Methodist denomination (which came to be the Global Methodist Church), with the existing church moving to more acceptance of non-heterosexual and gender-nonconforming identities. The church's General Conference was expected to vote on the plan in May 2020. The plan would have needed to be approved in May 2020 by the General Conference. It would grant the new denomination $25 million and would allow local churches to vote to affiliate with the new denomination and keep their assets if they leave. The vote was later postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Progressives, too, announced the creation of a new denomination in November 2020, the Liberation Methodist Connexion. In 2022, the Western Jurisdiction elected a second openly gay bishop, Cedrick Bridgeforth, who also is the denomination's first Black gay Bishop.\nDuring the 2024 General Conference, on April 25, 2024, the delegates passed a proposal to restructure the UMC, establishing regionalization that would allow each region to determine its own standards for same-sex marriage and the ordination of partnered LGBTQ clergy. Due to the proposal being a constitutional change, the proposal will need to be ratified by a two-thirds majority of votes cast during the local Annual Conferences. In November 2025, Worldwide Regionalization was ratified, renaming former Central Conferences to Regional Conferences and creating a US Regional Conference granting equal autonomy between Regions around the world, decolonizing the United Methodist Church. Multiple petitions were brought to amend statutory language regarding sexuality during General Conference. On April 30, 2024, the UMC removed penalties for clergy performing same-sex marriages, removed the ban on funding for LGBTQ-affirming organizations, and removed the prohibition on considering openly LGBTQ candidates for ordained ministry. On May 1, 2024, the General Conference of the UMC voted to repeal the prior prohibitions against clergy performing same-sex marriages and the ordination of openly partnered LGBTQ clergy. On May 2, the General Conference voted to approve more petitions, which amended the UMC Social Principles to remove language stating that \"the practice of homosexuality ... is incompatible with Christian teaching\"; revises the language on marriage to state that it is \"a sacred lifelong covenant that brings two people of faith [adult man and woman of consenting age or two adult persons of consenting age] into union with one another and into deeper relationship with God and the religious community\"; states opposition to both child marriage and polygamy; and affirms support for consent in sexual relations. On May 3, during the final day of business, the General Conference removed language from church law imposing potential penalties for officiating at same-sex weddings, penalties for being in a same-sex relationship themselves, prohibitions against clergy from officiating or churches hosting same-sex weddings, and mandates that clergy practice celibacy in singleness. In addition, General Conference added language allowing clergy to abstain from officiating any weddings. The Conference maintained the chargeable offense of \"immorality\" but voted against defining the offense to include infidelity or non-celibacy.\nAt the 2024 General Conference, a Constitutional Amendment was passed adding gender and ability to the membership nondiscrimination statement and was ratified in 2025 by the worldwide church, reading \u201cAll persons, without regard to race, gender, ability, color, national origin, status, or economic condition, shall be eligible to attend its worship services, participate in its programs, receive the sacraments, upon baptism be admitted as baptized members, and upon taking vows declaring the Christian faith, become professing members in any local church in the connection.\u201d\nMilitary service.\nAccording to \"The Book of Resolutions of The United Methodist Church\", \"The United Methodist Church calls upon all who choose to take up arms or who order others to do so to evaluate their actions in accordance with historic church teaching limiting resort to war, including questions of proportionality, legal authority, discrimination between combatants and noncombatants, just cause, and probability of success...\"\nThe United Methodist Church opposes conscription as incompatible with the teaching of Scripture. Therefore, the Church supports and extends its ministry to those persons who conscientiously oppose all war, or any particular war, and who therefore refuse to serve in the armed forces or to cooperate with systems of military conscription. However, the United Methodist Church also supports and extends its ministry to those persons who conscientiously choose to serve in the armed forces or to accept alternative service. The church also states that \"as Christians they are aware that neither the way of military action, nor the way of inaction is always righteous before God.\"\nThe United Methodist Church maintains that war is incompatible with Christ's message and teachings. Therefore, the Church rejects war as an instrument of national foreign policy, to be employed only as a last resort in the prevention of such evils as genocide, brutal suppression of human rights, and unprovoked international aggression. It insists that the first moral duty of all nations is to resolve by peaceful means every dispute that arises between or among them; that human values must outweigh military claims as governments determine their priorities; that the militarization of society must be challenged and stopped; that the manufacture, sale, and deployment of armaments must be reduced and controlled; and that the production, possession, or use of nuclear weapons be condemned. Consequently, the United Methodist Church endorses general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.\nThe United Methodist Church, like many Mainline Protestant denominations in the U.S., has a long tradition of providing ordained military chaplains who serve in all branches of the U.S. Armed Forces.\nPornography.\nThe United Methodist Church teaches that pornography is \"not only about sex; it is often about violence, degradation, exploitation, and coercion,\" and their website states that the Church \"oppose[s] all forms of pornography.\" The \"Sexual Ethics Task Force of The United Methodist Church\" states that \"Research shows it [pornography] is not an 'innocent activity'. It is harmful and is generally addictive. Persons who are addicted to pornography are physiologically altered, as is their perspective, relationships with parishioners and family, and their perceptions of girls and women.\"\nStem cell research.\nThe UMC supports federal funding for research on embryos created for \"in vitro\" fertilization that remain after the procreative efforts have ceased, if the embryos were provided for research instead of being destroyed, were not obtained by sale, and those donating had given prior informed consent for the research purposes. The UMC stands in \"opposition to the creation of embryos for the sake of research\" as \"a human embryo, even at its earliest stages, commands our reverence.\" It supports research on stem cells retrieved from umbilical cords and adult stem cells, stating that there are \"few moral questions\" raised by this issue.\nWorship and liturgy.\nThe United Methodist Church includes a variety of approaches to public worship. The common pattern of worship is found in the official liturgies of the church, while the practices of congregations across the denomination are quite diverse.\nThe common pattern comes from John Wesley, who wrote that \"there is no Liturgy in the world, either in ancient or modern language, which breathes more of a solid, scriptural, rational piety, than the Common Prayer of the Church of England.\" When the Methodists in America were separated from the Church of England, John Wesley himself provided a revised version of The Book of Common Prayer called \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists; With Other Occasional Services\". Wesley's \"Sunday Service\" has shaped the official liturgies of the Methodists ever since.\nLike other historic Christian churches, the United Methodist Church has official liturgies for services of Holy Communion, baptism, weddings, funerals, ordination, anointing of the sick and daily office prayer services. Some clergy offer healing services, while exorcism is an occasional practice by some clergy in The United Methodist Church in Africa. These services involve the laying on of hands and anointing with oil. Along with these, there are also special services for holy days such as All Saints Day, Ash Wednesday, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Easter Vigil. These services are contained in \"The United Methodist Hymnal\" and \"The United Methodist Book of Worship (1992)\". Many of these liturgies are derived from the Anglican tradition's Book of Common Prayer. In most cases, congregations also use other elements of liturgical worship, such as candles, optional use of incense at evening prayer, vestments, paraments, banners, and liturgical art.\nTypical worship services in United Methodism will include:\nMany larger United Methodist congregations have incorporated more contemporary styles of music and audio-visual technology into some of their worship services, though these churches generally also offer more traditional services.\nAs John Wesley advocated outdoor evangelism, revival services are a traditional worship practice of Methodism that are often held in United Methodist churches, as well as at outdoor camp meetings and at tent revivals.\nThe chancel of United Methodist churches usually features a lectern and baptismal font on one side of the altar table and a pulpit on the other side. The chancel also features the Christian Flag and sometimes, a processional cross. The chancel is often delimited by chancel rails, sometimes with a mourner's bench in front of it.\nOrder of worship.\nA typical United Methodist order of worship may include the following elements:\nGathering.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrayers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProclamation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nResponse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGoing forth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSaints.\nThe United Methodist Church's understanding of a \"saint\" is not unique among Protestants, yet differs significantly from the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, and Lutheran views. Methodists do not have a process for electing people to sainthood. They do not pray to saints, nor do they believe that saints serve as mediators to God. The denomination considers all faithful Christians to be saints.\nMethodist institutions may be named after a biblical figure (e.g., \"St. James UMC\"). Methodists also honor notable heroes and heroines of the Christian faith and look to these prominent saints as providing examples of holy living and commitment to Christ that are worthy of imitation. Such exemplary saints include martyrs, confessors of the Faith, evangelists, or important biblical figures such as Saint Matthew. Lutheran theologian and anti-Nazi martyr Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Salvation Army founder William Booth, African missionary David Livingstone and Methodism's revered founder John Wesley are among many cited as Protestant saints.\nArticle XIV of \"The United Methodist Articles of Religion\" explicitly rejects \"invocation of saints\" (praying to saints). The text reads \"\u2014Of Purgatory\u2014The Romish doctrine concerning purgatory, pardon, worshiping, and adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also invocation of saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but repugnant to the Word of God.\"\nOrganization.\nGovernance.\nThe church is decentralized with the General Conference being the official governing body. However, administratively the church has a governing structure that is similar to that of the United States government:\nGeneral Conference.\nThe United Methodist Church is organized into conferences. The highest level is called the \"General Conference\" and is the only organization which may speak officially for the church. The General Conference meets every four years (quadrennium). Legislative changes are recorded in \"The Book of Discipline\" which is revised after each General Conference. Non-legislative resolutions are recorded in the \"Book of Resolutions\", which is published after each General Conference, and expire after eight years unless passed again by a subsequent session of General Conference. The most recent General Conferences were held in Portland, Oregon in 2016, and St. Louis, Missouri, in 2019. The event is currently rotated between the US jurisdictions of the church. Bishops, councils, committees, boards, elders, etc., are not permitted to speak on behalf of the United Methodist Church as this authority is reserved solely for the General Conference in accordance with the \"Book of Discipline\".\nThe plenary session is presided over by an active bishop who has been selected by a committee of delegates to the conference. It is not uncommon for different bishops to preside on different days. The presiding officer is usually accompanied by parliamentarians.\nThe church had planned for a conference outside of the United States for the first time in history in 2024. These plans were established in 2015 for the first meeting. However, these plans were cancelled because organizers were unable to find a convention space that would be available for two weeks to host the global gathering. Sara Hotchkiss, business manager for the Commission on General Conference stated:\"No one has done anything wrong, or there's no reason not to go. It's just simply when we did a bid process, the facilities needed for the length of our conference were not available,\"\nJurisdictional and central conferences.\nSubordinate to the General Conference are the jurisdictional and central conferences which also meet every four years. The United States is divided into five jurisdictions: Northeastern, Southeastern, North Central, South Central and Western. Outside the United States the church is divided into seven central conferences: Africa, Congo, West Africa, Central &amp; Southern Europe, Germany, Northern Europe and Eurasia, and the Philippines. The main purpose of the jurisdictional and central conferences is to elect and appoint bishops, the chief administrators of the church. Additionally, central conferences may limitedly adapt the church law to the needs of their areas. Bishops thus elected serve \"episcopal areas\", which consist of one or more \"annual conferences\".\nIn the US, decisions in-between the four-year meetings are made by the Mission Council (usually consisting of church bishops). One of the most high-profile decisions in recent years by one of the councils was a decision by the Mission Council of the South Central Jurisdiction which in March 2007 approved a 99-year lease of at Southern Methodist University for the George W. Bush Presidential Library. The decision generated controversy in light of Bush's support of the Iraq War which the church bishops have criticized. A debate over whether the decision should or could be submitted for approval by the Southern Jurisdictional Conference at its July 2008 meeting in Dallas, Texas, remains unresolved.\nJudicial Council.\nThe Judicial Council is the highest court in the denomination. It consists of nine members, who are elected by the General Conference for an eight-year term. Its membership consists of both laity and clergy: the ratio of laity to clergy alternates every eight years. The Judicial Council interprets the \"Book of Discipline\" between sessions of General Conference, and during General Conference, the Judicial Council rules on the constitutionality of laws passed by General Conference. The Council also determines whether actions of local churches, annual conferences, church agencies, and bishops are in accordance with church law. The Council reviews all decisions of law made by bishops. The Judicial Council cannot create any legislation; it can only interpret existing legislation. The Council meets twice a year at various locations throughout the world. The Judicial Council also hears appeals from those who have been accused of chargeable offenses that can result in defrocking or revocation of membership.\nAnnual conference.\nThe annual conference, roughly the equivalent of a diocese in the Anglican Communion and the Roman Catholic Church or a synod in some Lutheran denominations such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, is the basic unit of organization within the UMC. The term \"annual conference\" is often used to refer to the geographical area it covers as well as the frequency of meeting. Clergy are members of their annual conference rather than of any local congregation, and are appointed to a local church or other charge annually by the conference's resident bishop at the meeting of the annual conference. In many ways, the United Methodist Church operates in a connectional organization of the annual conferences, and actions taken by one conference are not binding upon another.\nDistricts.\nAnnual conferences are further divided into districts, each served by a district superintendent. The district superintendents are also appointed annually from the ordained elders of the annual conference by the bishop. District superintendents, upon completion of their service as superintendent, routinely return to serving local congregations. The annual conference cabinet is composed of the bishop and the district superintendents.\nLocal churches.\n\"The Book of Discipline\" is the guidebook for local churches and pastors and describes in considerable detail the organizational structure of local United Methodist churches. All UM churches must have a board of trustees with at least three members and no more than nine members and it is recommended that no gender should hold more than a 2/3 majority. All churches must also have a nominations committee, a finance committee and a church council or administrative council. Other committees are suggested but not required such as a missions committee, or evangelism or worship committee. Term limits are set for some committees but not for all. The church conference is an annual meeting of all the officers of the church and any interested members. This committee has the exclusive power to set pastors' salaries (compensation packages for tax purposes) and to elect officers to the committees.\nAdministrative offices.\nThere is no official headquarters of the UMC although many of its biggest administrative offices are in Nashville, Tennessee, and are physically located near Vanderbilt University (which has historic Methodist ties but is no longer associated with the church).\nWhile the General Conference is the only organization that can officially speak for the United Methodist Church as a whole, there are 13 agencies, boards and commissions of the general church. These organizations address specific topic areas of denomination-wide concern with administrative offices throughout the United States.\nUnited Methodist Volunteers in Mission.\nUnited Methodist Volunteers in Mission (UMVIM) is the short-term mission arm of the United Methodist Church. UMVIM coordinates mission projects for over 100,000 United Methodist volunteers every year. UMVIM coordinates over 400 international development projects.\nEducation.\nThere are two separate pages describing this in more detail: United Methodist Church higher education and International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities.\nThroughout its history, the United Methodist Church has placed great emphasis on the importance of education. As such, the United Methodist Church established and is affiliated with around one hundred colleges and universities in the United States, including American University, Syracuse University, Boston University, Emory University, Duke University, Drew University, Otterbein University, University of Denver, University of Evansville, and Southern Methodist University. Most are members of the International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities. The church operates three hundred sixty schools and institutions overseas, notably Africa University in Zimbabwe.\nThere are 13 United Methodist seminaries. The United Methodist Church among Christian churches has a highly educated membership, with 37% of members holding graduate or post-graduate degrees. The church also claims a disproportionate share of high-income earners.\nClergy.\nUnited Methodist clergy consist of elders, local pastors, associate members and deacons. They hold membership in the annual conference and not in the local church. Additionally provisional clergy hold membership in the annual conference while they are under appointment to a local church or extension ministry. There are several offices of ministry within the United Methodist Church.\nCertified lay ministers may also be appointed to serve a church but under the supervision and direction of an elder.\nHistory.\nThe first Methodist clergy were ordained by John Wesley, a priest of the Church of England, because of the crisis caused by the American Revolution which isolated the Methodists in the States from the Church of England and its sacraments. Today, the clergy includes men and women who are ordained by bishops as elders and deacons and are appointed to various ministries. Elders in the United Methodist Church itinerate and are subject to the authority and appointment of their bishops. They generally serve as pastors in local congregations. Deacons are in \"service\" ministry and may serve as musicians, liturgists, educators, business administrators, and a number of other areas. Elders and deacons are required to obtain a master's degree (generally an M.Div.), or another equivalent degree, before \"commissioning\" and then ultimately ordination. Elders in full connection are each a member of their Annual Conference Order of Elders. Likewise each deacon in full connection is a member of their Annual Conference Order of Deacons.\nOrdination of women.\nThe Methodist Church has allowed ordination of women with full rights of clergy since 1956, when Maud K. Jensen was ordained and admitted into full connection in the Central Pennsylvania Annual Conference. This action was based upon its understanding of biblical principles. The United Methodist Church, along with some other Protestant churches, holds that when the historical contexts involved are understood, a coherent Biblical argument can be made in favor of women's ordination. In 1972, Jeanne Audrey Powers became the first woman to be nominated for the office of a bishop in The United Methodist Church.\nEarly Methodism.\nIn 1761, John Wesley, the founder of Methodism allowed a woman to preach, Sarah Crosby.In 1771, when Crosby and Mary Bosanquet faced criticism for preaching, Mary Bosanquet wrote a letter to Wesley, which persuaded Wesley to approve women preaching in public, signing letters of endorsement, recognizing the \u201cextraordinary call\u201d some women had.\nAfter John Wesley died in 1791, the church went through splits and was less favorable towards women preaching\nThe Methodist Church and its predecessors.\nHelenor M. Davisson was the first woman to be ordained as a Deacon in 1866 in the Methodist Protestant Church, the first woman to be ordained in any Methodist tradition.\nIn the Methodist Episcopal Church, Margaret Newton Van Cottwas the first woman to receive a local preacher\u2019s license in 1869. In 1875, Pauline Williams Martindale was ordained as an Elder in the Methodist Protestant Church. In 1880, Anna Howard Shaw and Anna Oliver sought ordination from the Methodist Episcopal Church, but were denied, so they transferred to the Methodist Protestant Church where they were ordained. However, the Methodist Protestant Church ruled Anna Howard Shaw\u2019s ordination was out of order in 1884. In 1920, the Methodist Episcopal Church granted women the right to be licensed as local preachers and in 1924, limited clergy rights as Elders and Deacons, but not conference members. The Methodist Episcopal Church, South, which split from the Methodist Episcopal Church over slavery, did not accept women\u2019s ordination. In 1939, the Methodist Episcopal Church, the Methodist Protestant Church, and the Methodist Episcopal Church, South merged and formed the Methodist Church, one of the predecessors of the United Methodist Church. The Methodist Church granted full clergy rights to women in 1956.\nThe Evangelical United Brethren Church and its predecessors.\nOne of the predecessors of the United Methodist Church, the Evangelical Church (not to be confused with modern Evangelicalism), discouraged women\u2019s ordination. Another predecessor, the Church of the United Brethren in Christ (New Constitution), granted a preaching license to Charity Opheral in 1849, but later passed a resolution against women preaching in 1857. The United Brethren Church began ordaining women in 1889. Ella Niswonger was the first woman ordained in the United Brethren Church. In 1904, Minnie Jackson Goins became the first African American woman ordained as an elder in the United Brethren Church. However, when the Evangelical Church and the United Brethren Church united in 1946 as the Evangelical United Brethren Church, women were denied ordination.\nThe United Methodist Church.\nIn 1968, the Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren Church merged, forming the United Methodist Church. The United Methodist Church has affirmed full clergy rights for women since its creation.\nMilestones for women\u2019s ordination in the United Methodist Church include but are not limited to\nBishop.\nAll clergy appointments are made and fixed annually by the resident bishop on the advice of the Annual Conference Cabinet, which is composed of the Area Provost/Dean (if one is appointed) and the several district superintendents of the districts of the Annual Conference. Until the bishop has read the appointments at the session of the Annual Conference, no appointments are officially fixed. Many Annual Conferences try to avoid making appointment changes between sessions of Annual Conference. While an appointment is made one year at a time, it is most common for an appointment to be continued for multiple years. Appointment tenures in extension ministries, such as military chaplaincy, campus ministry, missions, higher education and other ministries beyond the local church are often even longer.\nElder.\nElders are called by God, affirmed by the church, and ordained by a bishop to a ministry of Word, Sacrament, Order and Service within the church. They may be appointed to the local church, or to other valid extension ministries of the church. Elders are given the authority to preach the Word of God, administer the sacraments of the church, to provide care and counseling, and to order the life of the church for ministry and mission. Elders may also be appointed to extension ministry to serve as district superintendents, and they are eligible for election to the episcopacy. Elders serve a term of two\u2013three years as provisional elders prior to their ordination.\nDeacon.\nDeacons are called by God, affirmed by the church, and ordained by a bishop to servant leadership within the church.They are ordained to ministries of word, service, compassion, and justice. They may be appointed to ministry within the local church or to an extension ministry that supports the mission of the church. Deacons give leadership, preach the Word, contribute in worship, conduct marriages, bury the dead, and aid the church in embodying its mission within the world. Deacons assist elders in the sacraments of Holy Communion and Baptism, and may be granted sacramental authority if they are appointed as the pastor in a local church or as their extension ministry requires, upon approval of the bishop. Deacons serve a term of 2\u20133 years as provisional deacons prior to their ordination.\nProvisional clergy.\nAt the 1996 General Conference, the ordination order of transitional deacon was abolished. This created new orders known as \"provisional elder\" or \"provisional deacon\" for those who seek to be ordained in the respective orders. The provisional elder/deacon is a seminary graduate who serves at least two years in full-time appointments after being commissioned. During this period, the provisional elder may be granted sacramental ministry in their local appointment. For the first time in its history non-ordained pastors became a normal expectation, rather than an extraordinary provision for ministry.\nLocal pastors.\nLocal pastors in the United Methodist Church are individuals who are affirmed by the church and appointed by a bishop to serve in a ministry of Word, Sacrament, Order, and Service within the church. The official title for these individuals is \"licensed local pastor.\" Although they are not ordained, they are granted the authority to preach the Word of God, administer the sacraments, provide pastoral care and counseling, and lead the congregation in its ministry and mission.\nA bishop may appoint a licensed local pastor to serve a church when an ordained elder is unavailable, either because of a shortage of clergy or due to the financial hardship of a pastoral charge. Local pastors often serve in bi-vocational roles, fulfilling their ministerial calling both within the church and in their secular employment.\nLicensed local pastors, whether appointed full-time or part-time, are considered clergy. They hold membership in the annual conference rather than in the local church. Their authority to serve as pastors is limited to the specific church to which they are appointed and is valid only for the duration of that appointment. This authority does not extend beyond the assigned context or continue after the appointment ends. In their appointed church, they preach, conduct worship, and carry out the regular responsibilities of a pastor, but only under certain conditions and times agreed upon. While they are not required to hold advanced theological degrees, they must complete a licensing school and continue their education. This may be accomplished by completing an approved Course of Study at a United Methodist seminary or Course of Study school, or by enrolling in a Master of Divinity program at an approved United Methodist seminary.\nLicensed local pastors who wish to continue toward associate membership in the annual conference must successfully complete written and oral examinations, appear before the District Committee on Ministry and the Conference Board of Ordained Ministry, and meet certain age and service requirements as defined by their conference. They may also pursue ordination if they complete a bachelor's degree and fulfill additional requirements set by their Conference Board of Ordained Ministry. These typically include completing an advanced Course of Study or the required seminary coursework at an approved institution.\nWhen a licensed local pastor retires or is no longer appointed to a local church, they return to lay membership in a charge conference.\nLaity.\nThere are two classes of lay membership in the UMC: \"Baptized Members\" and \"Professing Members\".\nThe United Methodist Church (UMC) practices infant and adult baptism. Baptized Members are those who have been baptized as an infant or child, but who have not subsequently professed their own faith. These \"Baptized Members\" become \"Professing Members\" through confirmation and sometimes the profession of faith. Individuals who were not previously baptized are baptized as part of their profession of faith and thus become \"Professing Members\" in this manner. Individuals may also become a \"Professing Member\" through transfer from another Christian denomination.\nUnlike confirmation and profession of faith, Baptism is a sacrament in the UMC. The \"Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church\" directs the local church to offer membership preparation or confirmation classes to all people, including adults. The term confirmation is generally reserved for youth, while some variation on \"membership class\" is generally used for adults wishing to join the church. The \"Book of Discipline\" normally allows any youth at least completing sixth grade to participate, although the pastor has discretionary authority to allow a younger person to participate. In confirmation and membership preparation classes, students learn about Church and the Methodist-Christian theological tradition in order to profess their ultimate faith in Christ.\nLay members are extremely important in the UMC. The Professing Members are part of all major decisions in the church. General, Jurisdictional, Central, and Annual Conferences are all required to have an equal number of laity and clergy.\nIn a local church, many decisions are made by an administrative board or council. This council is made up of laity representing various other organizations within the local church. The elder or local pastor sits on the council as a voting member.\nAdditionally, Laity may serve the church in several distinct roles including:\nLay servant.\nAnother position in the United Methodist Church is that of the lay servant. Although not considered clergy, lay servants often preach during services of worship when an ordained elder, Local Pastor, Associate Member or deacon is unavailable. There are two categories of lay servants: \"local church lay servant\", who serve in and through their local churches, and \"certified lay servants\", who serve in their own churches, in other churches, and through district or conference projects and programs. To be recognized as local church lay servant,\nthey must be recommended by their pastor and Church Council or Charge Conference, and complete the basic course for lay servant. Each year they must reapply, reporting how they have served and continued to learn during that year. To be recognized as certified lay servant, they must be recommended by their pastor and Church Council or Charge Conference, complete the basic course and one advanced lay servant course, and be interviewed by the District or Conference Committee on Lay Speaking. They must report and reapply annually; and they must complete at least one advanced course every three years.\nCertified lay ministers.\nThe 2004 General Conference created another class of ministry, the certified lay minister (CLM). CLMs are not considered clergy but instead remain lay members of the United Methodist Church. A Certified Lay Minister (CLM) is a qualified United Methodist layperson called to congregational leadership as part of a ministry team under the supervision an ordained minister. Paragraph 271 in the 2012 Book of Discipline explains Certified Lay Ministry, requirements, and service distinction.\nA person wishing to become a CLM enters the certification process, which includes training, support, supervision, and accountability to the District Committee on Ordained Ministry. CLMs are laypeople serving out their call as disciples of Jesus Christ.\nDeaconesses and Home Missioners.\nDeaconesses and Home Missioners are an order of laity \u201ccalled by God to a lifetime relationship in The United Methodist Church for engagement with a full-time vocation in ministries of love, justice and service.\u201d Deaconesses and Home Missioners form a \u201ccovenant community that is rooted in Scripture, informed by history, driven by mission, ecumenical in scope and global in outreach.\u201d The Book of Discipline says that Deaconesses and Home Missioners strive to \u201calleviate suffering; eradicate causes of injustice and all that robs life of dignity and worth; facilitate the development of full human potential; and share in building global community through the church universal.\u201d In the United Methodist Church, Deaconesses are not female Deacons but are a separate order from Deacons (both of which are inclusive of all genders) (Deacons are also a clergy order). Deaconesses and Home Missioners are the same order but Home Missioner is a non-gendered title sometimes taken by men and others in the office. Deaconesses and Home Missioners are laity and many professions and occupations are represented in the Order.\nEcumenical relations.\nMethodism is one tradition within the Christian Church. The United Methodist Church is active in ecumenical relations with other Christian groups and denominations. It is a member of the National Council of Churches, the World Council of Churches, Churches Uniting in Christ, and Christian Churches Together. In addition, it voted to seek observer status in the National Association of Evangelicals and in the World Evangelical Fellowship. However, there are some in the United Methodist Church who feel that false ecumenism might result in the \"blurring of theological and confessional differences in the interests of unity.\"\nIn April 2005, the United Methodist Council of Bishops approved \"A Proposal for Interim Eucharistic Sharing.\" This document was the first step toward full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). The ELCA approved this same document in August 2005. At the 2008 General Conference, the United Methodist Church approved full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. The ELCA approved this document on August 20, 2009, at its annual churchwide assembly.\nThe United Methodist Church has since 1985 been exploring a possible merger with three historically African-American Methodist denominations: the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, and the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. A \"Commission on Pan Methodist Cooperation and Union\" formed in 2000 to carry out work on such a merger. In May 2012, The United Methodist Church entered into full communion with the African Methodist Episcopal Church, African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, African Union Methodist Protestant Church, Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, and Union American Methodist Episcopal Church, in which these Churches agreed to \"recognize each other's churches, share sacraments, and affirm their clergy and ministries.\"\nThere are also a number of churches such as the Evangelical Methodist Church in Argentina, Evangelical Church of Uruguay, and Methodist Church in India (MCI), that are \"autonomous affiliated\" churches in relation to the United Methodist Church.\nThe UMC is a member of the Wesleyan Holiness Consortium, which seeks to reconceive and promote Biblical holiness in today's Church, and many United Methodist congregations are members of the Christian Holiness Partnership, with ten percent of local church membership in the Christian Holiness Partnership being from the United Methodist connection. It is also active in the World Methodist Council, an interdenominational group composed of various churches in the tradition of John Wesley to promote the Gospel throughout the world. On July 18, 2006, delegates to the World Methodist Council voted unanimously to adopt the \"Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification\", which was approved in 1999 by the Vatican and the Lutheran World Federation.\nFull Communion.\nThe United Methodist Church is in full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America; the Moravian Church in North America (Northern and Southern Provinces); \nPan-Methodist Churches which include The African Methodist Episcopal Church, The African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, The African Union Methodist Protestant Church, The Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, The Union American Methodist Episcopal Church; and the Uniting Church in Sweden. The United Methodist Church also has a large number of churches in partnerships in \"formal, ecumenical relationships approved by the General Conference\" which are categorized as Concordat Churches, Affiliated Autonomous Churches, Affiliated United Churches, and Known Ecumenical Partner Churches Specific to European Central Conferences. While not using the exact wording, these relationships are closely akin to full communion, and include the Methodist Church of Great Britain and the United Church of Canada.\nThe United Methodist Church approved full communion with the Episcopal Church at its Annual Conference on April 30, 2024. The agreement is awaiting approval by the Episcopal Church, which is not expected until 2027. Both churches are already in full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Moravian Church in North America (Northern and Southern Provinces).\nMembership trends.\nLike many other mainline Protestant denominations in the United States, the United Methodist Church has experienced significant membership losses in recent decades. At the time of its formation, the UMC had about 11 million members in nearly 42,000 congregations. In 1975, membership dropped below 10 million for the first time. In 2005, there were about 8 million members in over 34,000 congregations. Membership is concentrated primarily in the Midwest and in the South. Texas has the largest number of members, with about 1 million. The states with the highest membership rates are Oklahoma, Iowa, Mississippi, West Virginia, and North Carolina.\nBy the opening of the 2008 General Conference, total UMC membership was estimated at 11.4 million, with about 7.9 million in the US and 3.5 million overseas. Significantly, about 20 percent of the conference delegates were from Africa, with Filipinos and Europeans making up another 10 percent. During the conference, the delegates voted to finalize the induction of the Methodist Church of the Ivory Coast and its 700,000 members into the denomination. Given current trends in the UMC\u2014with overseas churches growing, especially in Africa, and US churches collectively losing about 1,000 members a week\u2014it was estimated that Africans would make up at least 30 percent of the delegates at the 2012 General Conference, and was also possible that 40 percent of the delegates will be from outside the US. One Congolese bishop has estimated that typical Sunday attendance of the UMC is higher in his country than in the entire United States.\nIn 2018, outside of the United States, it had 6,464,127 members and 12,866 churches.\nIn 2020, it had 6,268,310 members and 30,543 churches in the United States.\nIn 2024, the number decreased to 3,988,810 professing members (members who are baptized and have made a profession of faith), 2257,502 baptized members (non-professing), and 794,307 constituent members (members who are not baptized) in the United States, as divisions grew over church policy regarding homosexuality and the Global Methodist Church was formed in the prior year. The drop to 4.2million members in 2023 represented a loss of approximately 1.2 million members, or about 22% of the previous years' total - the biggest loss that any denomination has ever lost in a single year in American religious history. Much of this decrease (but not all) was because of exiting congregation, wishing to leave the UMC with their property. In 2023, 5,595 UMC congregations chose to disaffiliate. In total, from 2019 to 2023, approximately 25% of the American UMC churches disaffiliated, 7,673 in total.\nChurchwide giving.\nContributions to the local church not only benefit the local congregation, but also have regional, national, and international impact through the United Methodist Church's connectional giving system. The power of this collective giving enables the church to educate clergy, encourage cooperation with other faith communions, fund General Conference, nurture historically black colleges and Africa University, and support bishops.\nIndividuals may also choose to give to the church by naming the Permanent Fund for the United Methodist Church as beneficiary in their estate plans. The Permanent Fund provides a permanent source of funding for the ministries of the United Methodist Church.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32306", "revid": "47668471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32306", "title": "UPN", "text": "American television network (1995\u20132006)\nThe United Paramount Network (UPN) was an American broadcast television network. It was founded on October 27, 1993, and launched on January 16, 1995 before closing on September 15, 2006, when it merged with The WB to form The CW.\nUPN was originally a joint venture between Chris-Craft Industries (later sold to News Corporation)'s subsidiary, United Television, and Viacom's then-recently acquired subsidiary, Paramount Television (which produced most of UPN's programming), then became solely owned by Viacom in 2000 after subsequently purchasing Chris-Craft's remaining stake. On December 31, 2005, UPN was kept by CBS Corporation, which was the new name for Viacom when it split into two separate companies. On January 24, 2006, CBS Corporation and Time Warner jointly announced that the companies would shut down UPN and competitor The WB to launch a new joint venture network later that year. UPN ceased broadcasting on September 15, 2006, with The WB following two days later. Select programs from both networks moved to the new network, The CW, when it launched on September 18, 2006.\nHistory.\n1948\u20131994: Origins of the network.\nParamount Pictures had played a pivotal role in the development of network television. It was a partner in the DuMont Television Network, and the Paramount Theaters chain, which was spun off from the corporate/studio parent and merged with ABC in a deal that helped cement that network's status as a major network. The Paramount Television Network was launched in 1948, but dissolved in the 1950s.\nParamount had long had plans for its own television network with the Paramount Television Service. Set to launch in early 1978, it would have run its programming for only one night a week. Thirty \"Movies of the Week\" would have followed ' on Saturday nights. Plans for the new network were scrapped when sufficient advertising slots could not be sold, though Paramount would contribute some programs to Operation Prime Time, such as the mini-series \"A Woman Called Golda\", and the weekly pop music program, \"Solid Gold\". \"Star Trek: Phase II\" was reworked as the theatrical film, ', absorbing the costs already incurred from the aborted television series.\nParamount, and its eventual parent Viacom (which bought the studio's then-parent, Paramount Communications, in 1994), continued to consider launching their own television network. Independent stations, even more than network affiliates, were feeling the growing pressure of audience erosion to cable television in the 1980s and 1990s; there were unaffiliated commercial television stations in most of the major television markets, even after the foundation of Fox in 1986. Meanwhile, Paramount, which had long been successful in syndication with repeats of ', launched several first-run syndicated series by the 1990s, including \"Entertainment Tonight\", \"The Arsenio Hall Show\", ', \"War of the Worlds\", ', and '.\nIn 1993, Time Warner and Chris-Craft Industries entered into a joint venture to distribute programs via a prime time programming service, the Prime Time Entertainment Network (PTEN), which is UPN's partial parent. Chris-Craft later became a partner in UPN, and Time Warner launched The WB in a joint venture with the Tribune Company at roughly the same time.\n1994\u20131999: Launch and early years.\nParamount formed the Paramount Stations Group in 1991 when it purchased the assets of the TVX Broadcast Group, which owned several independent stations in major markets. This was not unlike the purchase of the Metromedia stations by News Corporation five years earlier, which were used as the nucleus for Fox. In another parallel, 20th Century Fox (the News Corporation subsidiary behind the Fox network, which was spun off with the company's other entertainment assets to 21st Century Fox on June 28, 2013 before Disney acquired them on March 20, 2019), like Paramount, had long been a powerhouse in television syndication. All indicators suggested that Paramount was about to launch a network of its own.\nIn April 1993, the Federal Communications Commission ended the fin-syn rules that prohibited networks from owning the rerun rights to programs they broadcast. Fear that networks would stop buying programs from independent studios was another reason for Paramount to start a network.\nOn October 27, 1993, Viacom and Chris-Craft announced the formation of a new television network, later to be named the United Paramount Network, with initial plans to run two hours of programming in prime time for two nights per week. The new network would be co-owned by United &amp; Paramount Television, while most of its shows were to be produced by Paramount Television.\nInitially, the network was to simply be called \"U\", but the \"U Network\" trademark was held by the now-defunct National Association of College Broadcasters (NACB), which had been operating a satellite television programming network featuring programs largely produced by college students since 1991. The founder and first head of UPN, Lucie Salhany, approached NACB with an offer of US$50,000 to transfer the name. Due to the costs related to rebranding the student network, and under the advice of its then-volunteer legal counsel, Cary Tepper, the non-profit association countered with a request of $100,000, which Salhany refused. At one point, the network was set to be titled the U/P Network before its current name was decided. Ultimately, the \"U\" in UPN stood for Chris-Craft subsidiary United Television, which owned the network's two largest stations, WWOR-TV in New York City and KCOP-TV in Los Angeles; the \"P\" represented Paramount Television, the studio that formed a programming partnership with Chris-Craft to create the network. Chris-Craft and Paramount/Viacom each owned independent stations in several large and mid-sized U.S. cities, and these stations formed the nuclei of the new network.\nWarner Bros. announced plans to launch a similar network, which would become known as The WB, in close proximity to UPN. The belief that a new broadcast network could grow to be competitive was predicated on the idea that the network in question would not have a fledgling rival to contend with. With the change in landscape, the joint understanding of assured defeat prompted executives from Viacom and Time Warner (at the time, UPN and The WB's respective owners, with the latter owning most of The WB) to discuss the prospect of merging the networks together. Both sides reached an agreement on the division of affiliates, but Chris-Craft expressed extreme skepticism and declined to proceed with the merger. A merger would ultimately come in 2006 with the creation of The CW.\nUPN launched on January 16, 1995, initially carrying programming only on Monday and Tuesday nights from 8:00 to 10:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time. The first telecast, the of \"\", was an auspicious start, with 21.3 million viewers; however, \"Voyager\" would neither achieve such viewership levels again, nor would any of the series premiering on UPN's second night of broadcasting survive the season. In contrast, The WB debuted one week earlier, on January 11, with four series \u2013 only one of which, \"Muscle\", would not survive its first season. The first comedy series to premiere on UPN were \"Platypus Man\", starring Richard Jeni, and \"Pig Sty\", with both shows airing Monday nights in the 9:00\u00a0p.m. hour; both received mixed reviews. Neither lasted long.\nOther early UPN programs included the action series \"Nowhere Man\", starring Bruce Greenwood and \"Marker\", starring Richard Grieco; the comic western \"Legend\" starring Richard Dean Anderson; the sci-fi themed action series, \"The Sentinel\"; and \"Moesha\", a sitcom starring R&amp;B musician Brandy Norwood. Of the network's early offerings, only \"Star Trek: Voyager\", \"Moesha\" and \"The Sentinel\" would last longer than one season. As a result of the lack of viewership, UPN operated on a loss and had lost $800\u00a0million by 2000.\nWithin nearly two years of the network's launch, on December 8, 1996, Paramount/Viacom purchased a 50% stake in UPN from Chris-Craft for approximately $160\u00a0million. Like Fox had done nine years earlier, UPN started with a few nights of programming each week, with additional nights of primetime shows gradually being added over the course of several seasons. Because of this, UPN's affiliates were basically independent stations for all intents and purposes during the network's early years, with these stations airing either syndicated programs or movies during primetime on nights when the network did not provide programming. The first expansion of its primetime lineup came with the addition of programming on Wednesday nights on March 6, 1996 (during the second half of the 1995\u201396 season); that expansion also saw UPN assume the broadcast rights to the Blockbuster Entertainment Awards, which aired its inaugural broadcast on CBS the year before.\nUPN ordered 36 sci-fi films to air as part of its weekly movie presentations beginning in 1998; the films were supplied by four production companies, with most of the titles coming from Paramount. Some titles would be shown on Showtime first, which allowed the premium cable channel to cooperate in advertising the movies.\nUPN completed its prime time expansion in the 1998\u201399 season, with Thursdays and Fridays as the last nights of programming to be added to the network's evening slate. That season saw the debut of \"The Secret Diary of Desmond Pfeiffer\", a sitcom set during the Civil War that centered on a black English nobleman who becomes the valet to Abraham Lincoln; even before its premiere, the series was riddled by controversy and protests from several African American activist groups (including the Los Angeles chapter of the NAACP, who picketed outside Paramount Studios one week before the originally scheduled pilot episode) and some advertisers for its perceived lighthearted take on American slavery in the 19th century. Despite the publicity \"Desmond\" received from the controversial approach it applied to its topic, the series suffered from low ratings (with the first episode on October 5, 1998, placing 116th out of 125 programs aired that week on network television) and was canceled after four episodes.\n1999\u20132005: Viacom era and decline.\nSix months before Viacom announced its $36\u00a0billion merger with (the original) CBS Corporation, in March 1999, Viacom applied a contractual clause that would \u2013 within a 45-day grace period \u2013 force Chris-Craft to either buy Viacom out of UPN, or have Chris-Craft sell its ownership stake in UPN to Viacom. Three days later on February 8, Chris-Craft subsequently filed a lawsuit against Viacom in the New York Supreme Court to block Viacom's merger with CBS, claiming that a pact signed between the two partners in 1997 had prevented either from owning \"any interest, financial or otherwise\" in \"any competing network,\" including CBS, for a four-year period through January 2001. On March 17, New York Supreme Court judge Herman Cahn ruled against Chris-Craft's move for a permanent injunction to curtail the Viacom-CBS merger and the enforcement of Viacom's ultimatum.\nUnable to find a suitable partner, on March 20, Chris-Craft allowed Viacom to buy out its 50% stake for $5\u00a0million, giving Viacom full control of UPN. This gave UPN the rare distinction of being one of the only broadcast networks to not have had owned-and-operated stations (O&amp;O) in the three largest media markets, New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago (with The WB \u2013 the only network that never have had an O&amp;O \u2013 being the only other, as minority owner Tribune Broadcasting owned most of its charter affiliates including those in all three markets, while majority owner Time Warner only owned WTBS-TV, an independent station that originated then-superstation TBS). With Viacom taking full ownership control of UPN, KCOP-TV and WWOR-TV lost their statuses as O&amp;Os and automatically became affiliates of UPN, with UPN's \"de facto\" owned-and-operated flagship stations becoming Philadelphia outlet WPSG (now an independent station) and San Francisco outlet KBHK-TV (now KPYX, also an independent). In addition, neither Chris-Craft or Viacom had ever held ownership of Chicago affiliate WPWR-TV, which had been the largest UPN station that was not owned-and-operated by UPN before the Viacom buyout.\nShortly afterward, Viacom shortened UPN's official name from the \"United Paramount Network\" to the three-letter initialism, \"UPN\". Viacom also proposed a rebranding of UPN into the \"Paramount Network\", using a prototype logo based on Paramount's mountain logo, which served as the basis for the \"P\" triangle in UPN's original logo that was used until September 2002. This idea was abandoned after many affiliates protested, citing that the rebranding might confuse viewers and result in ratings declines, alongside the costs of rebranding their stations with a new image and new network (and possible call sign changes). Several years later, cable television network Spike (part of Viacom) rebranded as Paramount Network.\nViacom's purchase of CBS a few months before (which resulted in the merger of that network's owned-and-operated stations into Viacom's Paramount Stations Group unit), created duopolies between CBS and UPN stations in Philadelphia (KYW-TV and WPSG), Boston (WBZ-TV and WSBK-TV), Miami (WFOR-TV and WBFS-TV), Dallas\u2013Fort Worth (KTVT and KTXA), Detroit (WWJ-TV and WKBD-TV), and Pittsburgh (KDKA-TV and WNPA). Viacom's purchase of CBS was said to be the \"death knell\" for the Federal Communications Commission's longtime ban on television station duopolies. Further transactions added San Francisco (KPIX-TV and KBHK-TV, the latter of which was traded to Viacom/CBS by Fox Television Stations) and Sacramento (KOVR and KMAX-TV, the former of which was sold to Viacom/CBS by the Sinclair Broadcast Group) to the mix.\nAt the time of UPN's launch, the network's \"de jure\" flagship stations were Chris-Craft-owned WWOR-TV in Secaucus, New Jersey (which serves the New York City market) and KCOP-TV in Los Angeles (which serves the Los Angeles market). Even after Chris-Craft sold its share in the network to Viacom, WWOR and KCOP were still commonly regarded as the \"de jure\" flagship stations of the network since it had long been common practice for this status to be associated with a network's station in the East Coast and West Coast. For this reason, some doubt was cast on UPN's future after Fox Television Stations bought most of Chris-Craft's television stations for $5.5\u00a0billion on August 12, 2000, which included several UPN affiliates (including WWOR and KCOP). Fox later bought the third-largest UPN affiliate, Chicago's WPWR-TV, through a separate deal with Newsweb Corporation for $450 million in June 2002. Despite the uncertainty of the network's future following the Fox purchases, UPN reached four-year affiliation agreements with Fox Television Stations' nine UPN affiliates on September 24, 2003.\nIn 2001, UPN entered into a public bidding war to acquire two series from The WB \u2013 \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Roswell\" \u2013 from producing studio 20th Century Fox Television. UPN eventually outbid The WB for the shows and aired them together on Tuesday nights until \"Roswell\" ended its run in 2002; \"Buffy\" ended its run the following year. In January 2002, Viacom President and COO, Mel Karmazin restructured UPN, resulting in UPN being taken out of the ownership of Paramount Television, and being placed under the oversight of CBS Television, with CBS President Leslie Moonves being given responsibility for UPN. Under CBS, new shows began to breathe life into UPN starting in Fall 2003 with \"America's Next Top Model\" and sitcom \"All of Us\" (which was produced by Will and Jada Pinkett Smith), followed up by the Fall 2004 premiere of the mystery series \"Veronica Mars\" and the Fall 2005 premiere of the sitcom \"Everybody Hates Chris\", produced and narrated by Chris Rock.\n2005\u20132006: CBS Corporation era and network closure.\nOn June 14, 2005, Viacom announced that it would be split into two companies due to declining performance of the company's stock; both the original Viacom \u2013 which was renamed CBS Corporation \u2013 and a new company that took the Viacom name would be controlled by the original Viacom's parent National Amusements (controlled by Sumner Redstone). UPN was kept by CBS Corporation, while the new Viacom took Paramount Pictures among other holdings each company acquired in the deal. The split took effect on January 1, 2006.\nOn January 24, 2006, UPN parent CBS Corporation and Time Warner, the majority owner of The WB, announced that they would shut down the two respective networks and launch a new broadcast network that would be operated as a joint venture between both companies, The CW, which incorporated UPN and The WB's higher-rated programs with newer series produced exclusively for The CW. The new network immediately signed 10-year affiliation agreements with 16 stations affiliated with The WB (out of 19 stations that were affiliated with the network) that were owned by that network's part-owner, the Tribune Company \u2013 including stations in the coveted markets of New York City, Los Angeles and Chicago \u2013 and 11 UPN stations that were owned by CBS Corporation. Fox Television Stations' nine UPN affiliates were passed over for affiliations as a result, and two days later, those stations removed all UPN branding and ceased promotion of the network's programs. One month later on February 22, Fox announced the formation of MyNetworkTV, a new network that would also launch in September 2006 that would use the company's soon-to-be former UPN affiliates as the nucleus. Over the next eight months, determinations were made as to which shows from the two networks would cross over to The CW, as well as which of UPN and The WB's affiliate stations would be selected to become affiliates of the new network. Programming-wise, six UPN shows \u2013 \"America's Next Top Model\" (which was the last surviving series from UPN that remained on The CW's schedule until it moved to VH1 in 2016), \"Veronica Mars\", \"Everybody Hates Chris\", \"Girlfriends\", \"All of Us\", and \"WWE SmackDown!\" \u2013 were chosen to move to The CW for its inaugural 2006\u201307 fall schedule.\nWith the exception of \"WWE SmackDown!\", all of the programs that aired during the network's final three months were reruns. Unlike The WB, which closed its operations two days later with \"The Night of Favorites and Farewells\" (a special night of programming paying tribute to the network's most popular series), UPN closed with little to no fanfare on September 15, 2006, fading to black after that night's \"WWE SmackDown!.\" The Fox-owned UPN stations had disaffiliated from the network on August 31; as a result, UPN's last two weeks of programming did not air in 10 markets where Fox owned a UPN affiliate that was set to become an owned-and-operated station of MyNetworkTV, when that network launched on September 5, alongside other markets where the local UPN station affiliated with MyNetworkTV or terminated their UPN affiliation during the summer. Shortly after the network's closure, UPN's website was redirected to The CW's website, and then to CBS's website.\nProgramming.\nAt the time of its shutdown, UPN ran only two hours of primetime network programming on Monday through Fridays from 8:00 to 10:00\u00a0p.m. ET (compared to the three primetime hours on Monday through Saturdays and four hours on Sundays offered by the Big Three networks, ABC, NBC and CBS). UPN never carried any weekend primetime programming throughout the network's run (though it did offer children's programming on weekend mornings until 2003, and a movie package to its affiliates on weekend afternoons until 2000, when the latter was replaced with a two-hour repeat block of UPN programs); as a result, affiliates held the responsibility of programming their Saturday and Sunday evening schedules with syndicated programs, sports, movies or network programs that were preempted from earlier in the week due to special programming, in the 8:00\u201310:00\u00a0p.m. (Eastern and Pacific Time) time period. This primetime scheduling allowed for many of the network's affiliates to air local newscasts during the 10:00\u201311:00\u00a0p.m. (Eastern and Pacific Time) time period.\nMost of UPN's programming through the years was produced by Paramount Television or a Viacom-owned sister company (Viacom Productions, Big Ticket Television, Spelling Television or CBS Productions). UPN's first official program was \"\", with the first comedy shows to debut being two short-lived series: the Richard Jeni starring vehicle \"Platypus Man\" and \"Pig Sty\".\nOther notable UPN programs during the network's existence included \"The Sentinel\", \"Moesha\", \"\", \"WWE SmackDown\", \"America's Next Top Model\", \"Girlfriends\", the \"Moesha\" spin-off \"The Parkers\", \"Veronica Mars\", \"Everybody Hates Chris\", \"Home Movies\", and the animated adaptation of \"Dilbert\". In Summer 2005, UPN aired \"R U the Girl\", in which R&amp;B group TLC (not with Left Eye) searched for a woman to join them on a new song. The network also produced some special programs, including 2001's \"Iron Chef USA\". Much of UPN's comedy programming between 1996 and 2006 (particularly those that aired as part of the network's Monday evening lineup) was largely aimed at African American audiences, with minor exceptions in shows such as \"Clueless\", \"Realitycheck\" and \"Head Over Heels\".\nUPN occasionally acquired series canceled by the other broadcast networks, including former WB series \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Roswell\" (both of which moved to UPN in 2001, \"Buffy\" was picked up after The WB chose not to renew it due to issues with license fees while \"Roswell\" joined UPN after that same network also canceled the series), and former ABC series \"Clueless\" and \"The Hughleys\". The first program that UPN acquired from another network was \"In the House\", which moved to the network from NBC (which canceled the LL Cool J sitcom after its second season) in 1996. In its later years, as part of the network's desire to maintain its own identity with its own unique shows, UPN instituted a policy of \"not picking up other networks' scraps\", which was a strong argument when fan pressure was generated in 2004 for them to pick up \"Angel\", the spin-off of \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" which had been dropped from The WB.\nUPN aired only one regular sports event program: the much-hyped XFL in 2001, airing Sunday evening games as part of a package from co-creator and WWE founder Vince McMahon, which also included what was then \"WWF SmackDown!\", and the only time the network carried programming officially outside of weeknights. UPN had planned to air a second season of the XFL in 2002, but it also demanded that \"SmackDown!\" be reduced by 30 minutes; McMahon did not agree to the change and the football league folded not long afterward.\nNews programming.\nLike Fox and The WB, UPN never aired national morning or evening newscasts; however, several of its affiliates and owned-and-operated stations did produce their own local news programs. Several UPN affiliates ran a local newscast in the 10:00\u201311:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern and Pacific (9:00\u201310:00\u00a0p.m. Central and Mountain Time) timeslot at some point during or throughout their affiliations with the network; there were also a few stations that produced a weekday morning newscast, although early evening newscasts were largely absent on most of these stations. The UPN affiliate body had fewer news-producing stations in comparison to stations aligned with the Big Three television networks (NBC, ABC and CBS) and considerably fewer than Fox and especially The WB. In several markets, the local UPN affiliate either outsourced news programming to an NBC, ABC or CBS station in the market (either due to insufficient funds or studio space for production of their own newscasts, or in later years after the FCC permitted duopolies in markets with at least eight unique station owners in 2000, the station being operated through a legal duopoly or management agreement with a major network affiliate); other affiliates opted to carry syndicated programming in the hour following UPN's primetime programming lineup. For example, one of the largest O&amp;O UPN affiliates in the country, WPWR-TV, never aired news programming in its 11-year run. This is mainly due to Viacom and Chris Craft's non-affiliation with the Chicago station.\nWhen the network launched in January 1995, UPN automatically added six affiliates with functioning news departments through Chris-Craft/United Television and Viacom's respective affiliation deals with the network; all of those stations started their news operations as either independent stations or during prior affiliations with other networks: WWOR-TV/Secaucus, New Jersey (New York City), KCOP-TV/Los Angeles, WKBD-TV/Detroit, KPTV/Portland, Oregon, KMSP-TV/Minneapolis and WTOG/Tampa, Florida. Two more stations would join them later on: KSTW/Seattle, also owned by Viacom at the time, after it affiliated with UPN in 1997 through the reversal of a 1995 affiliation switch with CBS affiliate KIRO-TV (which also kept its news department as a UPN affiliate), and KMAX-TV/Sacramento, which joined UPN after being acquired by Viacom in 1998 and began producing newscasts shortly after its 1995 affiliation with The WB. KSTW and WTOG's news departments were shut down in 1998 due to cost-cutting measures mandated by Viacom; newscasts would briefly return to KSTW via a news sharing agreement with KIRO-TV between 2003 and 2005.\nNot all of UPN's news-producing stations were owned by the two companies that formed the nuclei of the network's affiliate group; WUAB/Cleveland, which started its news department in 1988, also continued its 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast as a UPN affiliate (it would begin producing newscasts for sister station WOIO-TV in February 1995, after that station became a CBS affiliate; though WOIO eventually took over production of the newscast by 2002). Harrisburg affiliate WLYH-TV briefly continued its newscasts after switching to UPN from CBS in 1995, until WHP-TV began operating the station under a local marketing agreement that fall. WFTC/Minneapolis continued to produce a late evening newscast after Fox Television Stations (which acquired KMSP-TV through the Chris-Craft purchase, and converted it into a Fox O&amp;O) acquired the station from Clear Channel Communications and switched the station to UPN \u2013 it was moved to 10:00\u00a0p.m. to avoid competing with KMSP's 9:00\u00a0p.m. newscast until the WFTC newscast was canceled in June 2006.\nWith the exception of KPTV and KMSP, both of which are now Fox stations, none of the former UPN affiliates that produced newscasts during their affiliation with the network continue to maintain an independent news department \u2013 despite license requirements imposed by the station's 1983 transfer of its license to Secaucus, New Jersey from New York City to cover New Jersey issues, WWOR-TV, which continued to produce news programming after coming under common ownership with Fox O&amp;O WNYW, shut down its news department in July 2013 and replaced its lone 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast with an outside produced program called \"Chasing New Jersey\", a move that resulted in calls by state politicians for the FCC to revoke Fox's license to operate the station. KTTV took over production of sister station KCOP's newscasts in 2007, before discontinuing news programming on that station in 2013. KMAX's news department has since been merged with that of KOVR although it still produces a morning newscast separate from that station. WKBD shut down its news department (which was later shared with WWJ-TV) in December 2002, with its 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast continuing to be produced by ABC affiliate WXYZ-TV until its eventual cancellation in 2005. CBS re-launched a news operation for both WWJ and WKBD under the umbrella title of \"CBS News Detroit\" in January 2023.\nChildren's programming.\nWhen the network launched in January 1995, UPN introduced a weekend morning cartoon block called \"UPN Kids\" (later called \"The UPN Kids Action Zone\" during the 1998\u201399 season). Prior to the commencement of broadcast, UPN signed a content deal with Saban Entertainment, who produced the animated shows \"Bureau of Alien Detectors\", \"The Mouse and the Monster\" and \"Space Strikers\" for UPN Kids during the 1995-96 and 1996-97 television seasons. \"Space Strikers\" was wholly owned by Saban Entertainment, although the ownership for \"Bureau of Alien Detectors\" and \"The Mouse and the Monster\" was jointly split between Saban and UPN. In late 1997, UPN added two teen-oriented series by Saban to the lineup; \"Sweet Valley High\" (based on the young adult book series by Francine Pascal) and \"Breaker High\" (which co-starred a then-unknown Ryan Gosling). Both shows filled the weekday morning block for the 1997\u201398 season, while they were also included alongside the animated series on Sunday mornings. \"Sweet Valley High\" had previously aired in first-run syndication between 1994 and mid-1997, before moving to UPN Kids. Unlike other networks, UPN gave its affiliates the option of running its weekend children's program block on either Saturdays or Sundays. In January 1998, the network entered into a deal with Saban Entertainment to program the Sunday morning block with Fox Kids programs which had recently ended, such as \"\" and \"Spider-Man\".\nIn the mid to late 1990s, local affiliates of UPN were among some of the first stations in the United States to air dubbed animes such as \"Dragon Ball\", \"Dragon Ball Z\", \"Sailor Moon\" and \"Pok\u00e9mon\". At the time, the dubs of these animes were airing in first-run syndication (also often appearing on Fox and WB affiliates), with \"Pok\u00e9mon\" later moving from syndication to Kids' WB in 1999, and the former moving to Cartoon Network in 1998. The syndicated anime dubs were never officially part of the national UPN Kids block.\nIn 1998, there were rumors that UPN then entered into discussions with then-corporate sister Nickelodeon (both networks were owned by Viacom) to produce a new block.\nIn 1999, UPN contracted the rights to the network's children's programming lineup to The Walt Disney Company; as a result, the teen-oriented and animated series were replaced with a new block called \"Disney's One Too\", which debuted on September 6, 1999, and featured select programs seen on ABC's \"Disney's One Saturday Morning\" lineup (such as \"Recess\" and '). Many UPN affiliates at the network's launch were already airing The Disney Afternoon, a block supplied by Disney-owned syndication distributor Buena Vista Television; however, that block would be discontinued in August 1997. The addition of \"Disney's One Too\" expanded UPN's children's program block back to two hours, running on Sunday mornings and weekday afternoons. In September 2002, ' moved to UPN from Fox Kids, due to Disney's acquisition of Fox's children's program inventory as well as the Fox Family Channel, which was renamed ABC Family (now Freeform) the past year. At the same time, the \"One Too\" branding was dropped from on-air usage due to the rebranding of ABC's Saturday morning lineup from \"One Saturday Morning\" to \"ABC Kids\" (although the block was unofficially referred to as \"Disney's Animation Weekdays\" outside the network). UPN subsequently chose not to renew its contract with Disney, with the network dropping all children's programming after August 31, 2003. This left UPN as one of only two major broadcast networks that did not air a children's programming block, the other being Pax TV, which discontinued its \"Pax Kids\" lineup in 2000, before returning children's programming as Ion Television through the 2006 launch of Qubo (as a 24/7 network, it was pulled off the air in 2021). Incidentally, UPN's successor The CW carried over the Kids' WB Saturday morning lineup from fellow predecessor The WB, resulting in UPN affiliates that joined The CW in September 2006 carrying network-supplied children's programming for the first time since the \"One Too\" block ended.\nSome Fox stations that declined to carry 4Kids TV passed on that block to an affiliate of UPN or The WB, or an independent station, in order for the Fox affiliate to air general entertainment programming or local newscasts on Saturday mornings (for example, WFLD in Chicago moved the 4Kids TV schedule to co-owned then-UPN affiliate WPWR-TV, while WFLD aired infomercials).\nTelevision films.\nDuring the late 1990s, UPN produced a number of television films under the umbrella brand \"Blockbuster Shockwave Cinema\", in conjunction with sponsor (and then-sister company) Blockbuster Video, almost all of which were sci-fi films.\nFrom UPN's inception until 2000, the network also offered a hosted movie series called the \"UPN Movie Trailer\" to its stations. The weekend block featured mostly older theatrically released action and comedy films, often those from the Paramount film library. The \"Movie Trailer\" block was discontinued in 2000 to give stations that opted for them room for a two-hour block of select UPN series that aired in primetime during the past week. There were also three Paramount-branded blocks that aired on Viacom's UPN owned-and-operated stations between 1995 and 2000: the \"Paramount Teleplex\" as the main brand for movies at any given timeslot, the \"Paramount Prime Movie\" for primetime features, and the \"Paramount Late Movie\" for films airing in late night timeslots. From 2002 to 2006, UPN offered a movie block (airing on Saturdays or Sundays depending on the affiliates) called \"Hot Weekend Movie\", which carried movies (theatrical, made-for-TV and direct-to-video) from the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) library.\nAffiliates.\nUPN had approximately 143 full-power owned-and-operated or primary affiliate stations in the United States, and another 65 stations aired some UPN programming as secondary affiliates. Although it was considered a major network by Nielsen for ratings purposes, UPN was not available in every American television market. In some areas, UPN programming was shown off-pattern by affiliates of other networks (airing immediately after programming from their primary network on some Fox and WB stations, or during overnight timeslots on major network affiliates) or by otherwise independent stations, such as in the case of KIKU-TV in Honolulu, Hawaii. Some affiliates were also known to extensively preempt network programming in order to broadcast local sporting events.\nBy 2003, UPN had an estimated audience reach of 85.98% of all U.S. households (equivalent to 91,689,290 households with at least one television set). In contrast, The WB was viewable in 91.66% of all U.S. television homes. This is mainly because UPN did not have wide distribution in areas ranked below the top 100 Nielsen-designated media markets, whereas The WB operated The WB 100+ Station Group \u2013 a cable-only station group that was launched by the network in September 1998 \u2013 to provide broad coverage to those markets (from January 1995 to October 1999, The WB's programming was carried over the superstation feed of the network's Chicago affiliate WGN-TV through a programming agreement with its owner Tribune Broadcasting). Despite the fact that UPN would not be able to have extensive small-market coverage at launch due to a lack of commercial television stations in those areas, Paramount Television denied Advance Entertainment Corporation permission from distributing the network's programming over the WWOR EMI Service, the superstation feed of New York City affiliate WWOR-TV, preventing the network from reaching markets without an exclusive or secondary UPN affiliate. The network proposed launching a cable-originated service to increase its distribution to markets without an over-the-air affiliate in July 1998; however, the service, which was to have been named UPN Plus, ultimately never launched. UPN did have one cable-only affiliate in its station form, WNFM-TV in Fort Myers, Florida, which joined the network in 1998.\nIn markets where Viacom had a CBS/UPN duopoly after its 2000 merger with CBS, the UPN station was used to air CBS network programs if local sporting events or extended breaking news coverage would air on the CBS station, sometimes resulting in UPN programs being pre-empted outright, as the CBS-owned outlets were usually the senior partner in the duopolies (an exception being Detroit, where WKBD-TV is considered the senior partner to WWJ-TV due to WKBD being longer-established). One such event occurred on September 26, 2004, when Hurricane Jeanne forced a scheduled NFL game between the Pittsburgh Steelers and Miami Dolphins in Miami to be postponed from its scheduled start time of 1:00\u00a0p.m. to 8:30\u00a0p.m. ET; the game aired locally on KDKA-TV and WFOR-TV while their respective UPN sister stations, WNPA-TV and WBFS-TV, aired CBS's regular Sunday night programming instead.\nThese factors led to the network struggling in the ratings over much of UPN's existence, with its later \"Star Trek\" franchise, \"\", perhaps suffering the most and ultimately being canceled by the network in a controversial decision in February 2005. The most consistent ratings performer for the network was \"WWE SmackDown\". During the 2004\u20132005 season, the network was getting consistently better ratings than The WB, much of this thanks to its carriage of the WWE.\nStation standardization.\nWhen the network launched, UPN began having most of its stations branded using a combination of \"UPN\" or \"Paramount\" (the latter having been used only by the network's Viacom-owned stations, some of whom adopted the \"Paramount\" branding prior to UPN's launch), and the affiliated station's channel number. By the late 1990s, affiliates were simply branded under the \"UPN (channel number or city)\" scheme (for example, Chicago affiliate WPWR-TV called itself \"UPN Chicago\" and New York City O&amp;O-turned-affiliate WWOR-TV was referred to as \"UPN 9\", until The CW's launch was announced in January 2006).\nHowever, most of the UPN owned-and-operated stations under Viacom/CBS Corporation branded themselves by the network/city conventions (for example, KBHK-TV/San Francisco was branded as \"UPN Bay Area\", WKBD/Detroit was branded as \"UPN Detroit\", WUPA was branded as \"UPN Atlanta\" and WUPL/New Orleans was branded as \"UPN New Orleans\"). That type of branding did not always apply though, as for example, WSBK-TV/Boston was branded \"UPN 38\" and KMAX-TV/Sacramento was branded \"UPN 31\". WNPA/Pittsburgh originally branded itself as \"UPN 19\", but rebranded itself as \"UPN Pittsburgh\" soon after the network introduced its second and final logo in September 2002, making it one of the few that had carried both standardization styles. Many UPN-affiliated stations followed the same branding scheme (for example, KFVE/Honolulu used the brand \"UPN Hawaii\").\nThis would be a continuation of the trend of networks using such naming schemes, which originated at Fox (and even earlier by the Canadian CBC), and was also predominately used at CBS (which has most of its owned-and-operated stations, with a few exceptions, brand using a combination of the network's name and over-the-air channel number) and The WB (with the exception of its Tribune Broadcasting-owned affiliates in Los Angeles and Chicago, and certain other stations); NBC and ABC also use similar branding schemes, but not to the same broad level outside their O&amp;Os. While the \"Big Three\" networks do not require their affiliates to have such naming schemes (though some affiliates choose to adopt it anyway) and only on the network's O&amp;Os is the style required, UPN mandated it on all stations \u2013 though in one case, Milwaukee affiliate WCGV branded as \"Channel 24\" from 1998 to 2001, excluding UPN imagery from its station branding (WCGV, which previously branded as \"UPN 24\", had disaffiliated from the network for eight months in 1998 due to a compensation dispute; it received a rare waiver from the network to air a marathon of the last half of which it had not aired in August 1998, before the fifth season's premiere in September.).\nOne Chris-Craft/United Television-owned station, KMSP-TV in Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul, only branded as \"UPN 9\" for its entertainment and network programming. Due to the station's circumstances of holding full cable carriage across the state of Minnesota and into The Dakotas as a superstation, local management preferred to retain their pre-UPN \"Minnesota 9\" branding in some manner, as most of the UPN schedule was of low appeal to the station's rural viewers, and it was building a successful and competitive news department that did not depend on the success or failure of UPN. KMSP's news division success despite UPN affiliation was one of the pushes for Fox Television Stations to acquire United Television overall, then convert KMSP-TV to a Fox owned-and-operated station in Fall 2002. The UPN affiliation thus moved to new sister station WFTC, which followed all UPN branding guidelines until Fox pulled their support for the network in January 2006.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32307", "revid": "628775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32307", "title": "United Airlines", "text": "Airline of the United States\nUnited Airlines, Inc. is a major airline in the United States headquartered in Chicago, Illinois. It operates an extensive domestic and international route network across the United States and to destinations on six continents. Regional service is provided by independent carriers operating under the United Express brand, and the Star Alliance, of which United was one of the five founding airlines, extends its network throughout the world.\nUnited traces its origins to the late 1920s through the merger of several early airlines, the oldest of which was Varney Air Lines, founded in 1926 by Walter Varney. Because Varney was incorporated into the company, United often cites 1926 as its founding year. United has remained one of the largest airlines in the world for much of its history, including through successive mergers and acquisitions.\nNetwork.\nDestinations.\nAs of 2025, United Airlines flies (or has flown) to the following destinations. This table does not include destinations served by United's regional subsidiary, United Express.\nHubs.\nAs part of its hub-and-spoke transport model, United currently operates eight hubs:\nAlliance and codeshare agreements.\nUnited Airlines is a member of the Star Alliance that has 25 member airlines that operate a combined fleet of over 5,000 aircraft, with more than 19,000 flights, serving more than 1,300 airports with access to over 1,000 lounges in 195 countries.\nUnited has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCabins.\nUnited Polaris.\nUnited Polaris is the airline's international business class product. The seats convert into a flatbed and include personal storage areas, power outlets and upgraded dining and amenity offerings.\nPolaris seats are available on all Boeing 767s and 787s and on internationally configured 757s and 777s. Narrowbody 757 aircraft use a 2\u20132 layout without direct aisle access from each seat, while widebody aircraft provide aisle access for all passengers.\nUnited has introduced an updated Polaris suite for Boeing 787-9 aircraft, planned to enter service after 2026. The new suites will include sliding doors and larger 4K screens, with the first row featuring \"Polaris Studio\" seats with additional space and features.\nPolaris passengers receive priority check-in and boarding along with access to United Polaris lounges or partner lounges.\nUnited First and United Business.\nUnited First is the highest cabin offered on domestically configured aircraft. When these aircraft operate internationally, the cabin is marketed as United Business. Seats on narrowbody aircraft have a seat pitch, while domestically configured Boeing 777-200ERs feature fully flat seats in a staggered layout. Amenities include priority services, complimentary alcoholic beverages and meals on longer flights, and dedicated check-in areas.\nUnited introduced a redesigned domestic first-class seat in 2015, initially on Airbus A320 family aircraft, subsequently rolling it out across the mainline fleet.\nIn 2019, United announced a fleet-wide increase in first and business class seating, including the introduction of the premium-configured Bombardier CRJ550.\nUnited's newest narrowbody interiors debuted on the Airbus A321neo in 2023.\nUnited &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Premium Plus.\nUnited Premium Plus is the airline's international premium economy class cabin. It is available on all internationally configured widebody aircraft, featuring recliner seats with increased width, legroom and footrests. Typical layouts are 2\u20132\u20132 on Boeing 767s, 2\u20133\u20132 on 787s and 2\u20134\u20132 on 777s.\nUnited has introduced an revised Premium Plus seat for Boeing 787-9 aircraft, planned to enter service after 2026 that will have privacy dividers and upgraded lighting.\nPremium Plus includes enhanced dining, complimentary alcoholic beverages and upgraded bedding and amenities. The product entered service in 2019 after initially being sold as extended-legroom seating during the rollout period.\nEconomy Plus.\nEconomy Plus seats are located in the forward section of the economy cabin and in exit rows. They offer of additional pitch and extra recline compared to standard economy seats. All other in-flight amenities are the same as United Economy.\nEconomy Plus is complimentary for MileagePlus Premier members, with eligibility depending on status tier.\nUnited Economy.\nUnited Economy is offered on all aircraft, with a typical seat pitch and of recline. Many aircraft include personal seat-back entertainment systems, while others offer streaming media through onboard Wi-Fi. Some Boeing 737 aircraft are also equipped with DirecTV. Under the United NEXT initiative, all mainline aircraft are planned to have personal touchscreens by 2025.\nFood and beverage service varies by route. Domestic and short-haul international flights offer buy-on-board options, while long-haul international flights include complimentary meals. All flights offer free snacks and non-alcoholic beverages, with complimentary beer and wine on long-haul international routes.\nBasic Economy.\nBasic Economy is United's lowest fare type. Passengers receive the same onboard service as standard economy but face restrictions including no advance seat assignment, limited carry-on allowances and reduced eligibility for MileagePlus and Premier benefits.\nReward programs.\nFrequent flyer programs.\nMileagePlus is the frequent flyer program for United Airlines. Published MileagePlus Premier tiers are Premier Silver, Premier Gold, Premier Platinum, and Premier 1K. Unpublished tiers include United Global Services and Chairman's Circle.\nAs United is a Star Alliance member, customers reaching certain qualifications are entitled to certain benefits which may be used across the entirety of the Star Alliance network. Premier Silver customers are given Star Alliance Silver status, while Premier Gold customers and higher are given Star Alliance Gold status.\nAirport lounges.\nUnited Club is the airline lounge associated with United Airlines and United Express carriers. The United Club replaced the former United Red Carpet Club and Continental Airlines Presidents Club prior to United Airlines' merger with Continental.\nPolaris lounges are lounges available exclusively to long-haul travelers in United's Polaris business class cabin, as well as passengers in first and business class on Star Alliance carriers. Amenities include \u00e0 la carte dining, shower facilities, and sleeping pods.\nCorporate affairs.\nOwnership and structure.\nUnited Airlines, Inc. is a publicly traded company under its parent holding company, United Airlines Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation listed on Nasdaq under the ticker symbol https://. As of \u00a02025[ [update]], it has a market capitalization exceeding $35 billion. United's operating revenues and operating expenses account for nearly 100% of the holding company's revenues and operating expenses. United's operating revenues and expenses account for nearly all of the holding company's financial activity.\nHeadquartered in the Willis Tower in Chicago, United ranked No. 83 on the 2025 Fortune 500 list of the largest U.S. corporations by total revenue. Through United Airlines Holdings, the company also holds a 9.9% stake in Mesa Airlines, a regional carrier operating under the United Express brand.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for United Airlines are (as of the end of the calendar year):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHeadquarters and other facilities.\nUnited Airlines headquarters are located at the Willis Tower, 233 South Wacker Drive, Chicago, Illinois.\nIn 2007, United had moved its headquarters from Elk Grove Township, a suburb of Chicago, to 77 West Wacker Drive in the Chicago Loop after receiving US$5.5 million in incentives from the City of Chicago.\nIn 2010, United accepted the City of Chicago's offer of US$35 million in incentives, including a US$10 million grant, for United to move its remaining 2,500 employees out of Elk Grove Township to the Willis Tower (formerly the Sears Tower) in the Chicago Loop. On May 31, 2012, United opened its operations center, which occupied twelve floors there. In 2019 United renewed its lease at Willis Tower, originally ending in 2028 and now set to expire in 2033, and plans to construct a roof deck and a dining hall on the fourth floor.\nThe former headquarters campus at Elk Grove Township was gradually annexed into the Village of Mount Prospect, and serves as an IT operations facility, with a new data center constructed in 2013.\nUnited maintains a large presence in downtown Houston, having leased of space (seven floors) for occupancy in 2017.\nUnited has training facilities for its flight crews in Denver and Houston, a major aircraft maintenance center in San Francisco, and call centers in Houston and Chicago.\nUnited Aviate Academy is a flight training school owned and operated by United Airlines. Located at Phoenix Goodyear Airport in Goodyear, Arizona, it is the only flight school in the United States fully owned by a major commercial airline. The academy, which opened in 2022, serves as the primary training facility for United Aviate, United's pilot career development program.\nThe academy was established to address the growing pilot shortage and to increase diversity within the aviation industry. Students admitted to the program train under Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Part 141 standards, progressing through private pilot, instrument, and commercial ratings. Graduates are eligible to transition into the broader Aviate program, eventually joining United as first officers with a goal to train 5,000 pilots by 2030, with a secondary goal to train more women and people of color.\nCorporate identity.\nBrand image.\nThe pre-merger United logo, commonly nicknamed the \"tulip\", was developed in the early 1970s by the designer Saul Bass as part of a new brand image. The logo represented the airline's monogram as well as a modernized version of the airline's shield logo which had been adopted in the 1930s, but fell out of use by the late 1960s. The ribbon-like rendering has also been said to symbolize the motion of flight. In 2010, United announced they would be merging with Continental Airlines and as a result, the combined airline would keep the United name but discontinue using the tulip logo and use the Continental Airlines \"globe\" identity and livery instead, designed in 1991 by the Lippincott company.\nMarketing themes.\nUnited's earliest slogan, \"The Main Line Airway\", emphasized its signature New York-Chicago-San Francisco route, and was replaced in 1965 with \"Fly the Friendly Skies\", which was in use until 1996 in its first iteration. The \"It's time to fly\" slogan was created in 2004. After the merger of United and Continental in October 2010, the slogan changed to \"Let's fly together\" until September 2013, when United announced a return of the \"Fly the Friendly Skies\" slogan in an ad campaign to start the following day. The resurrected slogan would be accompanied by the 1924 George Gershwin song \"Rhapsody in Blue\" as its theme song, and a voiceover provided by Matt Damon.\nUnited had licensed its theme song, \"Rhapsody in Blue\", from Gershwin's estate for US$ in 1976. \"Rhapsody\" would have entered the public domain in 2000, but the Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998 extended its copyright another 20 years until January 1, 2020, when it officially entered on the Public Domain. United announced that it would continue to use \"Rhapsody in Blue\" as its theme song following the merger with Continental.\nEnvironmental initiatives.\nBecause over 98 percent of United's greenhouse gas emissions are from jet fuel, its environmental strategy has focused on operational fuel efficiency initiatives and investments in sustainably produced, low-carbon alternative fuels.\nOn August 23, 2011, United announced a conversion to paperless flight decks with 11,000 iPads for its pilots. Each iPad, which weighs less than , will replace approximately of paper operating manuals, navigation charts, reference handbooks, flight checklists, logbooks, and weather information. The green benefits include reductions in paper use, printing, and fuel consumption. This shift not only streamlines the flight process but also significantly enhances operational efficiency and safety by ensuring pilots have the most up-to-date information readily available.\nOn November 7, 2011, United flew the world's first commercial aviation flight on a microbially-derived biofuel. The aircraft was fueled with 40 percent Solajet, which is Solazyme's algae-derived renewable jet fuel, and 60 percent petroleum-derived jet fuel. This flight was operated by the Eco-Skies Boeing 737-800 aircraft from IAH to ORD.\nOn January 15, 2013, Aviation Partners Boeing (APB), a joint venture between Aviation Partners Inc. and Boeing, announced that United had agreed to replace the Blended Winglets on its Boeing 737NG aircraft with APB's Split Scimitar Winglet (SSW), significantly reducing drag. Once the SSWs are installed, it is estimated that APB's winglet technology will save United more than $250 million annually in fuel costs.\nOn June 30, 2015, United invested US$30 million in Fulcrum BioEnergy, an alternative fuel company. Fulcrum's alternative fuel is produced through a clean and efficient thermochemical process and reduces lifecycle carbon emissions by more than 80 percent. As part of its investment, United will work with Fulcrum to develop up to five alternative fuel refineries near its U.S. hubs. These refineries will produce up to of sustainable aviation alternative fuel per year, and United will have the opportunity to purchase at least per year for a minimum of 10 years, making it the largest aviation alternative fuel commitment to date.\nOn March 11, 2016, United became the first airline in the world to fly on commercial-scale quantities of such fuels on a continuous basis, which were procured from AltAir Fuels. This fuel was produced from sustainable feedstocks such as non-edible natural oils and agricultural wastes and is expected to provide a greater than 60 percent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions on a lifecycle basis when compared to traditional jet fuel. United has agreed to purchase up to of sustainable alternative fuel from AltAir Fuels for use in Los Angeles over a three-year period.\nIn 2016, United began partnering with Clean the World to repurpose items from the airline's international premium class amenity kits and donate the hygiene products to those in critical need. Clean the World provides hygiene education and soap to promote handwashing, which helps prevent hygiene-related deaths. During the first year of this partnership, United expected to divert of material that otherwise would have gone to landfills.\nIn 2017 United started a partnership with Audubon International to protect raptors\u2014including hawks, ospreys and owls\u2014in and around New York-area airports and resettle the birds-of-prey at suitable golf course habitats where the species are more likely to thrive.\nIn 2022 United expanded its use of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) overseas, to Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport. It was the first US airline to purchase sustainable jet fuel overseas. United began the use of sustainable fuel at San Francisco International Airport and London Heathrow in 2023, and at Chicago O'Hare and Los Angeles International Airport in 2024.\nEmployee relations.\nUnited Airlines was the first airline to see a successful unionization of flight attendants when the Association of Flight Attendants-CWA (AFA) was founded in 1945 by five United Airlines flight attendants. The AFA has represented flight attendants from United Airlines since. Their contract became amendable in August 2021 and 99.9% of the flight attendants who voted were in favor of authorizing a strike on August 28, 2024.\nUnited Airlines maintenance technicians are represented by the International International Brotherhood of Teamsters. Their contract became amendable on December 5, 2024.\nThe International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAM) District 141 represents approximately 34,000 Fleet Service, Passenger Service, Reservations, Stockroom, Central Load Planner, Maintenance Instructor, Fleet Technical Instructor, Emergency Procedures Instructor and Security Officer workers. Their contract became amendable on May 1, 2025.\nWith over 18,000 members, the United Airlines pilots are the largest pilot group in the world and represented by the Air Line Pilots Association (ALPA). ALPA was founded by United Air Lines Captain David L. Behncke and 23 other key figures in Chicago, Illinois, on July 27, 1931. In the 1930s, flying was a perilous occupation; thus, from the time of its formation to today, one of ALPA's main goals has been to improve air safety. The United pilots' current contract will become amendable on September 30, 2027.\nAccidents and incidents.\nSource: United Airlines Accidents and Incidents History at Aviation Safety Network.\nControversies and passenger incidents.\nFlight 976.\nUnited Airlines Flight 976 was a regularly scheduled flight from Ministro Pistarini International Airport, Buenos Aires to John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York City on October 19, 1995. Prior to takeoff, an investment banker became disruptive after consuming two glasses of champagne, began threatening crew members and attempted to pour his own drinks, against airline and federal regulations. After takeoff, the banker was served two more glasses of red wine, after which the crew refused to serve him more alcohol due to his apparent intoxication. When his requests for more alcohol were denied, he pushed over a female flight attendant, climbed onto a service trolley, took off his pants and defecated, used linen napkins as toilet paper, wiped his hands on various service counters and tracked feces throughout the aircraft, after which he entered a lavatory and locked himself in.\nA request to divert to Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn International Airport in San Juan, Puerto Rico, was denied due to the security risks created by the presence of the President of Portugal M\u00e1rio Soares, Argentinian foreign minister Guido di Tella and their security details on the flight. The disruptive passenger was arrested by the FBI after landing in New York and charged with interfering with a flight crew and threatening a flight attendant. He later pleaded guilty to the latter charge and was fined $5,000 (having previously agreed to reimburse the airline for its cleanup costs and all the other passengers their airfare, which amounted to nearly $50,000) and given two years' probation. The incident was later dubbed the worst ever case of air rage.\nAnimal transport.\nIn 2013, after pressure from PETA, United announced that it would no longer transport monkeys to laboratories. United was the last North American passenger airline to transport these animals to laboratories. United flies more animals and has longer flight stage length than any other US airline, and accounted for one third of animal deaths of US airlines between 2012 and 2017.\nEffective March 20, 2018, the PetSafe program was suspended with no new reservations for cargo transport of pets accepted. This came after United announced plans to mark pet carriers in the passenger cabin with bright tags and legislation was introduced in the United States House of Representatives and United States Senate banning the placement of pets in overhead compartments. This was in response to a dog death after a passenger placed it in the overhead compartment following flight attendant instructions, but the flight attendant denied knowing that the luggage contained a dog.\nCyber security issues.\nUnited awarded airline miles as \"bug bounties\" to hackers who could identify gaps in the carrier's web security. Two hackers have each been rewarded with 1 million miles of air travel as of July 15, 2015. This cybersecurity program was announced a few weeks after the company experienced two software glitches. The first incident delayed 150 United flights on June 2 due to a problem with its flight dispatching system. Six days later, United's reservation system delayed flights by not allowing passengers to check-in. In addition to the \"bug bounty\" program, United said it tests systems internally and engages cybersecurity firms.\nIn July 2019, security researcher Sam Jadali exposed a catastrophic data leak known as DataSpii, involving clickstream data provider DDMR and marketing intelligence company Nacho Analytics (NA). NA granted its members access to real-time data, including the ability to observe United Airlines passengers checking into their flights through the United website. The Washington Post highlighted how DataSpii resulted in the dissemination United passenger information including last names and flight confirmation numbers. The disseminated data also enabled the viewing of United customers' current geographic locations as they checked into their flights via the United website. DataSpii harvested data from millions of Chrome and Firefox users through compromised browser extensions, exploiting United's method of embedding personally identifiable information (PII) directly within the URLs. Jadali's investigation revealed that DDMR facilitated rapid dissemination of this data to additional third parties, often within minutes of acquisition, endangering the privacy of the sensitive data collected.\n2017 passenger removal.\nOn the evening of April 9, 2017, a passenger was forcibly removed by law enforcement from United Airlines flight 3411 at Chicago-O'Hare, bound for Louisville. United announced that it needed four seats for airline staff on the sold-out flight. When no passengers volunteered after being offered vouchers worth $800, United staff selected four passengers to leave. Three of them did so, but the fourth, a doctor named David Dao, declined as he said that he had patients to treat the following morning. He was pulled from his seat by Chicago Department of Aviation security officers and dragged by his arms down the aisle. Dao sustained a concussion, broken teeth and a broken nose among other injuries. The incident was captured on smartphone cameras and posted on social media, triggering angry public backlash. Afterwards, United's then-chief executive officer, Oscar Munoz, described Dao as \"disruptive and belligerent\", apologized for \"re-accommodating\" the paying customers, and defended and praised staff for \"following established procedures\". He was widely criticized as \"tone-deaf\". Munoz later issued a second statement calling what happened a \"truly horrific event\" and accepting \"full responsibility\" for it. After a lawsuit, Dao reached an undisclosed settlement with United and airport police. In the aftermath, United's board of directors decided that Munoz would not become its chairman and that executive compensation would be tied to customer satisfaction. Following this incident, passenger complaints increased by 70 percent.\nMail-scan fraud.\nIn February 2021, United Airlines was fined $49 million by the United States Department of Justice on charges of fraud on postal service contracts for transportation of international mail. According to investigators, between 2012 and 2015 United submitted delivery scan data to make it appear that United and its partner airlines complied with International Commercial Air requirements with accurate delivery times when in fact they were automated delivery scans with aspirational delivery time. Some employees within United worked to hide this fact from the United States Postal Service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32308", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32308", "title": "United States customary units", "text": "Units of measurement commonly used in the U.S.\nUnited States customary units form a system of measurement units commonly used in the United States and most U.S. territories since being standardized and adopted in 1832. The United States customary system developed from English units that were in use in the British Empire before the U.S. became an independent country. The United Kingdom's system of measures evolved by 1824 to create the imperial system, with imperial units, which was officially adopted in 1826, changing the definitions of some of its units. Consequently, while many U.S. units are essentially similar to their imperial counterparts, there are noticeable differences between the systems.\nThe majority of U.S. customary units were redefined in terms of the meter and kilogram with the Mendenhall Order of 1893 and, in practice, for many years before. These definitions were refined by the international yard and pound agreement of 1959.\nThe United States uses customary units in commercial activities, as well as for personal and social use. In science, medicine, many sectors of industry, and some government and military areas, metric units are used. The International System of Units (SI), the modern form of the metric system, is preferred for many uses by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). For newer types of measurement where there is no traditional customary unit, international units are used, sometimes mixed with customary units: for example, electrical resistivity of wire expressed in ohms (SI) per thousand feet.\nHistory.\nThe United States customary system of units of 1832 is based on the system in use in the United Kingdom prior to the introduction to the British imperial system on January 1, 1826. Both systems are derived from English units, an older system of units which had evolved over the millennia before American independence, and which had its roots in both Roman and Anglo-Saxon units.\nThe customary system was championed by the U.S.-based International Institute for Preserving and Perfecting Weights and Measures in the late 19th century. Some advocates of the customary system saw the French Revolutionary, or metric, system as atheistic. The president of an Ohio auxiliary of the Institute wrote that the traditional units were \"a just weight and a just measure, which alone are acceptable to the Lord\". His organization later went so far as to publish music for a song proclaiming \"down with every 'metric' scheme\".\nThe U.S. government passed the Metric Conversion Act of 1975, which made the metric system \"the preferred system of weights and measures for U.S. trade and commerce\". The legislation states that the federal government has a responsibility to assist industry as it \"voluntarily\" converts to the metric system, i.e., metrification. This is most evident in U.S. labeling requirements on food products, where SI units are almost always presented alongside customary units. According to the \"CIA World Factbook\", the United States is one of three nations (along with Liberia and Myanmar (Burma)) that have not adopted the metric system as their official system of weights and measures.\n, signed by President George H. W. Bush in July 1991, citing the Metric Conversion Act, directed departments and agencies within the executive branch of the United States Government to \"take all appropriate measures within their authority\" to use the metric system \"as the preferred system of weights and measures for United States trade and commerce\" and authorized the Secretary of Commerce \"to charter an Interagency Council on Metric Policy ('ICMP'), which will assist the Secretary in coordinating Federal Government-wide implementation of this order.\" Implementation has been limited. \"See\" Metrication in the United States.\nU.S. customary units are widely used on consumer products and in industrial manufacturing. Metric units are standard in the fields of science, medicine, and engineering, as well as many sectors of industry and government, including the military. There are anecdotal objections to the use of metric units in carpentry and the building trades, on the basis that it is easier to remember an integer number of inches plus a fraction, rather than a measurement in millimeters, or that foot-inch measurements are more suitable when distances are frequently divided into halves, thirds, and quarters, often in parallel. The metric system also lacks a parallel measurement to the foot.\nThe term \"United States customary units\" was used by the former United States National Bureau of Standards, although \"English units\" is sometimes used in colloquial speech.\nLength.\nFor measuring length, the U.S. customary system uses the inch, foot, yard, and mile, which are the only four customary length measurements in everyday use. From 1893, the foot was legally defined as exactly , approximately . Since July 1, 1959, the units of length have been defined on the basis of = , which makes the foot exactly . \nThe U.S., the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries agreed on this definition per the International Yard and Pound Agreement of 1958. At the time of the agreement, the basic geodetic datum in North America was the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD27), which had been constructed by triangulation based on the definition of the foot in the Mendenhall Order of 1893, that is = : this definition was retained for data derived from NAD27, but renamed the \"US survey foot\" to distinguish it from the international foot. \nFor most applications, the difference between the two definitions is insignificant \u2013 one international foot is exactly of a US survey foot, for a difference of about per mile \u2013 but it affects the definition of the State Plane Coordinate Systems (SPCSs), which can stretch over hundreds of miles.\nThe NAD27 was replaced in the 1980s by the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83), which is defined in meters. The SPCSs were also updated, but the U.S. National Geodetic Survey left the decision of which, if any, definition of the foot to use to the individual states and other jurisdictions. All SPCS 1983 systems are defined in meters, but forty jurisdictions also use the survey foot, six use the international foot, and ten do not specify which, if any, foot type should be used.\nIn 2019, the NIST, working with the National Geodetic Survey (NGS), National Ocean Service (NOS), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Department of Commerce (DOC), issued a Federal Register Notice (FRN) indicating the deprecation of the U.S. survey foot and U.S. survey mile units from December 31, 2022.\nIn the following tables in this and subsequent sections, the most common measures are shown in \"italics\", and approximate values are shown in parentheses; values not in parentheses are exact.\nUS survey units.\nNote that as announced by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the US survey foot, and other units defined in terms of it, have been deprecated since 2023, \"except for historic and legacy applications\".\nArea.\nThe most widely used area unit with a name unrelated to any length unit is the acre. The National Institute of Standards and Technology formerly contended that customary area units are defined in terms of the square survey foot, not the square international foot. From 2023, it states that \"although historically defined using the U.S. survey foot, the statute mile can be defined using either definition of the foot, as is the case for all other units listed in this table. However, use of definitions based on the U.S. survey foot should be avoided after December 31, 2022 except for historic and legacy applications.\"\nVolume.\nThe cubic inch, cubic foot and cubic yard are commonly used for measuring volume. There is one group of units for measuring volumes of liquids, based on the wine gallon and subdivisions of the fluid ounce, and one for measuring volumes of dry material, each with their own names and sub-units.\nThe units and their names are similar to the units in the imperial system, and many units are shared between the two systems as a whole. With respect to volume, this differs. The independence of the U.S. from the British Empire decades prior to the reformation of units in 1824\u2014most notably the gallon, its subdivisions, and (in mass) higher combinations above the pound\u2014is the cause of the differences in values.\nAs a non-participant in that reform, the U.S. retained the separate systems for measuring the volumes of liquids and dry material, whereas the imperial system had unified the units for both under a new imperial gallon. The U.S. uses the pre-1824 gallon () and Winchester bushel (), as opposed to British 1824 definition of \n of water and the bushel as . \nFluid volume.\nOne US fluid ounce is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416 of a US pint, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204432 of a US quart, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044128 of a US gallon. The teaspoon, tablespoon, and cup are defined in terms of a fluid ounce as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, and 8 fluid ounces respectively. The fluid ounce derives its name originally from being the volume of one ounce avoirdupois of water, but in the US it is defined as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044128 of a US gallon. Consequently, a fluid ounce of water weighs about 1.041 ounces avoirdupois.\nFor nutritional labeling and medicine in the US, the teaspoon and tablespoon are defined as a metric teaspoon and tablespoon\u2014precisely and respectively.\nThe saying, \"a pint's a pound the world around\", refers to 16 US fluid ounces of water weighing approximately (about 4% more than) one pound avoirdupois. An imperial pint of water weighs a pound and a quarter ().\nThere are varying standards for barrel for some specific commodities, including 31 gallons for beer, 40 gallons for whiskey or kerosene, and 42 gallons for petroleum. The general standard for liquids is 31.5 gal or half a hogshead. The common 55-gallon size of drum for storing and transporting various products and wastes is sometimes confused with a barrel, though it is not a standard measure.\nIn the U.S., single servings of beverages are usually measured in fluid ounces. Milk is usually sold in half-pints (8 fluid ounces), pints, quarts, half gallons, and gallons. Water volume for sinks, bathtubs, ponds, swimming pools, etc., is usually stated in gallons or cubic feet. Quantities of gases are usually given in cubic feet (at one atmosphere).\nMinims, drams, gill, and pottle are rarely used currently. The gill is often referred to as a \"half-cup\". The \"pottle\" is often referred to as a \"half-gallon\".\nDry volume.\nDry volume is measured on a separate system, although many of the names remain the same. Small fruits and vegetables are often sold in dry pints and dry quarts. \nWhile the US dry gallon is no longer used, and is no longer included in the handbook that many states recognize as the authority on measurement law, it implicitly exists since the US dry measures of bushel, peck, quart and pint are still in use. Pecks and bushels are sometimes used, particularly for grapes, apples and similar fruits in agricultural regions.\nMass and weight.\nThere have historically been five different English systems of mass: tower, apothecaries', troy, avoirdupois, and metric. Of these, the avoirdupois weight is the most common system used in the U.S., although Troy weight is still used to weigh precious metals. Apothecaries' weight\u2014once used by pharmacies\u2014has been largely replaced by metric measurements. Tower weight fell out of use in England (due to legal prohibition in 1527) centuries ago, and was never used in the U.S. The imperial system, which is still used for some measures in the United Kingdom and other countries, is based on avoirdupois, with variations from U.S. customary units larger than a pound.\nThe pound avoirdupois, which forms the basis of the U.S. customary system of mass, is defined as exactly by agreement between the U.S., the United Kingdom, and other English-speaking countries in 1959. Other units of mass are defined in terms of it.\nThe avoirdupois pound is legally defined as a measure of mass, but the name pound is also applied to measures of force. For instance, in many contexts, the pound avoirdupois is used as a unit of mass, but in some contexts, the term \"pound\" is used to refer to \"pound-force\". The slug is another unit of mass derived from pound-force.\nTroy weight, avoirdupois weight, and apothecaries' weight are all built from the same basic unit, the grain, which is the same in all three systems. While each system has some overlap in the names of their units of measure (all have ounces and pounds), the relationship between the grain and these other units within each system varies. For example, in apothecary and troy weight, the pound and ounce are the same, but are different from the pound and ounce in avoirdupois in terms of their relationships to grains and to each other. \nThe systems also have different units between the grain and ounce (apothecaries' has scruple and dram, troy has pennyweight, and avoirdupois has just dram, sometimes spelled \"drachm\"). The dram in avoirdupois weighs just under half of the dram in apothecaries'. The fluid dram unit of volume is based on the weight of 1 dram of water in the apothecaries' system.\nTo alleviate confusion, it is typical when publishing non-avoirdupois weights to mention the name of the system along with the unit. Precious metals, for example, are often weighed in \"troy ounces\", because just \"ounce\" would be more likely to be assumed to mean an avoirdupois ounce.\nFor the pound and smaller units, the U.S. customary system and the British imperial system are identical. They differ when dealing with units larger than the pound. The definition of the pound avoirdupois in the imperial system is identical to that in the U.S. customary system.\nIn the U.S., only the ounce, pound and short ton\u00a0\u2013 known in the country simply as the ton\u00a0\u2013 are commonly used, though the hundredweight is still used in agriculture and shipping. The grain is used to describe the mass of propellant and projectiles in small arms ammunition. It was also used to measure medicine and other very small masses.\nGrain measures.\nIn agricultural practice, a bushel is a fixed volume of . The mass of grain will therefore vary according to density. Some nominal weight examples are:\nCooking measures.\nThe most common practical cooking measures for both liquid and dry ingredients in the U.S. are \"teaspoon\", \"tablespoon\", and \"cup\", along with halves, thirds, quarters, and eighths of each. Units used are \"pounds\", \"ounces\", and \"fluid ounces\". Common sizes are also used, such as \"can\" (presumed size varies depending on product), \"jar\", \"square\" (e.g. of chocolate), \"stick\" (e.g. of butter), or portion of fruit or vegetable (e.g. a half lemon, two medium onions).\nTemperature.\nDegrees Fahrenheit are used in the U.S. to measure temperatures in most non-scientific contexts. The Rankine scale of absolute temperature is used in engineering thermodynamics when the Fahrenheit scale is employed. (0\u00a0\u00b0Ra = absolute zero = \u2013459.67\u00a0\u00b0F) Scientists worldwide use the kelvin and degree Celsius. Several U.S. technical standards are expressed in Fahrenheit temperatures, and some American medical practitioners use degrees Fahrenheit for body temperature.\nThe relationship between the different temperature scales is linear but the scales have different zero points, so conversion is not simply multiplication by a factor. Pure water freezes at 32 \u00b0F = 0 \u00b0C and boils at 212 \u00b0F = 100 \u00b0C at 1 atm. The conversion formula is:\nformula_1\nor inversely as\nformula_2\nOther units.\nLength\nVolume\nMass\nForce\nEnergy\nPower\nPressure\nTorque\nInsulation\nVarious combination units are in common use; these are straightforwardly defined based on the above basic units.\nSizing systems are used for various items in commerce, several of which are U.S.-specific:\nOther names for U.S. customary units.\nThe United States Code refers to these units as \"traditional systems of weights and measures\".\nOther common ways of referring to the system are: \"customary\", \"standard\", \"English\", or \"imperial\", which refers to the post-1824 reform measures used throughout the British Empire &amp; Commonwealth countries. Another term is the foot\u2013pound\u2013second (FPS) system, as opposed to centimeter\u2013gram\u2013second (CGS) and meter\u2013kilogram\u2013second (MKS) systems.\nTools and fasteners with sizes measured in inches are sometimes called \"SAE bolts\" or \"SAE wrenches\" to differentiate them from their metric counterparts. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) originally developed fasteners standards using U.S. units for the U.S. auto industry. The organization now largely uses metric units.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32309", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32309", "title": "Umbelliferae", "text": ""}
{"id": "32310", "revid": "50799306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32310", "title": "Lockheed U-2", "text": "American reconnaissance aircraft\nThe Lockheed U-2, nicknamed the \"Dragon Lady\", is an American single-engine, high\u2013altitude reconnaissance aircraft operated by the United States Air Force (USAF) and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) since the 1950s. Designed for all-weather, day-and-night intelligence gathering at altitudes above , the U-2 has played a pivotal role in aerial surveillance for decades.\nLockheed Corporation originally proposed the aircraft in 1953. It was approved in 1954, and its first test flight was in 1955. Between 1956 and 1962, U-2 aircraft conducted covert reconnaissance missions over the Soviet Union, China, Vietnam, and Cuba, gathering critical imagery intelligence throughout the Cold War. In 1960, CIA pilot Gary Powers was shot down in a U-2C over the Soviet Union by a surface-to-air missile (SAM). Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was shot down in a U-2 during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962.\nU-2s have taken part in post-Cold War conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, and supported several multinational NATO operations. Beyond tactical surveillance, U-2s have supported the development of electronic sensors, calibrated space-based instruments, conducted high-altitude atmospheric experiments, and tested line-of-sight and over-horizon communications systems. The U-2 is one of a handful of aircraft types to have served the USAF for over 50 years, along with the Boeing B-52, Boeing KC-135, Lockheed C-130 and Lockheed C-5. The newest models (TR-1, U-2R, U-2S) entered service in the 1980s, and the latest model, the U-2S, had a technical upgrade in 2012. The U-2 is currently operated by the USAF and NASA.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nAfter World War II, the U.S. military desired better strategic aerial reconnaissance to help determine Soviet capabilities and intentions, and to prevent being caught off-guard as it had been in the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Air Force commissioned the 'Beacon Hill Report' from Project Lincoln at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which was researched in 1951\u20131952 and delivered in 1952. The committee was led by Carl F. P. Overhage and was overseen by the Air Force's Gordon P. Saville, and included James Gilbert Baker and Edwin H. Land, who would design the specialized optics in the U-2.\nDuring the early 1950s, the best intelligence the American government had on facilities deep inside the Soviet Union were World War II German Luftwaffe photographs taken during the war of territory west of the Ural Mountains, so overflights to take aerial photographs of the Soviet Union would be necessary. The committee suggested a plane with advanced optics, flying above .\nAfter 1950, Soviet air defenses consistently intercepted all aircraft near the country's borders\u2014sometimes even those in Japanese airspace. Existing US reconnaissance aircraft, primarily bombers converted for reconnaissance duty such as the Boeing RB-47, were vulnerable to anti-aircraft artillery, missiles, and fighters. Richard Leghorn of the United States Air Force suggested that an aircraft that could fly at should be safe from the MiG-17, the Soviet Union's best interceptor aircraft, which could barely reach . He and others believed that Soviet radar, which used American equipment provided during the war, could not track aircraft above .\nAt the time, the highest-flying aircraft available to the US and its allies was the English Electric Canberra, which could reach . The British had already produced the PR3 photo-reconnaissance variant, but the USAF asked for English Electric's help to further modify the American-licensed version of the Canberra, the Martin B-57, with long, narrow wings, new engines, and a lighter airframe to reach . The U.S. Air Research and Development Command mandated design changes that made the aircraft more durable for combat, but the resulting RB-57D aircraft of 1955 could only reach . The Soviet Union, unlike the United States and Britain, had improved radar technology after the war, and could track aircraft above .\nLockheed proposal.\nIt was thought that an aircraft that could fly at would be beyond the reach of Soviet fighters, missiles, and radar. Another Air Force officer, John Seaberg, wrote a request for proposal in 1953 for an aircraft that could reach over a target with of operational radius. The USAF decided to solicit designs only from smaller aircraft companies that could give the project more attention. Under the code name \"Bald Eagle\", it gave contracts to Bell Aircraft, Martin Aircraft, and Fairchild Engine and Airplane to develop proposals for the new reconnaissance aircraft. Officials at Lockheed Aircraft Corporation heard about the project and decided to submit an unsolicited proposal. To save weight and increase altitude, Lockheed executive John Carter suggested that the design eliminate landing gear and not attempt to meet combat load factors for the airframe. The company asked Clarence \"Kelly\" Johnson to come up with such a design. Johnson was Lockheed's best aeronautical engineer, responsible for the P-38 and the P-80. He was also known for completing projects ahead of schedule, working in a separate division of the company, informally called the \"Skunk Works\".\nJohnson's design, named CL-282, was based on the Lockheed XF-104 with long, slender wings and a shortened fuselage. The design was powered by the General Electric J73 engine and took off from a special cart and landed on its belly. It could reach an altitude of and had a radius. The reconnaissance aircraft was essentially a jet-powered glider. In June 1954, the USAF rejected the design in favor of the Bell X-16 and the modified B-57. Reasons included the lack of landing gear, use of the J73 engine instead of the more proven Pratt &amp; Whitney J57 used by the competing designs, and not using multiple engines, which the USAF believed to be more reliable. General Curtis LeMay of Strategic Air Command (SAC) walked out during a CL-282 presentation, saying that he was not interested in an airplane without wheels or guns. Having guns could pose a greater risk of exposing the aircraft during flight, and having missiles could expose it to thermal sensors.\nApproval.\nCivilian officials including Trevor Gardner, an aide to Secretary of the Air Force Harold E. Talbott, were more positive about the CL-282 because of its higher potential altitude and smaller radar cross-section, and recommended the design to the Central Intelligence Agency's Office of Scientific Intelligence. At that time, the CIA depended on the military for overflights, and Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles favored human over technical intelligence-gathering methods. However, the Intelligence Systems Panel, a civilian group advising the USAF and CIA on aerial reconnaissance, had recognized by 1954 that the RB-57D would not meet the requirement that panel member Allen F. Donovan of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory believed was necessary for safety. The CIA told the panel about the CL-282. The design elements that the USAF considered to be flaws (the single-engine and light load factor) appealed to Donovan. He was a sailplane enthusiast who believed that a sailplane was the type of high-altitude aircraft the panel was seeking.\nEdwin Land, the developer of instant photography and another member of the panel, proposed to Dulles through Dulles' aide, Richard M. Bissell Jr., that his agency should fund and operate this aircraft. Land believed that if the military, rather than the CIA, operated the CL-282 during peacetime, such action could provoke a war. Although Dulles remained reluctant to have the CIA conduct its own overflights, Land and James Killian of MIT told President Eisenhower about the aircraft; Eisenhower agreed that the CIA should be the operator. Dulles finally agreed, but some USAF officers opposed the project because they feared it would endanger the RB-57D and X-16.\nThe USAF's Seaberg helped persuade his own agency to support the CL-282, albeit with the higher-performance J57 engine, and final approval for a joint USAF-CIA project (the first time the CIA dealt with sophisticated technology) came in November 1954. Lockheed had meanwhile become busy with other projects and had to be persuaded to accept the CL-282 contract after its approval.\nManufacture.\nBissell became head of the project, which used covert funding; under the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, the CIA's director is the only federal government employee who can spend \"unvouchered\" government money. Lockheed received a $22.5 million contract (equivalent to $ million in 2024) in March 1955 for the first 20 aircraft, with the first $1.26 million ($ million in 2024) mailed to Johnson's home in February 1955 to keep work going during negotiations. The company agreed to deliver the first aircraft by July of that year and the last by November 1956. It did so, and for $3.5 million ($ million in 2024) under budget. The Flight Test Engineer in charge was Joseph F. Ware Jr.\nInitial design and manufacturing was done at Lockheed's Skunk Works factory in Burbank, California, with engineers embedded in the manufacturing area to address problems quickly. Procurement of the aircraft's components occurred secretly. When Johnson ordered altimeters calibrated to from a company whose instruments only went to , the CIA set up a cover story involving experimental rocket aircraft. Shell Oil developed a new low-volatility, low vapor pressure jet fuel that would not evaporate at high altitudes; the fuel became known as JP-7. Manufacturing several hundred thousand gallons for the aircraft in 1955 caused a nationwide shortage of Esso's FLIT insecticide.\nRealizing the plane could not be tested and flown out of Burbank Airport, they selected what would become Area 51. It was acquired and a paved runway constructed for the project. The planes were dismantled, loaded onto cargo planes, and flown to the facility for testing. The aircraft was renamed the U-2 in July 1955, the same month the first aircraft, Article 341, was delivered to Groom Lake. The \"U\" referred to the deliberately vague designation \"utility\" instead of \"R\" for \"reconnaissance\", and the U-1 and U-3 aircraft already existed. The CIA assigned the cryptonym AQUATONE to the project, with the USAF using the name OILSTONE for their support to the CIA.\nJames Baker developed the optics for a large-format camera to be used in the U-2 while working for Perkin-Elmer. The new camera had a resolution of from an altitude of . The aircraft was so crowded that when Baker asked Johnson for of space for a lens with a focal length, Johnson replied \"I'd sell my grandmother for six more inches!\"; Baker instead used a f/13.85 lens in a format for his final design.\nFuel.\nThe U-2 has used Jet Propellant Thermally Stable (JPTS) since the aircraft's development in the 1950s. JPTS is a high thermal stability, high altitude fuel, created specifically for the U-2. JPTS has a lower freeze point, higher viscosity, and higher thermal stability than standard USAF fuels. In 1999, the Air Force spent approximately $11.3 million (equivalent to $20.58 million in 2023 dollars) on fuel for the U-2 aircraft and was looking for a lower-cost alternative. JPTS is a specialty fuel and as such has limited worldwide availability and costs over three times the unit volume price of USAF's primary jet fuel, JP-8. Research was carried out to find a cheaper and easier alternative involving additives to generally used jet fuels. A JP-8 based alternative, JP-8+100LT, was being considered in 2001. JP-8+100 has increased thermal stability by over stock JP-8, and is only 0.5 cents per gallon more expensive; low-temperature additives can be blended to this stock to achieve desired cold performance.\nThe small landing gear made a perfect balance in the fuel tanks essential for a safe landing. Similarly to sailplanes, the U-2 has a yaw string on the canopy to detect slip or skid during the approach. A skid during flight with no bank is the hint of an imbalance around the longitudinal axis which could be resolved by moving the fuel to the left or right wing tank.\nRadar cross-section reduction.\nWhen the first overflights of the Soviet Union were tracked by radar, the CIA initiated Project Rainbow to reduce the U-2's radar cross-section. This effort ultimately proved unsuccessful, and work began on a follow-on aircraft, which resulted in the Lockheed A-12 \"Oxcart\".\nPossible successor.\nIn August 2015, the 60th anniversary of the U-2 program, Lockheed Martin's Skunk Works revealed they were internally developing a successor to the U-2, referred to as the UQ-2 or RQ-X, combining features from both the manned U-2 and unmanned Northrop Grumman RQ-4 Global Hawk and improving upon them. Disclosed details say the design is essentially an improved U-2 airframe with the same engine, service ceiling, sensors, and cockpit, with the main differences being an optional manning capability (something Lockheed has proposed for the U-2 to the USAF several times, but has never gained traction) and low-observable characteristics. The USAF has no requirement or schedule for a next-generation High-Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) platform, but Lockheed sees a future need and wants something in development early. The company's last attempt to create a stealth unmanned aircraft was the RQ-3 DarkStar, which never made it past flight testing and was canceled. Plans for a U-2 replacement would not conflict with the development of the SR-72, another project by the company to create a hypersonic unmanned surveillance plane, as it would be suited for missions that require greater speed for time-sensitive targets.\nThe company released a notional artist's impression of the TR-X aircraft at an Air Force Association conference in Washington on 14 September 2015. Its name was changed to mean \"tactical reconnaissance\" to reflect its purpose as an affordable peace and wartime intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) aircraft, distinguishing it from strategic, penetrating SR-71-class platforms; TR is a reference to the short-lived rebranding of the U-2 as the TR-1 in the 1980s. Size, and thus cost, is kept down by having less endurance than the Global Hawk at around 20 hours, which is still about the same time as a normal RQ-4 sortie even though it is capable of flying for 34 hours. The TR-X concept is aimed squarely at USAF needs and is not currently being marketed to the CIA or other government agencies. It would have increased power and cooling to accommodate new sensors, communication equipment, electronic warfare suites, and perhaps offensive or defensive laser weapons. TR-X could be ready for service in the 2025 timeframe, with a fleet of 25\u201330 aircraft proposed to replace the nearly 40-aircraft mix of U-2s and RQ-4s.\nLockheed Martin revealed more specifications about the TR-X concept at a 15 March 2016 media day, confirming the aircraft would be unmanned and air refuelable. Its maximum takeoff weight would be greater than either the U-2's or RQ-4's at around , with a payload and wingspan. It will use the same F118-101 turbofan and generator as the U-2, but thrust could increase to and power increased to 65\u201375 kVA; service ceiling would increase to with a second engine. The TR-X is meant to be \"survivable, not unnoticeable\", operating outside of enemy air defense bubbles rather than penetrating into them.\nAvionics Tech Refresh.\nIn 2020, the US Air Force awarded the Avionics Tech Refresh contract to Lockheed Martin for upgrading the U-2. In February 2020, the flight tests and the installation of new electro-optical reconnaissance systems were completed. SYERS-2C cameras manufactured by Collins Aerospace equip the entire U-2S fleet. The contract is valued at $50 million. The U-2S's ISR very high altitude mission requires changes for avionics suite for the U-2's onboard systems, a new mission computer designed to the U.S. Air Force's open mission systems standard and a new and modern cockpit displays (primary flight display or PFD).\nThe avionics upgrades are scheduled to be completed by 2022. Lockheed Martin then plans to refresh the U-2's sensors and other electronic systems, to act as a node in the Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS) now under development.\nDesign.\nThe design that gives the U-2 its remarkable performance also makes it a difficult aircraft to fly. Martin Knutson said that it \"was the highest workload air plane I believe ever designed and built\u00a0\u2026 you're wrestling with the airplane and operating the camera systems at all times\", leaving no time to \"worry about whether you're over Russia or you're flying over Southern California\". The U-2 was designed and manufactured for minimum airframe weight, which results in an aircraft with little margin for error. Most aircraft were single-seat versions, with only five two-seat trainer versions known to exist. Early U-2 variants were powered by Pratt &amp; Whitney J57 turbojet engines. The U-2C and TR-1A variants used the more powerful Pratt &amp; Whitney J75 turbojet. The U-2S and TU-2S variants incorporated the more powerful General Electric F118 turbofan engine.\nHigh aspect ratio wings give the U-2 glider-like characteristics, with an engine out glide ratio of about 23:1, comparable to gliders of the time. To maintain their operational ceiling of , the early U-2A and U-2C models had to fly very near their never-exceed speed (VNE). The margin between that maximum speed and the stall speed at that altitude was only . This narrow window is called the \"coffin corner\", because breaching either limit was likely to cause airflow separation at the wings or tail. For most of the time on a typical mission the U-2 was flying less than above stall speed. A stall would cause a loss of altitude, possibly leading to detection and overstress of the airframe.\nThe U-2's flight controls are designed for high-altitude flight; the controls require light control inputs at operational altitude. However, at lower altitudes the higher air density and lack of a power-assisted control system make the aircraft very difficult to fly: control inputs must be extreme to achieve the desired response, and a great deal of physical strength is needed to operate the controls. The U-2 is very sensitive to crosswinds, which, together with its tendency to float over the runway, makes the aircraft notoriously difficult to land. As it approaches the runway, the cushion of air provided by the high-lift wings in ground effect is so pronounced that the U-2 will not land unless the wings are fully stalled. A landing U-2 is accompanied on the ground by a chase car, which is driven by a second U-2 pilot who assists the landing U-2 by reporting the aircraft's altitude. In practice, once the aircraft has descended to an altitude of above the runway the pilot initiates a stall and the aircraft falls from this height. Chase cars and live calling of aircraft altitude are necessary because the landing gear is not designed to absorb the weight of the aircraft when falling from altitudes much above .\nInstead of the typical tricycle landing gear, the U-2 uses a bicycle configuration with a forward set of main wheels located just behind the cockpit and a rear set of main wheels located behind the engine. The rear wheels are coupled to the rudder to provide steering during taxiing. To maintain balance while taxiing and take-off, two auxiliary wheels called \"pogos\" are attached under the wings. These fit into sockets underneath each wing at about mid-span and fall off at takeoff. To protect the wings during landing, each wingtip has a titanium skid. After the U-2 comes to a halt, the ground crew re-installs the pogos, then the aircraft taxis to parking.\nBecause of the high operating altitude and the cockpit's partial pressurization, equivalent to pressure altitude, the pilot wears a pressurized space suit called the S1034, which delivers the pilot's oxygen supply and provides emergency protection in case cabin pressure is lost. While pilots can drink water and eat various liquid foods in squeezable containers through a self-sealing hole in the face mask, they typically lose up to 5% of their body mass on an eight-hour mission. \nInitially, pilots had the option of carrying a suicide pill, although most chose not to. If put in the mouth and bitten, the \"L-pill\"\u2014containing liquid potassium cyanide\u2014would cause death in 10\u201315 seconds. After a pilot almost accidentally ingested an L-pill instead of candy during a December 1956 flight, the suicide pills were put into boxes to avoid confusion. When in 1960 the CIA realized that a pill breaking inside the cockpit would kill the pilot, it destroyed the L-pills, and as a replacement, its Technical Services Division developed a needle poisoned with a powerful shellfish toxin and hidden in a silver dollar. Only one was made because the agency decided if any pilot needed to use it the program would probably be canceled. Like the suicide pill, not all pilots carried the coin, and Knutson did not know of any that intended to commit suicide; he carried it as a weapon to escape in the event of capture.\nTo decrease the risk of developing decompression sickness, pilots breathe 100% oxygen for an hour prior to taking off to remove nitrogen from the blood. A portable oxygen supply is used during transport to the aircraft. Since 2001, more than a dozen pilots have reportedly suffered the effects of decompression sickness, including permanent brain damage in nine cases; initial symptoms include disorientation and becoming unable to read. Factors increasing the risk of illness since 2001 include longer mission durations and more cockpit activity. Conventional reconnaissance missions would limit pilot duties to maintaining flight paths for camera photography. Operations over Afghanistan included more real-time activities, such as communication with ground troops, increasing their bodies' oxygen requirements and the risk of nitrogen bubble formation. U-2 pilots now exercise during oxygen pre-breathing. In 2012, modifications were initiated under the Cockpit Altitude Reduction Effort (CARE), increasing the cabin pressure from 3.88 psi to 7.65 psi, a altitude equivalent. The urine collection device also was rebuilt to eliminate leakage.\nSensors.\nExisting cameras had ground resolution down to from an altitude of , and were inadequate for the altitude. Ground resolution of was required, at a maximum payload weight of . The U-2's camera was specially designed by James G. Baker of Harvard and Richard Scott Perkin of the Perkin-Elmer Company, initially in collaboration and later separately.\nInitial missions were flown with the trimetrogon \"A\" camera, consisting of three cameras, with F/8 resolving 60 lines per mm, and the ground resolution can be inferred by calculation to be . This was followed by the \"B\" camera with a lens with F/10 and image motion compensation, resolving 100 lines per mm, and the ground resolution can be inferred by calculation to be . It was a panoramic camera which took pictures of an extremely large area of the earth's surface. The lens design consisted of a single aspheric singlet lens. reels of film were used, with the emulsion being coated on a polyester (PET) base that offered significantly improved dimensional stability over extremes of temperature and humidity compared to conventional cellulose acetate.\nIn addition, the U-2 also carried a low-resolution Perkin-Elmer tracking camera using a 3-inch (7.6 cm) lens, which made continuous horizon-to-horizon photographs. This is common practice in high resolution cameras in later systems also, where the large image helps localize the small high-resolution images.\nThe aircraft carries a variety of sensors in the nose, Q-bay (behind the cockpit, also known as the camera bay), and wing pods. The U-2 is capable of simultaneously collecting signals, imagery intelligence and air samples. Imagery intelligence sensors include either wet film photography, electro-optic, or radar imagery\u2014the latter from the Raytheon ASARS-2 system. It can use both line-of-sight and over-horizon data links.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nPilot selection and training.\nThough the USAF and the Navy would eventually fly the U-2, the CIA had majority control over the project, code-named Project DRAGON LADY. Despite SAC chief LeMay's early dismissal of the CL-282, the USAF in 1955 sought to take over the project and put it under SAC until Eisenhower repeated his opposition to military personnel flying the aircraft. Nonetheless, the USAF substantially participated in the project; Bissell described it as a \"49 percent\" partner. The USAF agreed to select and train pilots and plot missions, while the CIA would handle cameras and project security, process film, and arrange foreign bases.\nBeyond not using American military personnel to fly the U-2, Eisenhower preferred to use non-U.S. citizens. Seven Greek pilots and a Polish expatriate were added to the U-2 trainees although only two of the Greek pilots were subsequently allowed to fly the aircraft. Their flight proficiency was poor. The language barrier and a lack of appropriate flying experience proved problematic; by late 1955, foreign pilots had been dropped from the program. USAF pilots had to resign their military commissions before joining the agency as civilians, a process referred to as \"sheep dipping\", and were always called \"drivers\", not pilots. The program only recruited fighter pilots with reserve USAF commissions, as regular commissions complicated the resignation process. The program offered high salaries and the USAF promised that pilots could return at the same rank as their peers. The CIA's standards for selection were higher than the USAF's once the latter began its own U-2 flights; although more candidates were rejected, the CIA's program had a much lower accident rate. Test pilot Tony LeVier trained other Lockheed pilots to fly the U-2. By September 1955 he had trained six USAF pilots, who in turn trained other \"sheep-dipped\" pilots. As no two-seat trainer model was available for the program's first 15 years, training was done before the trainee's first solo flight and via radio. Pilots had to adjust to the U-2's unusual combination of jet engines and enormous, high-lift glider wings; because of the \"coffin corner\" they learned of the need to pay complete attention to flying when not using the autopilot.\nTest flights.\nAfter AQUATONE was funded and security handled by the CIA, the agency referred to all its high altitude aircraft as \"articles\". This was intended to reduce the chances of a security breach as part of a compartmented security system. These three-digit \"article\" numbers were factory assigned. Article 341 was the original U-2 prototype, and it never received a USAF serial. The first flight took place at Groom Lake on 1 August 1955, during what was intended to be only a high-speed taxi test. The sailplane-like wings were so efficient that the aircraft jumped into the air at , amazing LeVier who, as he later said, \"had no intentions whatsoever of flying\". The lake bed had no markings, making it difficult for LeVier to judge the distance to the ground, and the brakes proved too weak; he bounced the U-2 once before it stopped rolling, but the aircraft suffered only minor damage. LeVier again found landing the U-2 difficult during the first intentional test flight three days later. On his sixth try, he found that landing the aircraft by touching down on the rear wheel first was better than making the initial touchdown with the front wheel. Pilots continued to have difficulty during landing because the ground effect held the aircraft off the runway for long distances. On a test flight on 8 August, the U-2 reached , proving that Johnson had met his promised specifications and deadline. By 16 August, the prototype flew at , an altitude never before reached in sustained flight; by 8 September, it reached .\nBy January 1956, the U-2 had so impressed the USAF that it decided to obtain its own aircraft. The USAF purchased a total of 31 U-2s through the CIA; the transaction's code name, Project DRAGON LADY, was the origin of the aircraft's nickname. Meanwhile, U-2s conducted eight overflights of the U.S. in April 1956, convincing project overseers that the aircraft was ready for deployment. As often happens with new aircraft designs, there were several operational accidents. One occurred during these test flights when a U-2 suffered a flameout over Tennessee; the pilot calculated that he could reach New Mexico. Every air base in the continental U.S. had sealed orders to carry out if a U-2 landed. The commander of Kirtland Air Force Base near Albuquerque, New Mexico, was told to open his orders, prepare for the arrival of an unusual aircraft making a deadstick landing, and get it inside a hangar as soon as possible. The U-2 successfully landed after gliding for more than , and its strange, glider-like appearance and the space-suited pilot startled the base commander and other witnesses.\nNot all U-2 incidents were so benign, with three fatal accidents in 1956 alone. The first was on 15 May 1956, when the pilot stalled the aircraft during a post-takeoff maneuver that was intended to drop off the wingtip outrigger wheels. The second occurred on 31 August, when the pilot stalled the aircraft immediately after takeoff. On 17 September, a third aircraft disintegrated during ascent in Germany, also killing the pilot. There were other non-fatal incidents, including at least one that resulted in the loss of the aircraft.\nCover story.\nA committee of Army, Navy, USAF, CIA, NSA, and State Department representatives created lists of priority targets for U-2 and other intelligence-gathering methods. The U-2 project received the list and drew up flight plans, and the committee provided a detailed rationale for each plan for the president to consider as he decided whether to approve it. The CIA's Photo Intelligence Division grew in size to prepare for the expected flood of U-2 photographs. Before the aircraft became operational, however, USAF's Project Genetrix, which used high-altitude balloons to photograph the Soviet Union, China, and eastern Europe, led to many diplomatic protests from those countries and for a while, CIA officials feared that the U-2 project was at risk. While Genetrix was also a technical failure\u2014only 34 of the 516 balloons returned usable photographs\u2014the balloon flights gave the United States many clues on how the Communist countries used radar to track overflights, which benefited the U-2 program.\nWith approval from the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA)'s director Hugh Dryden, Bissell's team at the CIA developed a cover story for the U-2 that described the aircraft as used by NACA for high-altitude weather research; the cover story would be used if the aircraft were lost over hostile territory. U-2s flew some real weather-related missions, taking photographs that appeared in the press, and sometimes had civilian government decals, but few believed in the cover story; in May 1957 the UK's \"Daily Express\" newspaper reported the U-2 operating east of the Iron Curtain.\nThe civilian advisers Land and Killian disagreed with the cover story, advising that in case of an aircraft loss, the United States forthrightly acknowledge its use of U-2 overflights \"to guard against surprise attack\". Their advice was not followed, and the weather cover story led to the disaster that followed the May 1960 U-2 loss.\nInitial overflights of Communist territory.\nThe British government in January 1956 approved the U-2's deployment from RAF Lakenheath. NACA announced that the USAF Air Weather Service would use a Lockheed-developed aircraft to study the weather and cosmic rays at altitudes up to 55,000\u00a0feet; accordingly, the first CIA detachment of U-2s (\"Detachment A\") was known publicly as the 1st Weather Reconnaissance Squadron, Provisional (WRSP-1). The death in April 1956, however, of British agent Lionel Crabb while examining Soviet ships in Portsmouth harbor embarrassed the British government, which asked the United States to postpone the Lakenheath flights. To avoid delays, in June 1956, Detachment A moved to Wiesbaden, Germany, without approval from the German government, while Giebelstadt Army Airfield was prepared as a more permanent base.\nEisenhower remained concerned that despite their great intelligence value, overflights of the Soviet Union might cause a war. While the U-2 was under development, at the 1955 Geneva Summit he proposed to Nikita Khrushchev that the Soviet Union and the United States would each grant the other country airfields to use to photograph military installations. Khrushchev rejected the \"Open Skies\" proposal.\nThe CIA told the president that the Soviets could not track high-altitude U-2 flights; this belief was based on studies using old Soviet radar systems and American systems that were not as effective at high altitudes as current Soviet systems, of which the U.S. was not aware. Knutson later said that \"the U-2 was really quite invisible to American radar, but Russian radar were a little different\u2014better, you might say\". Although the Office of Scientific Intelligence issued a more cautious report in May 1956 that stated that detection was possible, it believed that the Soviets could not consistently track the aircraft. Dulles further told Eisenhower, according to presidential aide Andrew Goodpaster, that in any aircraft loss the pilot would almost certainly not survive. With such assurances and the growing demand for accurate intelligence regarding the alleged \"bomber gap\" between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, in June 1956 Eisenhower approved 10 days of overflights.\nThe first U-2 overflight had already occurred, using the existing authorization of air force overflights over Eastern Europe. On 20 June 1956, a U-2 flew over Poland and East Germany, with more flights on 2 July. When Eisenhower refused to approve the U-2's flight over Soviet airspace, the CIA turned to a foreign power, MI6, the British Secret Intelligence Service, to request authorization from Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Harold Macmillan, who approved the flights. The fact that radar had\u2014contrary to the CIA's expectations\u2014successfully tracked the aircraft worried Eisenhower, but he approved the first Soviet overflight, Mission 2013 on 4 July. U-2 Article 347's main targets were the Soviet submarine construction program in Leningrad, and counting the numbers of the new Myasishchev M-4 \"Bison\" bomber.\nSoviet radar monitored the U-2 incursion into Soviet airspace in real-time, with radar tracking starting from the time the aircraft crossed into East German airspace. Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was informed immediately. While contemplating appropriate retaliatory steps, he ordered Soviet Ambassador to Washington, Georgy Zarubin, to protest vehemently to the U.S. State Department that very day, explaining that the recent trust-building to ease tensions between the two countries was undermined by the overflight provocations.\nA second flight on 5 July continued searching for Bisons, took photographs of Moscow (the only ones taken by the program), and flew over cloud-covered rocket factories at Kaliningrad and Khimki. Eisenhower knew from the earlier overflights that his hope of no Soviet detection was unrealistic, but ordered that the overflights stop if the aircraft could be tracked. The CIA found that the Soviets could not consistently track the U-2s and therefore did not know that Moscow and Leningrad had been overflown. The aircraft's photographs showed tiny images of MiG-15s and MiG-17s attempting and failing to intercept the aircraft, proving that the Soviets could not shoot down an operational U-2. Knutson recalled that the \"constant stream of Russian fighters\" trying to shoot down the U-2 during overflights was sometimes \"so thick\" that they interfered with photographs. Repeatedly failing for years to stop the aircraft embarrassed the USSR, which made diplomatic protests against the flights but did not publicize the penetration of Soviet territory.\nU-2 missions from Wiesbaden would depart westward in order to gain altitude over friendly territory before turning eastward at operational altitudes. The NATO Air Defence mission in that area included No. 1 Air Division RCAF (Europe), which operated the Canadair Sabre Mark 6 from bases in northeastern France. This aircraft had a service ceiling of 54,000\u00a0feet and numerous encounters between the U-2 and RCAF 'ZULU' alert flights have been recorded for posterity.\n\"Bomber gap\" disproven.\nOn 10 July, the Soviets protested what they described as overflights by a USAF \"twin-engine medium bomber\", apparently believing that it was a B-57 Canberra. The U.S. replied on 19 July that no American \"military planes\" had overflown the Soviet Union, but the fact that the Soviets' report showed that they could track the U-2s for extended periods caused Eisenhower to immediately halt overflights over eastern Europe. Beyond the Soviet protests, the president was concerned about the American public's reaction to the news that the U.S. had violated international law. To avoid project cancellation, the CIA began Project Rainbow to make the U-2 less detectable. The eight overflights over communist territory, however, had already shown that the bomber gap did not exist; the U-2s had not found any Myasishchev M-4 Bison bombers at the nine bases they had visited. Because the Eisenhower administration could not disclose the source of its intelligence, however, Congressional and public debate over the bomber gap continued.\nSuez Crisis and aftermath.\nThe presidential order did not restrict U-2 flights outside eastern Europe. In May 1956, Turkey approved the deployment of Detachment B at Incirlik Air Base, near Adana, Turkey. Before the new detachment was ready, however, Detachment A in late August used Adana as a refueling base to photograph the Mediterranean. The aircraft found evidence of many British troops on Malta and Cyprus as the United Kingdom prepared for its forthcoming intervention in Suez. The U.S. released some of the photographs to the British government. As the crisis grew in seriousness, the project converted from a source of strategic reconnaissance, which prioritized high quality over speed (the film was processed by its maker, then analyzed in Washington), to a tactical reconnaissance unit that provided immediate analysis. The Photo Intelligence Division set up a lab at Wiesbaden; as Detachment B took over from A and flew over targets that remain classified as of \u00a02013[ [update]], the Wiesbaden lab's rapid reports helped the U.S. government to predict the Israeli-British-French attack on Egypt three days before it began on 29 October. On 1 November a flight flew over the Egyptian air base at Almaza twice, 10 minutes apart; in between the British and French attacked the base, and the visible results of the attack in the \"10-minute reconnaissance\" impressed Eisenhower. Beginning on 5 November, flights over Syria showed that the Soviets had not sent aircraft there despite their threats against the British, French and Israelis, a cause of worry for the U.S.\nIn the four years following the Suez Crisis, repeated U-2 missions over the Middle East were launched, particularly in times of tension. The end of the 1958 Lebanon crisis saw a decline in U-2 operations, although Detachment B U-2s operating from Turkey still sometimes overflew the Middle East along with occasional missions over Albania to check for Soviet missile activity. Israel was a major target of U-2 missions during this period, with U-2 missions detecting the construction of the Negev Nuclear Research Center in 1958, first bringing Israel's nuclear program to the attention of the US. The overflights drew the attention of the Israeli Air Force. Its radars detected and tracked the overflights, and on numerous occasions, Israeli fighter aircraft were scrambled to intercept them but were unable to reach their altitude. The Israeli government was baffled by the overflights. However, Israeli fighter pilots were twice able to spot the intruding aircraft. On 11 March 1959, two Israeli Super Myst\u00e8re fighters were directed to intercept a U-2 detected over Israel by Israeli ground-based radar. Although the aircraft were unable to make an intercept, the formation leader, Major Yosef Alon, managed to get a good look at the aircraft. He subsequently identified it out of a book as a U-2, registered as a weather reconnaissance aircraft to the US Weather Service. On 22 July 1959, after an overflight was detected, an Israeli Air Force Vautour jet was deployed to photograph the mysterious aircraft. The Vautour came within visual range and the U-2 was successfully photographed. In spite of this, it was not until the 1960 shootdown of a U-2 over the Soviet Union and its subsequent public exposure as a spy plane that the Israeli government understood the identity of the mystery aircraft.\nRenewal of Eastern Bloc overflights.\nEisenhower refused CIA pleas in September 1956 to reauthorize overflights of Eastern Europe but the Hungarian Revolution in November, and his reelection that month, caused the president to permit flights over border areas. Soviet interceptors could still not reach the U-2s but, after the Soviets protested a December overflight of Vladivostok by RB-57Ds, Eisenhower again forbade communist overflights. Flights close to the border continued, now including the first ELINT-equipped U-2s. In May 1957, Eisenhower again authorized overflights over certain important Soviet missile and atomic facilities. He continued to personally authorize each flight, closely examining maps and sometimes making changes to the flight plan. By 1957, one of the European units was based at Giebelstadt, and the far eastern unit was based at the Naval Air Facility Atsugi, Japan.\nPart of the reason for the May reauthorization was that the CIA promised that improvements from Project RAINBOW would make the majority of U-2 flights undetected. On 2 April 1957, a RAINBOW test flight crashed in Nevada, killing the pilot. The U-2's large wingspan slowed its descent during crashes, often leaving its remains salvageable; Lockheed was able to rebuild the wreckage from the incident into a flyable airframe, but that it could do so should have been evidence to the CIA that its cover story might not be viable after a crash in hostile territory. The RAINBOW anti-radar modifications were not very successful, and their use ended in 1958.\nSoviet overflights resumed in June 1957 from Eielson Air Force Base in Alaska to the Russian Far East, which had less effective radar systems. Others originated from Lahore, Pakistan. A Lahore flight on 5 August provided the first photographs of the Baikonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam: the CIA had been unaware of its existence until then. Other flights examined the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and the Saryshagan missile test site. After a few more overflights that year, only five more took place before the May 1960 incident because of Eisenhower's increasing caution. The president sought to avoid angering the Soviets as he worked to achieve a nuclear test ban; meanwhile, the Soviets began trying to shoot down U-2 flights that never entered Soviet airspace, and the details in their diplomatic protests showed that Soviet radar operators were able to effectively track the aircraft. To reduce visibility Lockheed painted the aircraft in a blue-black color that helped them blend in against the darkness of space, and the CIA aircraft received the more powerful Pratt &amp; Whitney J75-P-13 engine that increased maximum altitude by , to . In April 1958, CIA source Pyotr Semyonovich Popov told his handler George Kisevalter that a senior KGB official had boasted of having \"full technical details\" of the U-2, leading Bissell to conclude the project had a leak. The source of the leak was never identified, although there was speculation that it was Lee Harvey Oswald, then a radar operator at a U-2 base in Japan.\nThe Soviets developed their own overflight aircraft, variants of the Yak-25, which in addition to photographing various parts of the world through the early 1960s acted as a target for the new MiG-19 and MiG-21 interceptors to practice for the U-2.\nThe \"missile gap\".\nThe successful launch of Sputnik 1 on 4 October 1957 gave credence to Soviet claims about the progress of its intercontinental ballistic missile program, and began the Sputnik crisis in the United States. The U-2 intelligence caused Eisenhower to state in a press conference on 9 October that the launch did \"not raise my apprehensions, not one iota\", but he refused to disclose the U-2's existence as he believed that the Soviets would demand the end of the flights. In December 1958 Khrushchev boasted that a Soviet missile could deliver a 5-megaton warhead . Although the Soviets' SS-6 Sapwood missile program was actually stalled by technical failures, subsequent boasts\u2014and U.S. secretary of defense Neil McElroy's statement in February 1959 to Congress that the Soviets might have a three-to-one temporary advantage in ICBMs during the early 1960s\u2014caused widespread concern in the U.S. about the existence of a \"missile gap\". The American intelligence community was divided, with the CIA suspecting technical delays but the USAF believing that the SS-6 was ready for deployment. Khrushchev continued to exaggerate the Soviet program's success; the missile gap concerns, and CIA and State Department support, caused Eisenhower to reauthorize one Communist territory overflight in July 1959 after 16 months, as well as many ELINT flights along the Soviet border. British U-2 overflights were made in December and February 1960. The first one targeted a large segment of the railways in the Tyuratam test range area as ballistic missiles were expected to be deployed close to rail lines, as well as nuclear complexes and missile test sites. No sites were found. Neither flight proved or disproved the existence of a \"missile gap\". The British flights' success contributed to Eisenhower's authorization of one overflight in April.\nBy 1960 U-2 pilots were aware, Knutson recalled, that Soviet surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) had improved and that overflights had become much riskier, but did not worry because \"dumb fighter pilots always think it's the other guy that's going to get hit\". By this time the CIA had also concluded internally that Soviet SAMs had \"a high probability of successful intercept at providing that detection is made in sufficient time to alert the site\". Despite the much-increased risk, the CIA did not stop the overflights as they were overconfident following the years of successful missions, and because of the strong demand for more missile-site photographs, the U-2 was the major source of covert intelligence on the Soviet Union and had photographed about 15% of the country, producing almost 5,500 intelligence reports. The April flight was indeed tracked quickly, and Khrushchev said in his memoir that it should have been shot down by new SAMs, but the missile crews were slow to react.\nMay 1960: U-2 shot down.\nEisenhower authorized one more overflight, which was to be made no later than 1 May because the important Paris Summit of the Big Four Conference would begin on 16 May. The CIA chose for the mission\u2014the 24th deep-penetration Soviet overflight\u2014Operation GRAND SLAM, an ambitious flight plan for the first crossing of the Soviet Union from Peshawar, Pakistan to Bod\u00f8, Norway; previous flights had always exited in the direction from which they had entered. The route would permit visits to Tyuratam, Sverdlovsk, Kirov, Kotlas, Severodvinsk, and Murmansk. It was expected, given good weather, to resolve missile, nuclear and nuclear submarine intelligence issues with one flight. Francis Gary Powers, the most experienced pilot with 27 missions, was chosen for the flight. After delays, the flight began on May Day, 1 May. This was a mistake because, as an important Soviet holiday, there was much less air traffic than usual. The Soviets began tracking the U-2 15\u00a0miles outside the border, and over Sverdlovsk, four and a half hours into the flight, one of three SA-2 missiles detonated behind the aircraft at 70,500\u00a0feet, near enough to cause it to crash; another hit a Soviet interceptor attempting to reach the American aircraft. Powers survived the near miss and was quickly captured; the crash did not destroy the U-2 and the Soviets were able to identify much of the equipment.\nBissell and other project officials believed that surviving a U-2 accident from above 70,000\u00a0feet was impossible, so they used the pre-existing cover story. On 3 May, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA, the successor to NACA) announced that one of its aircraft, making a high-altitude research flight in Turkey, was missing; the government planned to say, if necessary, that the NASA aircraft had drifted with an incapacitated pilot across the Soviet border. By remaining silent, Khrushchev lured the Americans into reinforcing the cover story until he revealed on 7 May that Powers was alive and had confessed to spying on the Soviet Union. Eisenhower turned down Dulles' offer to resign and publicly took full responsibility for the incident on 11 May; by then all overflights had been canceled. The Paris Summit collapsed after Khrushchev, as the first speaker, demanded an apology from the U.S., which Eisenhower refused.\nU-2 pilots were told, Knutson later said, if captured \"to tell them everything that they knew\", because they were told little about their missions other than targets on maps. Otherwise, Powers had little instruction on what to do during an interrogation. Although he had been told that he could reveal everything about the aircraft since the Soviets could learn what they wanted from it, Powers did his best to conceal classified information while appearing to cooperate. His trial began on 17 August 1960. Powers\u2014who apologized on the advice of his Soviet defense counsel\u2014was sentenced to three years in prison, but on 10 February 1962 the USSR exchanged him and American student Frederic Pryor for Rudolf Abel at Glienicke Bridge between West Berlin and Potsdam, Germany. Two CIA investigations found that Powers had done well during the interrogation and had \"complied with his obligations as an American citizen during this period\". Although the government was reluctant to reinstate him to the USAF because of its statements that the U-2 program was civilian, it had promised to do so after CIA employment ended; Powers resolved the dilemma by choosing to work for Lockheed as a U-2 pilot.\nThe debris of Powers's aircraft was used to design a copy under the name Beriev S-13. That was then discarded in favor of the MiG-25R and reconnaissance satellites.\nThe search for operational ballistic missile sites continued focusing on the Soviet railway system using Corona satellite images, with a resolution of twenty to thirty feet compared to two to three feet from U-2 cameras.\nRestructuring.\nThe U-2 shootdown in 1960 paralyzed the U.S. reconnaissance community and forced changes in policy, procedures, and security protocol. The United States also had to move swiftly to protect its allies: for example after the Soviets announced that Powers was alive, the CIA evacuated the British pilots from Detachment B as Turkey did not know of their presence in the country. The end of Soviet overflights meant that Detachment B itself soon left Turkey, and in July Detachment C left Japan following a Japanese governmental request. Both detachments merged into Detachment G, under the command of Lt. Col. William Gregory, at Edwards Air Force Base, California where the CIA had relocated the U-2 program after nuclear testing forced it to abandon Groom Lake in 1957.\nThe CIA sought to determine if the U-2 could, from a fixed base at North Edwards, rapidly deploy to an advanced American base and complete reconnaissance flights on a largely self-sustaining basis. A proving exercise was arranged with Gregory and the new Detachment G unit to simulate deploying a U-2 unit overseas, taking two or three aircraft, and conducting three reconnaissance missions with no resupply. The exercise was critical to continued CIA operation of the U-2, since basing the aircraft in a foreign country was no longer an option. The exercise was completed with excellent results, and actual reconnaissance missions began to be scheduled immediately.\nOn 4 January 1961, the CIA U-2 reconnaissance effort, which was formerly known as CHALICE, was redesignated IDEALIST. This program codeword by the end of the decade was being used to describe the U.S. reconnaissance along the Chinese coastline, while Taiwanese missions into the Chinese country would be known as the IDEALIST program\nBy the next U-2 flight, in October 1960 over Cuba, the previously informal procedure in which the president personally approved or disapproved each flight after discussion with advisors was replaced by the National Security Council Special Group. The expansion of satellite intelligence partly compensated for the overflights' end but, because U-2 photographs remained superior to satellite imagery, future administrations considered resumption at times, such as during the Berlin Crisis of 1961.\nCuba.\nBay of Pigs Invasion.\nAs many as 15 U-2 sorties provided support for the April 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba by the United States. Scientists such as Edwin H. Land and James Rhyne Killian, who had originally conceived the U-2 and had advocated for its development and deployment as a tool of scientific reconnaissance, felt betrayed by the use of the U-2 for \"dirty tricks\" covert operations, such as the Bay of Pigs invasion. Richard M. Bissel, the CIA official in charge of both the U-2 program and CIA covert operations, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion, had been a good friend of Land and Killian, but such use of the U-2s strained their friendship.\nFrom October 1960, Detachment G made many overflights of Cuba from Laughlin Air Force Base, Texas. Although Lockheed modified six CIA aircraft into the aerial refueling-capable U-2F model in 1961, permitting some Cuba missions to originate from Edwards, pilot fatigue limited flights to about 10 hours. An August 1962 flight showed Soviet SA-2 SAM sites on the island; later overflights found more sites and MiG-21 interceptors. The increasing number of SAMs caused the United States to more cautiously plan Cuban overflights. USAF U-2s did not conduct overflights, but officials believed that it would be better for a military officer to be the pilot in case he was shot down. Following one last Cuba overflight that originated from Edwards and ended at McCoy Air Force Base, Florida, on 14 October 1962, all further U-2 operations over Cuba originated from a detachment operating location that was established at McCoy.\nCuban Missile Crisis.\nAfter receiving hasty training on the more powerful U-2F under the cognizance of the Weather Reconnaissance Squadron Provisional (WRSP-4) at Edwards AFB, Major Richard S. Heyser flew over western Cuba on 14 October 1962 in a U-2F; his aircraft was the first to photograph Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBM) in San Crist\u00f3bal before returning to McCoy AFB, Florida. Prior to the launch of all Cuban sorties, the two U-2F aircraft possessed by WSRP-4 and flown by 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing personnel had USAF insignia and tail numbers.\nSAC received permission to fly as many Cuban overflights as necessary for the duration of the resulting Cuban Missile Crisis. On a 27 October sortie from McCoy AFB, one of the U-2Fs was shot down over Cuba by an SA-2 Guideline surface-to-air missile, killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson; he posthumously received the first Air Force Cross.\nSoviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was dismayed, warning President John F. Kennedy in a private message that U-2 overflights could inadvertently cause WWIII: \"Is it not a fact that an intruding American plane could be easily taken for a nuclear bomber, which might push us to a fateful step?\"\nFulfilling CIA officials' fears of a USAF takeover, CIA pilots never again flew over Cuba; SAC retained control over Cuban overflights, which continued until the 1970s under the code name \"OLYMPIC FIRE\".\nAt the same time as the Cuban crisis, Royal Air Force (RAF) English Electric Lightnings of the Air Fighting Development Squadron made several practice interceptions against U-2s; guided by ground controllers and using energy climb profiles, the Lightning could intercept the U-2 at up to 65,000\u00a0ft.\nHickman incident.\nOn 28 July 1966, a U-2 piloted by USAF Captain Robert Hickman departed from Barksdale Air Force Base to conduct a reconnaissance mission; Hickman's orders included the requirement that he not enter Cuban airspace. As determined later by USAF investigators, trouble with the aircraft's oxygen system caused Hickman to lose consciousness. U.S. Navy pilot John Newlin, flying an F-4B assigned to VF-74, was scrambled from Naval Air Station Key West, ordered to intercept Hickman before he violated Cuban airspace, and, if necessary, shoot him down. Newlin could not reach the U-2 before flying closer than 12\u00a0miles from the Cuban coastline and so had to turn back. Hickman probably died from oxygen deprivation before the intercept was attempted. Hickman's U-2 flew across Cuba, ran out of fuel and crashed into a mountainside near Llanquera, Bolivia. The Bolivian military gave his remains an honor guard at a nearby chapel. The US embassy to Bolivia sent a team to investigate the crash site.\nFrom 1960 to 1965, U-2 flights originated or terminated on a nearly daily basis at Albrook USAF base. In 1966, elements of the USAF's 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing flew U-2s from Albrook to perform atmospheric sampling as the French detonated a nuclear device in the South Pacific.\nAsia.\nCIA overflights of Asian targets began in spring 1958 when Detachment C moved from Japan to Naval Air Station Cubi Point in the Philippines to overfly Indonesia during an uprising against Sukarno's \"Guided Democracy\" government. The CIA's Civil Air Transport, aiding the rebels, so badly needed pilots that it borrowed two CIA U-2 pilots despite the high risk to the U-2 program if one were captured. The Indonesian government soon defeated the rebels, however, and the U-2s returned to Japan. That year, Detachment C also flew over the Chinese coast near Quemoy during the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis to see if Communist Chinese forces were preparing to invade, and in 1959 aided CIA operations during the Tibetan uprising. The unit was collecting high-altitude air samples to look for evidence of Soviet nuclear tests when it was withdrawn from Asia after the May 1960 U-2 incident.\nOn 24 September 1959, an unmarked U-2, Article 360, crash landed to Fujisawa Airfield of Japan. Armed American security forces in plainclothes soon arrived and moved away locals at gunpoint, increasing public interest in the crash. The unlawfulness of the Black Jet Incident was criticized in Japan's House of Representatives. The same Article 360 was later shot down in the May 1960 U-2 incident. A month before the incident, another U-2 crash landed in rural Thailand. Locals helped the US remove the aircraft without publicity.\nDetachment G pilots began using the unmarked Taiwanese \"Detachment H\" U-2 for North Vietnam overflights in February 1962, but as tactical intelligence became more important, after the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution of August 1964 SAC took over all U-2 missions in Indochina. In late November 1962, Detachment G was deployed to Takhli Royal Thai Air Force Base, Thailand, to carry out overflights of the Chinese-Indian border area after Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru requested military aid following the Sino-Indian War in October\u2013November 1962. In 1963, India agreed to an American request for a permanent U-2 base for Soviet and Chinese targets, offering Charbatia, although it was only briefly used and Takhli remained Department G's main Asian base. After the Vietnamese ceasefire in January 1973 prohibited American military flights, CIA pilots again used the unmarked Detachment H U-2 over North Vietnam during 1973 and 1974. Several U-2s were lost over China.\nIn 1963, the CIA started project Whale Tale to develop carrier-based U-2Gs to overcome range limitations. During the development of the capability, CIA pilots took off and landed U-2Gs on the aircraft carrier and other ships. The U-2G was used only twice operationally. Both flights from \"Ranger\" occurred in May 1964 to observe France's development of an atomic bomb test range at Moruroa in French Polynesia.\nVietnam War.\nIn early 1964, SAC sent a detachment of U-2s from the 4080th to South Vietnam for high altitude reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam. On 5 April 1965, U-2s from the 4028th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron (SRS) took photos of SAM-2 sites near Hanoi and Haiphong harbor. On 11 February 1966, the 4080th Wing was redesignated the 100th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing (100 SRW) and moved to Davis-Monthan AFB, Arizona. The detachment at Bien Hoa AB, South Vietnam, was redesignated the 349th SRS.\nThe only loss of a U-2 during combat operations occurred on 9 October 1966, when Major Leo Stewart, flying with the 349th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron, developed mechanical problems high over North Vietnam. The U-2 managed to return to South Vietnam where Stewart ejected safely. The U-2 crashed approximately east-northeast of Saigon in Viet Cong (VC) territory. A Special Forces team was later sent to destroy the wreckage. One member stated that they retrieved classified radar jammers from the wreckage before they could be captured by the VC and possibly transferred to the USSR. In July 1970, the 349th SRS at Bien Hoa moved to Thailand and was redesignated the 99th SRS in November 1972, remaining there until March 1976.\nU-2 carrier operations.\nAt one time, in an effort to extend the U-2's operating range and to eliminate the need for foreign government approval for U-2 operations from USAF bases in foreign countries, it was suggested that the U-2 be operated from aircraft carriers. Three aircraft were converted for carrier operations by the installation of arrester hooks, and carrier-qualified naval aviators were recruited to fly them.\nIt turned out to be possible to take off and land a U-2 from a carrier. Testing in 1964 with the USS \"Ranger\" and in 1969 with the USS \"America\" proved the concept. The only operational carrier use occurred in May 1964 when a U-2, operating from USS \"Ranger\", was used to spy on a French atomic test in the Pacific. The Lockheed C-130 was also tested for carrier use to support U-2 sea deployments.\nIn 1969, the larger U-2Rs were flown from the carrier . The U-2 carrier program is believed to have been halted after 1969.\n1970\u20132000.\nIn August 1970, two U-2Rs were deployed by the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) to cover the Israeli-Egypt conflict under the code name \"EVEN STEVEN\".\nIn June 1976, the U-2s of the 100 SRW were transferred to the 9th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing (9 SRW) at Beale Air Force Base, California, and merged with Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird operations there. When the Strategic Air Command (SAC) was disbanded in 1992, the wing was transferred to the new Air Combat Command (ACC) and redesignated the 9th Reconnaissance Wing (9 RW).\nIn 1977, a U-2R was retrofitted with an upward-looking window so that it could be used for high altitude astronomical observations of the cosmic microwave background (CMB). This experiment was the first to measure definitively the motion of the galaxy relative to the CMB and established an upper limit on the rotation of the universe as a whole.\nIn 1984, during a major NATO exercise, RAF Flight Lieutenant Mike Hale intercepted a U-2 at a height of , where the aircraft had previously been considered safe from interception. Hale climbed to in his Lightning F3.\nIn 1989, a U-2R of 9th Reconnaissance Wing (RW), Detachment 5, flying from Patrick Air Force Base, Florida successfully photographed a space shuttle launch for NASA to assist in identifying the cause of tile loss during launch, which had been discovered in the initial post-\"Challenger\" missions.\nOn 2 January 1993, an Iraqi MiG-25 Foxbat attempted to intercept a USAF U-2 taking part in UN operations over Iraq. The R-40 (AA-6 Acrid) missile missed the U-2 and the MiG was 'chased off' by F-15 Eagles.\nOn 19 November 1998, a NASA ER-2 research aircraft set a world record for altitude of in horizontal flight in the weight class.\n21st century.\nThe U-2 remains in front-line service more than 60 years after its first flight, with the current U-2 beginning service in 1980. This is due primarily to its ability to change surveillance objectives on short notice, something that surveillance satellites cannot do. In the mid-1990s, it was converted from the U-2R to the U-2S, receiving the GE F118 turbofan engine. The U-2 outlasted its Mach 3 replacement, the SR-71, which was retired in 1998. A classified budget document approved by the Pentagon on 23 December 2005 called for the U-2's termination no earlier than 2012, with some aircraft being retired by 2007. In January 2006, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld announced the U-2's pending retirement as a cost-cutting measure during a larger reorganization and redefinition of the USAF's mission. Rumsfeld said that this would not impair the USAF's ability to gather intelligence, which would be done by satellites and a growing supply of unmanned RQ-4 Global Hawk reconnaissance aircraft.\nIn 2009, the USAF stated that it planned to extend the U-2 retirement from 2012 until 2014 or later to allow more time to field the RQ-4. Upgrades late in the War in Afghanistan gave the U-2 greater reconnaissance and threat-detection capability. By early 2010, U-2s from the 99th Expeditionary Reconnaissance Squadron had flown over 200 missions in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, as well as Combined Joint Task Force \u2013 Horn of Africa.\nA U-2 was stationed in Cyprus in March 2011 to help in the enforcement of the no-fly zone over Libya, and a U-2 stationed at Osan Air Base in South Korea was used to provide imagery of the Japanese nuclear reactor damaged by the 11 March 2011 earthquake and tsunami.\nIn March 2011, it was projected that the fleet of 32 U-2s would be operated until 2015. In 2014, Lockheed Martin determined that the U-2S fleet had used only one-fifth of its design service life and was one of the youngest fleets within the USAF. In 2011 the USAF intended to replace the U-2 with the RQ-4 before fiscal year 2015; proposed legislation required any replacement to have lower operating costs. In January 2012 the USAF reportedly planned to end the RQ-4 Block 30 program and extend the U-2's service life until 2023. The RQ-4 Block 30 was kept in service under political pressure despite USAF objections, stating that the U-2 cost $2,380 per flight hour compared to the RQ-4's $6,710 as of early 2014. Critics have pointed out that the RQ-4's cameras and sensors are less capable, and lack all-weather operating capability; however, some of the U-2's sensors may be installed on the RQ-4. The RQ-4 Block 30's capabilities were planned to match the U-2's by FY 2016, the replacement effort is motivated by decreases in the RQ-4's cost per flying hour.\nThe U-2's retirement was calculated to save $2.2 billion. $1.77 billion will have to be spent over 10 years to enhance the RQ-4, including $500 million on a universal payload adapter to attach one U-2 sensor onto the RQ-4. USAF officials fear that retiring the U-2 amid RQ-4 upgrades will create a capability gap In the House Armed Services Committee's markup of the FY 2015 budget, language was included prohibiting the use of funds to retire or store the U-2; it also requested a report outlining the transition capabilities from the U-2 to the RQ-4 Block 30 in light of capability gap concerns.\nIn late 2014, Lockheed Martin proposed an unmanned U-2 version with greater payload capability, but the concept did not gain traction with the USAF. In early 2015, the USAF was directed to restart modest funding for the U-2 for operations and research, development, and procurement through to FY 2018. The former head of the USAF Air Combat Command, Gen. Mike Hostage helped extend the U-2S to ensure commanders receive sufficient intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) coverage; stating \"it will take eight years before the RQ-4 Global Hawk fleet can support 90% of the coverage of the U-2 fleet.\" In 2015, the RQ-4 was planned to replace the U-2 by 2019, though Lockheed states the U-2 can remain viable until 2050. As of January 2018, the U.S. Air Force budget for 2018 had indefinitely postponed the retirement of the U-2. In February 2020, the U.S. Air Force submitted budget documents with confusing language suggesting that it could begin retiring U-2s in 2025 but clarified afterwards that no retirement is planned.\nOn 20 September 2016, a TU-2S trainer crashed upon takeoff from Beale Air Force Base, killing one pilot and injuring the other.\nIn early August 2018, NASA flew two missions using infrared sensors to map the Mendocino Complex Fire. The flights used the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) and Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) satellite instruments.\nIn 2020, the U-2 made history as the first military aircraft to integrate Artificial Intelligence on a mission. The AI program, code-named ARTU\u03bc, was developed by the U-2 Federal Laboratory.\nIn the 2023 Chinese balloon incident, the U.S. Air Force used U-2 aircraft to monitor a Chinese balloon that crossed the United States and Canada. U-2 flights confirmed the balloon's surveillance package was outfitted with multiple antennas capable of conducting signals intelligence collection operations and that the craft had large solar panels to power them.\nIn 2025, Air Force Chief of Staff General David Allvin confirmed that the U-2 was being used to surveil the US-Mexico border. The U-2 and RC-135 Rivet Joint were used for ISR operations to track cartels located in Mexico.\nAlso in 2025, as fleet retirement is being discussed, a TU-2S trainer set an endurance record for the class, by flying in 14 hours over all 48 lower US states.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBissell suggested bringing the British into the program to increase the number of overflights. Prime Minister Harold Macmillan agreed with the plan, and four RAF officers were sent to Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas for training in May 1958. On 8 July, the senior British pilot, Squadron Leader Christopher H. Walker, was killed when his U-2 malfunctioned and crashed near Wayside, Texas. This was the first death involving the U-2, and the circumstances were not disclosed for over 50 years. Another pilot was quickly selected and sent to replace Walker. After training, the group of RAF U-2 pilots arrived in Turkey in November 1958, shortly after the CIA's Detachment B from Adana provided valuable intelligence during the 1958 Lebanon crisis with both the United States and United Kingdom involvement. Since the September 1956 disclosure of Mediterranean photographs, the United Kingdom had received U-2 intelligence, except during the Suez Crisis. The CIA and Eisenhower viewed using British pilots as a way of increasing plausible deniability for the flights. The CIA also saw British participation as a way of obtaining additional Soviet overflights that the president would not authorize. The United Kingdom gained the ability to target flights toward areas of the world the United States was less interested in, and possibly avoid another Suez-like interruption of U-2 photographs.\nAlthough the RAF unit operated as part of Detachment B, the UK formally received title to the U-2s their pilots would fly, and Eisenhower wrote to Macmillan that because of the separate lines of authority, the nations were conducting \"two complementary programs rather than a joint one\". A secret MI6 bank account paid the RAF pilots, whose cover was employment with the Meteorological Office. While most British flights occurred over the Middle East during the two years the UK program existed, two missions over Soviet sites were very successful. The first targeted two missile test ranges, three nuclear complexes, and a large segment of railway in one of the test range areas. Operational ballistic missile sites were considered most likely close to railways but none were found. A second flight had as its main target the long-range bomber airfield at Saratov/Engels. The number of Bison long-range aircraft counted on the airfield settled the \"bomber gap\" controversy. Other targets were a missile test center and aircraft, aircraft engine and missile production plants. A new bomber with two engines at the base of the fin, the Tupolev Tu-22, was discovered at one of the aircraft plants. Like Eisenhower, Macmillan personally approved the Soviet overflights. The British direct involvement in overflights ended after the May 1960 U-2 downing incident; although four pilots remained stationed in California until 1974, the CIA's official history of the program stated that \"RAF pilots never again conducted another overflight in an Agency U-2.\" In 1960 and 1961 the first four pilots received the Air Force Cross, but their U-2 experience remained secret.\nTaiwan.\nBeginning in the 1950s, Taiwan's Republic of China Air Force (ROCAF) used the RB-57D aircraft for reconnaissance missions over the People's Republic of China (PRC), but suffered two losses when MiG-17s and SA-2 surface-to-air missiles intercepted and downed the aircraft.\nTaiwanese and American authorities reached an agreement in 1958 to create the 35th Squadron, nicknamed the Black Cat Squadron, composed of two U-2Cs in Taoyuan Air Base in northern Taiwan, at an isolated part of the air base. To create misdirection typical of the time, the unit was created under the cover of high altitude weather research missions for ROCAF. To the U.S. government, the 35th Squadron and any U.S. CIA/USAF personnel assigned to the unit were known as Detachment H on all documents. But instead of being under normal USAF control, the project was known as Project Razor, and was run directly by the CIA with USAF assistance. Each of the 35th Squadron's operational missions had to be approved by both the U.S. and the ROC presidents beforehand. A further layer of security and secrecy was enforced by all U.S. military and CIA/government personnel stationed in Taoyuan assigned to Detachment H having been issued official documents and IDs with false names and cover titles as Lockheed employees/representatives in civilian clothes. The ROCAF personnel would never know their U.S. counterparts' real names and rank/titles, or which U.S. government agencies they were dealing with. A total of 26 of 28 ROC pilots sent to the U.S. completed training between 1959 and 1973, at Laughlin Air Force Base, Texas. On 3 August 1959, a U-2 on a training mission out of Laughlin AFB, piloted by ROCAF Major Mike Hua, made a successful unassisted nighttime emergency landing at Cortez, Colorado, that became known as the Miracle at Cortez. Major Hua was awarded the USAF Distinguished Flying Cross for saving the aircraft.\nIn January 1961, the CIA provided the ROC with its first two U-2Cs, and in April the squadron flew its first mission over mainland China. In the wake of the Gary Powers incident, the Taiwanese program of China overflights was redesignated TACKLE, a subset of the new IDEALIST program. Other countries were occasionally overflown by the 35th Squadron, including North Korea, North Vietnam and Laos; however, the main objective of the 35th Squadron was to conduct reconnaissance missions assessing the PRC's nuclear capabilities. For this purpose, the ROC pilots flew as far as Gansu and other remote regions in northwest China. Some missions, to satisfy mission requirements including range, and to add some element of surprise, had the 35th Squadron's U-2s flying from or recovered at other U.S. air bases in Southeast Asia and Eastern Asia, such as Kunsan Air Base in South Korea, or Takhli in Thailand. All U.S. airbases in the region were listed as emergency/alternate recovery airfields and could be used besides the 35th Squadron's home base at Taoyuan Air Base in Taiwan. Initially, all film taken by the Black Cat Squadron would be flown to Okinawa or Guam for processing and development, and the U.S. forces would not share any mission photos with ROC. In the late 1960s, the USAF agreed to share complete sets of mission photos and help set up a photo development and interpretation unit at Taoyuan.\nIn 1968, the ROC U-2C/F/G fleet was replaced with the newer U-2R. However, with the overwhelming threats from SA-2 missiles and MiG-21 interceptors, along with the rapprochement between the U.S. and the PRC, the ROC U-2s stopped entering Chinese airspace, only conducting electronic intelligence-gathering and photo-reconnaissance missions using new Long Range Oblique Reconnaissance (LOROP) cameras on the U-2R from above international waters. The last U-2 mission over mainland China took place on 16 March 1968. After that, all missions had the U-2 fly outside a buffer zone at least around China.\nDuring his visit to China in 1972, U.S. president Richard Nixon promised the Chinese to cease all reconnaissance missions near and over China, though this was also practical as by 1972 U.S. photo satellites could provide better overhead images without risking losing aircraft and pilots, or provoking international incidents. The last 35th Squadron mission was flown by Sungchou \"Mike\" Chiu on 24 May 1974.\nBy the end of the ROC's U-2 operations, a total of 19 U-2C/F/G/R aircraft had been operated by the 35th Squadron from 1959 to 1974. The squadron flew some 220 missions, with about half over mainland China, resulting in five aircraft shot down, with three fatalities and two pilots captured; one aircraft lost while performing an operational mission off the Chinese coast, with the pilot killed; and another seven aircraft lost in training with six pilots killed. On 29 July 1974, the two remaining U-2R aircraft in ROC possession were flown from Taoyuan Air Base in Taiwan to Edwards AFB, California, US, and turned over to the USAF.\nVariants.\nPrimary list.\n The second ER-2 (lead aircraft) and two U-2Ss on a demonstration flight from Moffett Field before moving to Edwards Air Force Base, 1996. The farthest aircraft was modified from the first ER-2.\nU-2E/F/H details.\nIn May 1961, in an attempt to extend the U-2's already considerable range, Lockheed modified six CIA U-2s and several USAF U-2s with aerial refueling equipment, which allowed the aircraft to receive fuel from either the KC-97 or from the KC-135. This extended the aircraft's range from approximately and extended its endurance to more than 14 hours. The J57-powered U-2Bs were re-designated U-2E and the J75-powered U-2Cs were redesignated U-2F. Each modified U-2 also included an additional oxygen cylinder. However, pilot fatigue was not considered, and little use was made of the refueling capability. The only U-2H was both air refueling-capable and carrier-capable.\nU-2R/S details.\nThe U-2R, first flown in 1967, is significantly larger and more capable than the original aircraft. A tactical reconnaissance version, the \"TR-1A\", first flew in August 1981. A distinguishing feature of these aircraft is the addition of a large instrumentation \"superpod\" under each wing. Designed for standoff tactical reconnaissance in Europe, the TR-1A was structurally identical to the U-2R. The 17th Reconnaissance Wing, RAF Alconbury, England used operational TR-1As from 1983 until 1991. The last U-2 and TR-1 aircraft were delivered to USAF in October 1989. In 1992 all TR-1s were re-designated to U-2R for uniformity across the fleet. The two-seat trainer variant of the TR-1, the \"TR-1B\", was redesignated as the \"TU-2R\". After upgrading with the GE F118-101 engine, the former U-2Rs were designated the \"U-2S\" \"Senior Year\".\nER-2 details.\nA derivative of the U-2 known as the ER-2 (Earth Resources 2), in NASA's white livery, is based at the Dryden Flight Research Center (now Armstrong Flight Research Center) and is used for high-altitude civilian research including Earth resources, celestial observations, atmospheric chemistry and dynamics, and oceanic processes. Programs using the aircraft include the Airborne Science Program, ERAST and Earth Science Enterprise. Landings are assisted by another pilot at speeds exceeding in a chase car.\nOperators.\nUnited States Air Force\nStrategic Air Command\n1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1990\u20131992\n5th Strategic Reconnaissance Training Squadron 1986\u20131992\n95th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1991\u20131992 (RAF Alconbury, UK)\n99th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1976\u20131992\n4029th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1981\u20131986\n9 SRW Detachment 2; Osan Air Base, South Korea 1976\u20131992\n9 SRW Detachment 3; RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus 1970\u20131992\n9 SRW Detachment 4; RAF Mildenhall, UK 1976\u20131982\n9 SRW Detachment 5; Patrick AFB, FL 1976\u20131992\n95th Reconnaissance Squadron\n99th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1972\u20131976 (U-Tapao Air Base, Thailand)\n349th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1966\u20131976\n1704th Reconnaissance Squadron\n4028th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron\nAir Combat Command\n1st Reconnaissance Squadron 1992\u2013present\n5th Reconnaissance Squadron 1994\u2013present (Osan Air Base, South Korea)\n95th Reconnaissance Squadron 1992\u20131993\n99th Reconnaissance Squadron 1992\u2013present\nDetachment 2; Osan AB, South Korea 1992\u20131994\nDetachment 3; RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus 1992\u2013present\nDetachment 4; RAF Alconbury, UK 1993\u20131995\nRAF Fairford, UK 1995\u20131998; 2019\u2013present\nIstres AB, France 1998\u20132000\n99th Expeditionary Reconnaissance Squadron\n99th Expeditionary Reconnaissance Squadron\n4402d Reconnaissance Squadron\nAir Force Flight Test Center \u2013 Edwards Air Force Base, California\n4th Weather Reconnaissance Squadron (Provisional) 1956\u20131960\n6512th Test Squadron 1960\u20131980\nNational Aeronautics and Space Administration \u2013 Moffett Field, California (1981\u201397); Palmdale, California (1997\u2013present)\nCentral Intelligence Agency \u2013 1956\u20131974\nDetachment A, Germany\nDetachment B, Turkey\nDetachment C, Japan\nDetachment G, California\nSpecifications (U-2S).\n\"Data from\" Jane's all the World's Aircraft 1989\u201390, U.S. Air Force fact sheet, and Lockheed Martin U-2S product cardGeneral characteristics* Crew: 1* Capacity: payload* Aspect ratio: * Airfoil: root: NACA 63A409; tip: NACA 63A406\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: 12 hours* g limits: * Roll rate: * Maximum glide ratio: * Time to altitude: in 12 minutes 30 seconds* Lift-to-drag: 25.6* Thrust/weight: 0.425\nIn popular culture.\nThe image of a U-2 was used on the cover of the band Negativland's controversial 1991 EP titled \"U2\".\nThe TV series \"MythBusters\" featured the U-2 in the \"Flights of Fantasy\" episode during the 2015 season. The myth tested was that the U-2 was the most difficult plane to fly. While not coming to a consensus, the myth was found to be \"plausible\" because, among other things, the extremely bad field of vision during landing required a chase car to follow the plane to give the pilot additional visual references on the ground.\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32312", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32312", "title": "Unua Libro", "text": "1887 book by L. L. Zamenhof\nDr. Esperanto's International Language (), commonly referred to as (\"First Book\"), is an 1887 book by L. L. Zamenhof, in which he first introduced and described the constructed language Esperanto. First published in Russian on July 26\u00a0[O.S. July 14]\u00a01887, the publication of \"Unua Libro\" marks the formal beginning of the Esperanto movement.\nWriting under the pseudonym \"Dr. Esperanto\", Zamenhof originally referred to the language as the \"international language\"; the use of \"Esperanto\" did not arise until 1889 when people began to use his pseudonym as the name of the language itself. Zamenhof reproduced a significant portion of the content of \"Unua Libro\" in the 1905 \"Fundamento de Esperanto\", which he established as the sole obligatory authority over Esperanto in the Declaration of Boulogne, ratified by the first World Esperanto Congress later that year.\nHistory.\nAfter many years of developing the language, Zamenhof completed \"Unua Libro\" by the spring of 1885 and spent the next two years looking for a publisher. In 1887, shortly after he married his wife Klara, his new father-in-law Aleksandr Silbernik advised him to use money from Klara's dowry to find a publisher. Following his advice, Zamenhof found a publisher in Warsaw, Chaim Kelter. On July 26\u00a0[O.S. July 14]\u00a01887, Kelter published the book in Russian as \"International Language\" (). Before the end of the year, Kelter published the Polish, French, and German editions of the book, as well.\nIn 1888, Zamenhof had Julian Steinhaus translate the book into English, and the translation was published under the title \"Dr. Esperanto's International Tongue\". However, when Richard Geoghegan pointed out that Steinhaus's translation was very poor, Zamenhof destroyed his remaining copies and requested that Geoghegan produce a fresh translation. Geoghegan's translation of the book, titled \"Dr. Esperanto's International Language\", was published on January 17\u00a0[O.S. January 5]\u00a01889 and became the standard English translation. Henry Phillips Jr., a secretary of the American Philosophical Society and early supporter of Esperanto, also produced a translation in 1889, titled \"An Attempt towards an International Language\", but Geoghegan's translation remains the preferred standard.\n\"Unua Libro\" was also translated into Hebrew, Yiddish, Swedish, and Lithuanian in 1889 and then into Danish, Bulgarian, Italian, Spanish, and Czech in 1890.\nThe name \"Unua Libro\" was applied retroactively to the book in relation to the title of Zamenhof's 1888 book \"Dua Libro\" (\"Second Book\").\nIn 1905, Zamenhof reproduced much of the content of \"Unua Libro\" in \"Fundamento de Esperanto\", which he established as the only obligatory authority over Esperanto in the Declaration of Boulogne at the first World Esperanto Congress later that year. However, in his 1888 \"Aldono al la Dua Libro\" (\"Supplement to the Second Book\"), he officially altered the spelling of the suffixes of the temporal correlatives (\"when\", \"then\", \"always\", \"sometimes\", \"never\") from \"-ian\" to \"-iam\", which rendered the Esperanto of \"Unua Libro\" slightly outdated.\nContent.\nThe book consists of three parts, an introduction, a grammar section, and a dictionary.\nZamenhof begins by renouncing all rights to the language, putting it in the public domain.\nIn the introduction, Zamenhof lays out his case for the need for an international auxiliary language (IAL). He states that previous attempts, such as Volap\u00fck, have failed because they have not overcome the three main difficulties an IAL must overcome in order to succeed. Those difficulties are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. To render the study of the language so easy as to make its acquisition mere play to the learner.\n2. To enable the learner to make direct use of his knowledge with persons of any nationality, whether the language be universally accepted or not; in other words, the language is to be directly a means of international communication.\n3. To find some means of overcoming the natural indifference of mankind, and disposing them, in the quickest manner possible, and en masse, to learn and use the proposed language as a living one, and not only in last extremities, and with the key at hand.\u2014\u200a\nIn the next three parts, he addresses each difficulty specifically and explains why he believes Esperanto is fit to overcome them.\nIn part I, he explains the simplicity and flexibility of Esperanto grammar, particularly due to its regularity and use of affixes.\nIn part II, he demonstrates the ease of using Esperanto for international communication due to a simple and clear vocabulary. To demonstrate this, he translates the Our Father and Genesis 1:1\u20139 and presents a fictional letter and a few poems in Esperanto\u2014\"El Heine'\", a translation, and \"Mia penso\" and \"Ho, mia kor'\", both original.\nIn part III, he presents an idea called the \"universal vote\", which is a campaign to allot 10 million signatures of people making the following pledge: \"I, the undersigned, promise to learn the international language, proposed by Dr. Esperanto, if it shall be shown that ten million similar promises have been publicly given.\" He argues that this will prevent anyone from wasting time on learning the language since, once 10 million signatures have been gathered, there will be a significant population obliged to learn the language, rendering the language useful. He also welcomes critical feedback for the next year and promises to consider criticism before publishing a special booklet that will give definitive form to the language the following year (which was to be \"Aldono al la Dua Libro\"). Additionally, he lays out guidelines for a language academy to guide the evolution of the language in the future (which was to be the Akademio de Esperanto).\nIn the grammar section, he explains the Esperanto alphabet and sixteen grammar rules.\nIn the dictionary section, he presents a dictionary with 917 roots of vocabulary.\nReception and legacy.\nZamenhof received a wide range of reactions to \"Unua Libro\", from mocking criticism to avid interest. In the hundreds of letters he received, he saw enough support to prompt him to publish \"Dua Libro\" in January 1888 and \"La Esperantisto\" in 1889, in order to provide more Esperanto reading material for those with interest. In 1889, he also published Russian\u2013Esperanto and German\u2013Esperanto dictionaries to increase Esperanto vocabulary, as well as \"Aldono al la Dua Libro\", a supplement to \"Dua Libro\", to establish the definitive form of the language, a document he promised in part III of \"Unua Libro\".\nBy all measures, Zamenhof's \"universal vote\" campaign failed. By 1889, he had only reached 1000 signatures, a mere 0.01% of his goal of 10 million. Nevertheless, the Esperanto movement continued onward. Among the early supporters were educated Russian and Polish Jews, Leo Tolstoy and his followers, Eastern European freemasons, and speakers of Volap\u00fck who had lost hope in their language.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32313", "revid": "1313585914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32313", "title": "Unobtainium", "text": "Rare or fictional material\nUnobtainium (or unobtanium) is a term used in fiction, engineering, and common situations for a material ideal for a particular application but impractically difficult or impossible to obtain. Unobtainium originally referred to materials that do not exist at all, but can also be used to describe real materials that are unavailable due to extreme rarity or cost. It can also be used to refer to a device rather than a material.\nThe properties of any particular example of unobtainium depend on the intended use. For example, a pulley made of unobtainium might be massless and frictionless. But for a nuclear rocket, unobtainium might have the needed qualities of lightness, strength at high temperatures, and resistance to radiation damage; a combination of all three qualities is impossible with today's materials. The concept of unobtainium is often applied hand-wavingly, flippantly, or humorously.\nThe word \"unobtainium\" derives humorously from \"unobtainable\", with \"-ium\", a suffix for chemical element names. It predates the similar-sounding systematic element names, such as ununennium, unbinilium, unbiunium, and unbiquadium. An alternative spelling, \"unobtanium\", is sometimes used, by analogy to the names of real elements like titanium and uranium.\nEngineering origin.\nSince the late 1950s, aerospace engineers have used the term \"unobtainium\" when referring to unusual or costly materials, or when theoretically considering a material perfect for their needs in all respects, except that it does not exist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Unobtainium, n. A substance having the exact high test properties required for a piece of hardware or other item of use, but not obtainable either because it theoretically cannot exist or because technology is insufficiently advanced to produce it. Humorous or ironical.\u2014\u200a\nBy the 1990s, the term was in wide use, even in formal engineering papers such as \"Towards unobtainium [new composite materials for space applications].\"\nThe term may well have been coined in the aerospace industry to refer to materials capable of withstanding the extreme temperatures expected in re-entry. Aerospace engineers are frequently tempted to design aircraft which require parts with strength or resilience beyond that of currently available materials.\nLater, unobtainium became an engineering term for practical materials that really exist, but are difficult to get. For example, during the development of the SR-71 Blackbird spy plane, Lockheed engineers at the \"Skunk Works\" under Clarence \"Kelly\" Johnson used unobtainium to refer to titanium. Titanium allowed a higher strength-to-weight ratio at the high temperatures the Blackbird would reach, but its availability was restricted because the Soviet Union controlled its supply. This created a problem for the U.S. during the Cold War because the Blackbird required huge amounts of titanium; subsequent U.S. military aircraft such as the B-1 Lancer, F-15 Eagle, F/A-18 Hornet, and F-22 Raptor required relatively large amounts of it as well.\nContemporary popularization.\nUnobtainium began to be used among people who are neither science fiction fans nor engineers to denote an object that actually exists, but which is very hard to obtain either because of high price (sometimes referred to as \"unaffordium\") or limited availability. It usually refers to a very high-end and desirable product. By the 1970s, the term had migrated from the aerospace industry to the Southern California automobile and motorcycle cultures and, began to appear in industry publications such as early advertisements for Oakley motorcycle handgrips.\nOther examples are rear cassettes in the mountain biking community, parts that are no longer available for old-car enthusiasts, parts for reel-to-reel audio-tape recorders, and rare vacuum tubes such as the 1L6 or WD-11 that can now cost more than the equipment in which they were fitted. The eyewear and fashion wear company Oakley, Inc. also frequently denotes the material used for many of their eyeglass nosepieces and earpieces, which has the unusual property of increasing tackiness and thus grip when wet, as unobtanium.\nBy 2010, the term had been used in mainstream news reports to describe the commercially useful rare earth elements (particularly terbium, erbium, dysprosium, yttrium, and neodymium), which are essential to the performance of consumer electronics and green technology, but whose projected demand far outstrips their current supply.\nThere have been repeated attempts to attribute the name to a real material. Space elevator research has long used \"unobtainium\" to describe a material with the necessary characteristics, but carbon nanotubes might have these characteristics.\nScience fiction.\nUnobtainium was mentioned briefly in David Brin's 1983 book \"Startide Rising\", as a material that could be used in making weapons and comprising 1% of the core of one of the exomoons of the Kthsemenee system.\nUnobtainium is briefly mentioned in Wil McCarthy's \"The Collapsium\" (2000), where a programmable quantum-technology material called \"wellstone\" can simulate any conceivable element, including \"imaginary substances like unobtainium, impossibilium, and rainbow kryptonite\".\nIn the 2003 film \"The Core\", \"Unobtainium\" is the nickname of a 37-syllable long tungsten-titanium crystal alloy developed by Dr. Edward \"Braz\" Brazzelton that is able to absorb the extreme pressure and heat of the Earth's molten core and then convert these into usable energy; it's used in building the super resistant outer shell of the ship \"Virgil\".\nIn the 2009 film \"Avatar\", Unobtanium is the common name of a rare-earth mineral found exclusively on the exomoon Pandora, highly prized (and priced) because of its application as a powerful superconductor material. Because of its unusual magnetic properties, entire mountains with high concentrations of unobtanium levitate in the atmosphere of Pandora.\nSimilar terms.\nThe term eludium has been used to describe a material which has \"eluded\" attempts to develop it, with the variant spelling illudium derived from \"illusion\". This was mentioned in several Looney Tunes cartoons, where Marvin the Martian tried (unsuccessfully) to use his \"Eludium Q-36 Explosive Space Modulator\" to blow up the Earth.\nAnother largely synonymous term is wishalloy, although the sense is often subtly different in that a wishalloy usually does not exist at all, whereas unobtainium may merely be unavailable.\nA similar conceptual material in alchemy is the philosopher's stone, a mythical substance with the ability to turn lead into gold, or bestow immortality and youth. While the search to find such a substance was not successful, it did lead to discovery of a new element: phosphorus.\nIn architecture, the term \"renderite\" has been used to describe the use of unrealistic materials in concept renders.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
