{"id": "36567", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36567", "title": "Nuraghe", "text": "Ancient type of tower common in Sardinia\nThe nuraghe, or nurhag, is the main type of ancient megalithic edifice found in Sardinia, Italy, developed during the Nuragic Age between 1900 and 730\u00a0BC. Today it has come to be the symbol of Sardinia and its distinctive culture known as the Nuragic civilization. More than 7,000 nuraghes have been found, though archeologists believe that originally there were more than 10,000.\nEtymology.\nNatively, the structure is called a \"nuraghe\" (, ; plural: Logudorese Sardinian , Campidanese Sardinian , Italian ). According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" the etymology is \"uncertain and disputed\": \"The word is perhaps related to the Sardinian place names \"Nurra\", \"Nurri\", \"Nurru\", and to Sardinian \"nurra\" 'heap of stones, cavity in earth' (although these senses are difficult to reconcile). A connection with the Semitic base of Arabic \"n\u016br\" 'light, fire, etc.' is now generally rejected.\" The Latin word \"murus\" ('wall') may be related to it, being a result of the derivation: \"murus\"\u2013\"*muraghe\"\u2013nuraghe. However, such theories are debated.\nAn etymological theory suggests a Proto-Basque origin by the term \"*nur\" (stone) with the common -\"ak\" plural ending; the Paleo-Sardinian suffix -\"ake\" is also found in some Indo-European languages such as Latin and Greek. Another possible explanation is that the term \"nuraghe\" came from the name of the Iberian mythological hero Norax, and the root \"*nur\" would be an adaptation of the Indo-European root \"*nor\".\nGeneral layout.\nThe typical nuraghe is situated in areas where previous prehistoric Sardinian cultures had been distributed, that, is not far from alluvial plains (though few nuraghes appear in plains currently as they were destroyed by human activities such as agriculture, dams and road building) and has the outer shape of a truncated conical tower, thus resembling a medieval tower, with a tholos-like vault inside.\nThe structure's walls consist of three components: an outer layer (tilted inwards and made of many layers of stones whose size diminishes with increasing height: mostly, lower layers consist of rubble masonry, while upper layers tend to be of ashlar masonry); an inner layer, made of smaller stones (to form a corbelled dome of the bullet-shaped \"tholos\" type, and where ashlar masonry is used more frequently); and an intermediate layer of very small pieces and dirt, which makes the whole construction very sturdy: it stands only by virtue of the weight of its stones, which may each amount to several tons. Some nuraghes are about in height, the tallest one known, Nuraghe Arrubiu, reached a height of .\nThe entrance leads into a corridor, on whose sides are often open niches, that lead to the round chamber. A spiral stone stair, leading to upper floors (if present) and/or to a terrace, was built within the thick walls and it was illuminated by embrasures. The Nuragic towers might have as much as three corbel chambers one on top of the other. In complex nuraghes corridors were often present, sometimes corbelled, such as at Santu Antine, in which the corbelled arch corridors were superimposed on two levels, and reached a length of .\nToday fewer than 7,000\u00a0nuraghes remain standing; their number was originally larger. Nuraghes are most prevalent in the northwest and south-central parts of the island.\nFunction.\nThere is no consensus on the function of the nuraghes: they could have been rulers' residences, military strongholds, meeting halls, religious temples, ordinary dwellings or a combination of any of these things. Some of the nuraghes are, however, located in strategic places \u2013 such as hills \u2013 from which important passages could be easily controlled. They might have been something between a \"status symbol\" and a \"passive defence\" building, meant to be a deterrent for possible enemies.\nNuraghes could also have been the \"national\" symbol of the Nuragic peoples. Small-scale models of nuraghe have often been excavated at religious sites (e.g. in the \"maze\" temple at the Su Romanzesu site near Bitti in central Sardinia). Nuraghes may have just connoted wealth or power, or they may have been an indication that a site had its owners. Recent unconfirmed theories tend to suggest that Sardinian towns were independent entities (such as the city-states, although in a geographical sense they were not cities) that formed federations and that the building of these monuments might have depended on agreed-on distributions of territory among federated unities.\nThey were not tombs of princes and their families, as was mistakenly believed by taking as an argument the discovery of human remains there, but of strata of a later age than the Nuragic, that is, Carthaginian and Roman. Neither were they monumental temples, which today are known to be of different shapes and types, even for prehistoric island times, likewise burials (domus de janas or \"fairy houses\"; tumbas de sos gigantes or \"tombs of the giants\").\nIn 2002, Juan Belmonte and Mauro Zedda measured the entrance orientations (declinations and azimuths) of 272 simple nuraghes and of the central towers of 180\u00a0complex ones. The data revealed clear peaks corresponding to orientations pointing to the sunrise at winter solstice and to the Moon at its southernmost rising position. These alignments remained constant throughout the history of nuraghe. The most common declinations revealed were of around \u221243\u00b0 for the earlier nuraghes, shifting to just \u221245\u00bd\u00b0 for the later. Zedda has suggested that the target is likely a star, quite possibly Alpha Centauri.\nTypes.\nProtonuraghe.\nProtonuraghes are considered to be the most archaic type; they differ somewhat from the \"classical\" (tholos-vaulted) nuraghes in their stockier look. Protonuraghes generally follow an irregular plan and lack the large circular room present in presumed later forms; instead, they are laid out along one or more corridors or long rooms. Although lacking the central circular room, they are sometimes similar in size to later nuraghes.\nMixed nuraghe.\nThis type is distinguished by the restorations made in later times, supposedly because of a change to the protonuraghes design, or for other needs.\nSingle-tower nuraghe.\nThis is considered to be the predominant type of nuraghe, and it represents the most diffused typology. The single tower, of a truncated conical shape, contains one or more superimposed chambers, covered by a tholos-shaped chamber. The access, generally located at the ground level, leads into a passageway that leads, in the front, into the central chamber and in one side (usually the left) in the helical staircase, built inside the wall mass, that lead to the terrace or to the upper-floor chamber.\nIn addition to the usual circular rooms, in their inside can be found other smaller environments such as niches.\nA \"tancadu\" nuraghe.\nA \"tancadu\" nuraghe (Sardinian term for courtyard) represents the evolution of the single-tower nuraghe; another circular building was later added to the main tower, with two enclosing curtain walls connecting the two. A courtyard was present within the structure, sometimes provided with a well.\nPolylobed nuraghe.\nAlso called \"Nuragic royal palaces\", the polylobed nuraghes are the least frequent typology. Very elaborate and often designed in a unified manner, they look like veritable fortresses with several towers linked by high ramparts, whose function was to offer more useful space and perhaps to reinforce the central tower. These \"Megalithic castles\" were surrounded by additional walls, sometimes also provided with towers (the so-called bulwark).\nNotable nuraghes.\nNuraghes are inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage Site list. Su Nuraxi di Barumini, in the south of the island, has been chosen to represent all the nuragic patrimony, but one of the highest and most complex nuraghes is the Nuraghe Santu Antine near the village of Torralba, in northern Sardinia. Other famous nuraghes are near Alghero (Nuraghe Palmavera), Macomer, Abbasanta (see Losa), Orroli (Nuraghe Arrubiu), Gonnesa (Nuraghe Seruci) and Villanovaforru (Nuraghe Genna Maria).\nDate and cultural significance.\nThe nuraghes were built between the middle of the Bronze Age (18th\u201315th\u00a0centuries\u00a0BCE) and the Late Bronze Age. The claim that the El-Ahwat structures from Israel might be related has been contested; those are dated to either the 12th or the 11th century BCE. The only buildings widely accepted as being related to nuraghes are the \"torri\" (plural of \"torre\") from southern Corsica and the talaiots from Menorca and Mallorca.\nAccording to Massimo Pallottino, an Italian archaeologist specialized in Etruscology, the architecture produced by the Nuragic civilization was the most advanced of any in the western Mediterranean during this epoch, including those in the regions of Magna Graecia. Of the 7,000 extant nuraghes, only a few have been scientifically excavated.\nSee also.\nwith structure similar to nuraghes \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36568", "revid": "42522270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36568", "title": "List of archaeological and artistic sites of Sardinia", "text": "This is a list of archaeological and artistic sites of Sardinia, Italy:"}
{"id": "36578", "revid": "13467261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36578", "title": "I18n", "text": ""}
{"id": "36579", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36579", "title": "Clovis I", "text": "King of the Franks from 481 to 511\nClovis I (; reconstructed Frankish: ; ; c.\u2009466 \u2013 27 November 511) was the first king of the Franks to unite all of the Franks under one ruler, changing the form of leadership from a group of petty kings to rule by a single king, and ensuring that the kingship was passed down to his heirs. He is considered to have been the founder of the Merovingian dynasty, which ruled the Frankish kingdom for the next two centuries. Clovis is important in the historiography of France as \"the first king of what would become France.\"\nClovis succeeded his father, Childeric I, as a king of the Salian Franks in 481, and eventually came to rule an area extending from what is now the southern Netherlands to northern France, corresponding in Roman terms to Gallia Belgica (northern Gaul). At the Battle of Soissons (486), he established his military dominance of the rump state of the fragmenting Western Roman Empire, which was then under the command of Syagrius. By the time of his death in 511, Clovis had conquered several smaller Frankish kingdoms in the northeast of Gaul, stretching into what is now Germany. Clovis also conquered the Alemanni in eastern Gaul and the Visigothic kingdom of Aquitania in the southwest. These campaigns added significantly to Clovis's domains and established his dynasty as a major political and military presence in western Europe.\nClovis is also significant because of his baptism between 498 and 506, largely at the behest of his wife, Clotilde, who would later be venerated as a saint for this act, celebrated today in both the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church. The adoption by Clovis of Catholicism (as opposed to the Arianism of most other Germanic tribes) led to widespread conversion among the Franks, and eventually to religious unification across what is now modern-day France, the Low Countries and Germany. The alliance between the Franks and Catholicism eventually led to Charlemagne's crowning by the Pope as emperor in 800, and to the subsequent birth of the early Holy Roman Empire in the middle of the 10th century.\nName.\nBased on the attested forms, the original name is reconstructed in the Frankish language as *\"Hlodowig\" and is traditionally considered to be composed of two elements, both deriving from Proto-Germanic: \"*hl\u016bdaz\" (\"loud, famous\") and \"*wigan\u0105\" (\"to battle, to fight\"), resulting in the traditional practice of translating Clovis' name as meaning \"famous warrior\" or \"renowned in battle\".\nHowever, scholars have pointed out that Gregory of Tours consistently transcribes the names of various Merovingian royal names containing the first element as \"chlodo-\". The use of a close-mid back rounded vowel (o), rather than the expected close back rounded vowel (u) that Gregory does use in various other Germanic names (i.e. Fredegundis, Arnulfus, Gundobadus, etc.) opens up the possibility that the first element instead derives from Proto-Germanic \"*hlut\u0105\" (\"lot, share, portion\"), possibly invoking the concept of terra or 'territory or territorial warlord' or 'warrior of this territoriality', and further reaching potentially giving the subtext meaning of the name as \"loot bringer\" or \"plunder (bringing) warrior\". This latter hypothesis is supported by the fact that if the first element is taken to mean \"famous\", then the name of Chlodomer (one of Clovis' sons) would contain two elements (\"*hl\u016bdaz\" and \"*m\u0113rijaz\") both meaning \"famous\", which would be highly uncommon within the typical Germanic name structure.\nIn Middle Dutch, a language closely related to Frankish, the name was rendered as \"Lodewijch\" (cf. modern Dutch \"Lodewijk\"). The name is found in other West Germanic languages, with cognates including Old English \"Hlo\u00f0wig\", Old Saxon \"Hluduco\", and Old High German \"Hludw\u012bg\" (variant \"Hluotw\u012bg\"). The latter turned into \"Ludwig\" in Modern German, although the king Clovis himself is generally named Chlodwig. The Old Norse form \"Hl\u01eb\u00f0v\u00e9r\" was most likely borrowed from a West Germanic language.\nThe Frankish name \"*Hlodowig\" is at the origin of the French given name \"Louis\" (variant \"Ludovic\"), borne by 18 kings of France, via the Latinized form \"Hludovicus\" (variants \"Ludhovicus, Lodhuvicus\", or \"Chlodovicus\"). The English \"Lewis\" stems from the Anglo-French \"Louis\".\nHis full name in Latin was \"Flavius Chlodovechus\".\nBackground.\nClovis was the son of Childeric I, a king of the Salian Franks, and Basina, a Thuringian princess. The dynasty he founded is, however, named after his supposed ancestor, Merovech. Some sources claim that Clovis' grandfather was Chlodio, but his exact relation with Merovech is not known.\nNumerous small Frankish petty kingdoms existed during the 5th century. The Salian Franks was the first known Frankish tribe that settled with official Roman permission within the empire, first in Batavia in the Rhine-Maas delta, and then in 375 in Toxandria, which in the present day consists of the province of North Brabant in the Netherlands and parts of neighbouring provinces of Antwerp and Limburg in Belgium. This put them in the northern part of the Roman civitas Tungrorum, with the Romanized population still dominant south of the military highway Boulogne-Cologne. Later, Chlodio seems to have attacked westwards from this area to take control of the Roman populations in Tournai, then southwards to Artois, and Cambrai, eventually controlling an area stretching to the Somme river.\nChilderic I, Clovis's father, was reputed to be a relative of Chlodio and was known as the king of the Franks who fought as an army within northern Gaul. In 463, he fought in conjunction with Aegidius, the magister militum of northern Gaul, to defeat the Visigoths in Orl\u00e9ans. Childeric died in 481 and was buried in Tournai; Clovis succeeded him as king, aged just 15. Historians believe that Childeric and Clovis were both commanders of the Roman military in the province of Belgica Secunda, and were subordinate to the magister militum. The Franks of Tournai came to dominate their neighbours, initially aided by the association with Aegidius.\nThe death of Aetius in 454 led to the decline of imperial power in Gaul; leaving the Visigoths and the Burgundians competing for predominance in the area. The part of Gaul still under Roman control emerged as a kingdom under Syagrius, Aegidius's son.\nThough no primary sources expounding on the language spoken by Clovis exist, historical linguists consider it likely that, based on his family history and core territories, he spoke a form of Old Dutch. In this, the early Merovingians can be contrasted with the later Carolingians, such as Charlemagne, of the late 8th century and onward, who probably spoke various forms of Old High German.\nEarly reign (481\u2013491).\nRoad to Soissons.\nThe ruler of Tournai died in 481 and was succeeded by his young son, Clovis. His band of warriors probably numbered no more than half a thousand. In 486 he began his efforts to expand the realm by allying himself with his relative Ragnachar, king of Cambrai and another Frankish king, Chalaric. These rulers are sometimes referred to as \"regulus\" (diminutive of \"rex\"). Together the triumvirate marched against Syagrius and met the Gallo-Roman commander at Soissons. During the battle, Chalaric betrayed his comrades by refusing to take part in the fighting. Despite the betrayal, the Franks landed a decisive victory, forcing Syagrius to flee to the court of Alaric II. This battle is viewed as bringing about the end of the rump state of the Western Roman Empire outside of Italy. Following the battle, Clovis invaded the traitor Chalaric's territory and was able to imprison him and his son.\nTaming Gaul.\nPrior to the battle, Clovis did not enjoy the support of the Gallo-Roman clergy, so he proceeded to pillage the Roman territory, including the churches. The Bishop of Reims requested Clovis return everything taken from the Church of Reims; the young king aspired to establish cordial relationships with the clergy, so he returned a valuable ewer taken from the church. Despite his position, some Roman cities refused to yield to the Franks, namely Verdun \u2012 which surrendered after a brief siege \u2012 and Paris, which stubbornly resisted for a few years, perhaps as many as five. He made Paris his capital and established an abbey dedicated to Saints Peter and Paul on the south bank of the Seine.\nRealizing that he would not be able to rule Gaul without the help of the clergy, Clovis took a Catholic wife to please them. He also integrated many of Syagrius's units into his own army. The Roman kingdom was probably under Clovis's control by 491 because in the same year, Clovis allegedly moved against a small number of Thuringians in eastern Gaul, near the Burgundian border.\nMiddle reign (492\u2013506).\nBarbarian Relations.\nAround 493 AD, he secured an alliance with the Ostrogoths through the marriage of his sister Audofleda to their king, Theodoric the Great.\nIn the same year, the neighboring King of the Burgundians was slain by his brother, Gundobad; bringing civil strife to that kingdom. Allegedly, Gundobad proceeded to drown his sister-in-law and force his niece, Chrona, into a convent. Another niece, Clotilde, fled to the court of the third brother, Godegisel. Finding himself in a precarious position, Godegisel decided to ally himself to Clovis by marrying his exiled niece to the Frankish king.\nAssault of the Alamanni.\nIn 496, the Alamanni invaded and some Salians and Ripuarians \"reguli\" (kings) defected to their side. Clovis met his enemies near the strong fort of Tolbiac. During the fighting, the Franks suffered heavy losses. Clovis, together with over three thousand Frankish companions, may have converted to Christianity around this time. With the help of the Ripuarian Franks he narrowly defeated the Alamanni in the Battle of Tolbiac in 496. Now Christian, Clovis confined his prisoners, Chararic and his son, to a monastery.\nRelations with Burgundy.\nIn 500 or 501, Godegisel began scheming against his brother Gundobad. He promised his brother-in-law territory and annual tribute for defeating his brother. Clovis was eager to subdue the political threat to his realm and crossed into the Burgundian territory. Gundobad then moved against Clovis and called his brother for reinforcements. The three armies met near Dijon, where both the Franks and Godegisel's forces defeated the dumbfounded Gundobad, who escaped to Avignon. Clovis pursued him and laid siege to the city. After some months, Clovis was convinced to abandon the siege and settled for an annual tribute from Gundobad.\nArmorici allies.\nIn 501, 502 or 503, Clovis led his troops to Armorica. He had previously restricted his operations to minor raids, but now the goal was subjugation. Clovis failed to complete this objective via military means; therefore, he was constrained to statecraft. This proved fruitful, for the Armonici shared Clovis's disdain for the Arian Visigoths. Armorica and its fighters were thus integrated into the Frankish realm.\nLate reign (507\u2013511).\nVisiting the Visigoths.\nIn 507 Clovis was allowed by the magnates of his realm to invade the remaining threat of the Kingdom of the Visigoths. King Alaric had previously tried to establish a cordial relationship with Clovis by serving him the head of exiled Syagrius on a silver plate in 486 or 487. However, Clovis was no longer able to resist the temptation to move against the Visigoths, for many Catholics under Visigoth yoke were unhappy and implored Clovis to make a move. But just to be absolutely certain about retaining the loyalties of the Christians under Visigoths, Clovis ordered his troops to omit raiding and plunder, for this was not a foreign invasion, but a liberation.\nArmorici assisted him in defeating the Visigothic kingdom of Toulouse in the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 in 507, eliminating Visigothic power in Gaul. The battle added most of Aquitaine to Clovis's kingdom and resulted in the death of the Visigothic king Alaric II.\nAccording to Gregory of Tours, following the battle the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I made Clovis a patrician and honorary consul.\nUnifying the Franks.\nFollowing the Battle of Vouill\u00e9, Clovis eliminated all his possible rivals, including the other Frankish kings who ruled alongside him.\nSometime after 507, Clovis heard about Chararic's plan to escape from his monastic prison and had him murdered. Around the same time, Clovis convinced Prince Chlodoric to murder his father Sigobert, earning him his nickname as \"Chlodoric the Parricide\". Following the murder, Clovis betrayed Chlodoric and had his envoys strike him down. Sometime later, Clovis visited his old ally Ragnachar in Cambrai. Following his conversion to Christianity in 508, many of Clovis' pagan retainers had defected to Ragnachar's side, making him a political threat. Ragnachar denied Clovis's entry, prompting Clovis to make a move against him. He bribed Ragnachar's retainers and executed him alongside his brother Ricchar.\nDeath.\nShortly before his death, Clovis called a synod of Gallic bishops to meet in Orl\u00e9ans to reform the Church and create a strong link between the Crown and the Catholic episcopate. This was the First Council of Orl\u00e9ans. Thirty-three bishops assisted and passed 31 decrees on the duties and obligations of individuals, the right of sanctuary, and ecclesiastical discipline. These decrees, equally applicable to Franks and Romans, first established equality between conquerors and conquered. After his death, Clovis was laid to rest in the Abbey of St Genevieve in Paris.\nHis remains were relocated to Saint Denis Basilica in the mid- to late 18th century. When Clovis died, his kingdom was partitioned among his four sons, Theuderic, Chlodomer, Childebert and Clotaire. This partition created the new political units of the Kingdoms of Rheims, Orl\u00e9ans, Paris and Soissons, and inaugurated a tradition that would lead to disunity lasting until the end of the Merovingian dynasty in 751. Clovis had been a king with no fixed capital and no central administration beyond his entourage. By deciding to be interred at Paris, Clovis gave the city symbolic weight. When his grandchildren divided royal power 50 years after his death in 511, Paris was kept as a joint property and a fixed symbol of the dynasty.\nThe disunity continued under the Carolingians until, after a brief unity under Charlemagne, the Franks splintered into distinct spheres of cultural influence that coalesced around Eastern and Western centers of royal power. These later political, linguistic, and cultural entities became the Kingdom of France, the myriad German States, and the semi-autonomous kingdoms of Burgundy and Lotharingia.\nPersonal life.\nClovis married Clotilde, Frankish noble woman, in 492 or 493. She gave him three sons and a daughter. Clovis had another son from a previous marriage or by a concubine, which was customary for Germanic kings at that time.\nBaptism.\nClovis was born a pagan but later became interested in converting to Arian Christianity, whose followers believed that Jesus was a distinct and separate being from God the Father, both subordinate to and created by him. This contrasted with Nicene Christianity, whose followers believe that God the Father, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit are three persons of one being (consubstantiality). While the theology of the Arians was declared a heresy at the First Council of Nicea in 325, the missionary work of Bishop Ulfilas converted a significant portion of the pagan Goths to Arian Christianity in the 4th century. By the time of the ascension of Clovis, Gothic Arians dominated Christian Gaul, and Nicene Christians were the minority.\nClovis's wife Clotilde, a Burgundian princess, was a Nicene Christian despite the Arianism that surrounded her at court. Her persistence eventually persuaded Clovis to convert to Nicene Christianity, which he initially resisted. Clotilde had wanted her son to be baptized, but Clovis refused, so she had the child baptized without Clovis's knowledge. Shortly after his baptism, their son died, which further strengthened Clovis's resistance to conversion. Clotilde also had their second son baptized without her husband's permission, and this son became ill and nearly died after his baptism. Clovis eventually converted to Nicene Christianity (Catholicism) on Christmas Day, though the exact year is a matter of debate with plausible suggestions by scholars being 498\u2013506. in a small church in the vicinity of the subsequent Abbey of Saint-Remi in Reims; a statue of his baptism by Saint Remigius can still be seen there. The details of this event have been passed down by Gregory of Tours, who recorded them many years later in the 6th century.\nThe king's Nicene baptism was of immense importance in the subsequent history of Western and Central Europe in general, as Clovis expanded his dominion over almost all of Gaul. Catholicism offered certain advantages to Clovis as he fought to distinguish his rule among many competing power centers in Western Europe. His conversion to the Nicene form of Christianity served to set him apart from most other Germanic kings of his time, such as those of the Visigoths and the Vandals, who had converted from Germanic paganism to Arian Christianity. However, he was not the first Germanic king to convert to Nicene Christianity, that distinction belonging to the Suevic king of Gallaecia Rechiar, whose conversion predates Clovis's baptism by half a century. Nevertheless, Clovis's embrace of the Catholic faith may have also gained him the support of the Catholic Gallo-Roman aristocracy in his later campaign against the Visigoths, which drove them from southern Gaul in 507 and resulted in a great many of his people converting to Catholicism as well.\nOn the other hand, Bernard Bachrach has argued that his conversion from Frankish paganism alienated many of the other Frankish sub-kings and weakened his military position over the next few years. In the , Saint Gregory of Tours gave the Germanic gods that Clovis abandoned the names of roughly equivalent Roman gods, such as Jupiter and Mercury. William Daly, more directly assessing Clovis's allegedly barbaric and pagan origins, ignored the Gregory of Tours version and based his account on the scant earlier sources, a sixth-century of Saint Genevieve and letters to or concerning Clovis from bishops (now in the ) and Theodoric.\nClovis and his wife were buried in the Abbey of St Genevieve (St. Pierre) in Paris; the original name of the church was the Church of the Holy Apostles.\nRoman law.\nUnder Clovis, the first codification of the Salian Frank law took place. The \"Roman Law\" was written with the assistance of Gallo-Romans to reflect the Salic legal tradition and Christianity, while containing much from Roman tradition. The \"Roman Law\" lists various crimes as well as the fines associated with them.\nLegacy.\nThe legacy of Clovis's conquests, a Frankish kingdom that included most of Roman Gaul and parts of western Germany, survived long after his death. To many French people, he is the founder of the modern French state.\nDetracting, perhaps, from this legacy, is his aforementioned division of the state. This was done not along national or even largely geographical lines, but primarily to assure equal income amongst his sons after his death. While it may or may not have been his intention, this division was the cause of much internal discord in Gaul. This precedent led, in the long run, to the fall of his dynasty, for it was a pattern repeated in future reigns. Clovis did bequeath to his heirs the support of both people and the Church such that when the magnates were ready to do away with the royal house, the sanction of the Pope was sought first.\nSainthood.\nIn later centuries, Clovis was venerated as a saint in France. The Benedictine Abbey of Saint-Denis (where Clovis was buried) had a shrine to St. Clovis to the east of the main altar. There was also a shrine to him in the Abbey of Saint Genevieve in Paris. This shrine had a statue and a number of epitaphs and was probably where the veneration of St. Clovis began. Despite Clovis's presence in Paris, his cultus was largely based in the south of France. Abbot Aymeric de Peyrat (d. 1406), the author of the History of the Moissac Abbey, claimed that his own monastery was founded by St. Clovis and there were many monasteries named in his honour. Aymeric not only referred to Clovis as a saint but also prayed for St. Clovis's intercession. There were also known to be shrines dedicated to Clovis in \u00c9glise Sainte-Marthe de Tarascon and Saint-Pierre-du-Dor\u00e2t. Boniface Symoneta, Jacques Almain and Paulus Aemilius Veronensis gave hagiographic accounts of Clovis's life and at the time it was common to include Clovis's life in collections of the lives of the saints.\nIt has been suggested that the reason that the French state promoted the veneration of Clovis in the south was to establish a border cult that would cause Occitans to venerate the northern-led French state by venerating its founder. Another reason could be that Clovis was a preferable foundation figure for the House of Valois as their predecessors were the Direct Capetians who looked back to Charlemagne whose veneration had been widely recognised. In contrast to the theory of St. Clovis's cult being a primarily northern-supported movement, Amy Goodrich Remensnyder suggests that St. Clovis was used by Occitans to reject the northern concept of the monarchy and to reinstate their autonomy as something granted by the saint.\nSt. Clovis had the role of a more militarised royal saint than the pious Louis IX of France. As a saint, Clovis was important as he represented the spiritual birth of the nation and provided a chivalrous and ascetic model for French political leaders to follow. The veneration of St. Clovis was not exclusive to France as a print by the Holy Roman woodcut designer Leonhard Beck made for the Habsburg monarchs depicts Clovis as St. Chlodoveus, St. Boniface's Abbey in Munich depicted St. Chlodoveus as a saint worthy of emulation because of his advocacy, and the Florentine Baroque painter Carlo Dolci painted a large depiction of St. Clovis for the Imperial Apartment in the Uffizi Gallery.\nSt. Clovis had no known episcopal or papal canonisation or beatification but enjoyed pre-congregation popular acclaim. Following the example of the monks of St. Genevi\u00e8ve, St. Clovis' feast day in France was held on 27 November. St. Clovis enjoyed a persistent campaign from French royal authorities that few non-French national or dynastic saints did. French monarchs, beginning in the 14th century at the latest, attempted to canonise Clovis through papal recognition a number of times. The most notable attempt, led by King Louis XI and modelled on the successful canonisation campaign of Louis IX, occurred during a conflict with the Burgundians. The cause for Clovis's canonisation was taken up once again in the 17th century, with Jesuit support, a \"vita\" and an account of posthumous miracles, in opposition to the controversial historical works of Calvinist pastor Jean de Serres who portrayed Clovis as a cruel and bloodthirsty king.\nThe Jesuit attempt to formally canonize Clovis came after a rediscovery of Clovis's \"cultus\" in the 16th century. During this period, the dual role St. Clovis could have for modern France was clarified as that of a deeply sinful man who attained sainthood by submitting himself to the will of God, as well as being the founder of the Gallican Church. He also attained an essentially mystic reputation. St. Clovis' role in calling for the First Council of Orl\u00e9ans was understood to be strongly Gallican as he called it without Papal authority and with the understanding that he and his bishops had the authority to call councils that were binding for the Frankish people. For Protestant Gallicans, St. Clovis represented the role of the monarchy in governing the Church and curbing its abuses and was contrasted positively against the Papacy of his time. Protestants were unlikely to mention any of the miracles attributed to St. Clovis, sometimes even writing lengthy rejections of their existence. Instead, they saw his sainthood as evident from his creation of a state more holy and Christian than that of Rome.\nCatholic writers in the 16th century expanded upon the lists of St. Clovis's attributed miracles, but in the early 17th century they also began to minimize their use of the miraculous elements of his hagiography. Mid-to-late-17th-century Jesuit writers resisted this trend and allowed for no doubt as to the miraculous nature of St. Clovis life or his sainthood. Jesuit writers stressed the more extreme elements of his hagiography, and that of other saints associated with him, even claiming that St. Remigius lived for five hundred years. These hagiographies would still be quoted and widely believed as late as 1896, the fourteenth centenary of his baptism, as a speech from Cardinal Lang\u00e9nieux demonstrates. Another factor that led to a resurgence in St. Clovis's veneration was the Spanish Monarchy's use of the title Catholic Monarchs, a title French Monarchs hoped to usurp by attributing it to the much earlier figure of St. Clovis.\nChronology.\nThe sole source for the early Frankish period is Gregory of Tours, who wrote around the year 590. His chronology for the reign of Clovis is almost certainly fabricated, often contradicting itself and other sources. Gregory often divides Clovis' life in spans of 5 years: he became king at age 15, defeated Syagrius in the 5th year of his reign, defeated the Alamanni in his 15th year, defeated the Visigoths in his 25th year, and died at the age of 45, in the 5th year after his victory at Vouill\u00e9, having reigned 30 years. The exact date on which Clovis became \"king of all Franks\" is not known, but it happened sometime after the Battle of Vouill\u00e9, which is securely dated to 507. After this battle, Clovis made Paris his capital, converted to Catholicism, and orchestrated the murders of Frankish kings Sigobert and Ragnachar, uniting all Franks under his rule. Clovis' baptism, traditionally dated to December 496 on the account of Gregory, is now believed to have taken place in December 508 according to Clovis' correspondence with the then Bishop of Vienne, Avitus of Vienne, which also indicates that he leaned toward Arianism before converting to Catholicism rather than paganism. The election of Paris as capital must have also happened around 508. Given that the hostilities between Ragnachar and Clovis began after his conversion, it can be inferred that their confrontation took place shortly after, in 509.\nClovis I is traditionally said to have died on 27 November 511. The day is found in one medieval calendar and two missals now in the Library of the Abbey of Saint Genevieve (which was founded by Clovis). However, two obituaries in the abbeys of Saint Genevieve and Saint Denis date his death to 29 November and 3 January, respectively. The latter date may be a confusion with the feast of Genevieve, which also falls on 3 January. Gregory of Tours states that Clovis died on the fifth year after the Battle of Vouill\u00e9, which gives 511 using inclusive counting. However, he also states that he died on the 11th year of the episcopate of Licinius of Tours (AD 518) and on the 112th year after the death of Martin of Tours (AD 508). The \"Liber Pontificalis\" records that Clovis' crown was sent to Pope Hormisdas (r.514\u2013523), which could imply a later date. Clovis is last attested in an official document dated to 11 July 511, on the First Council of Orl\u00e9ans, and it is generally accepted that he died shortly after.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36580", "revid": "952218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36580", "title": "Dauphin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "36581", "revid": "332930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36581", "title": "Fishing", "text": "Activity of trying to catch fish\nFishing is the activity of trying to catch fish. Fish are often caught as wildlife from the natural environment (freshwater or marine), but may also be caught from stocked bodies of water such as ponds, canals, park wetlands and reservoirs. Fishing techniques include trawling, longlining, jigging, hand-gathering, spearing, netting, angling, shooting and trapping, as well as more destructive and often illegal techniques such as electrocution, blasting and poisoning.\nThe term fishing is also used more broadly to include catching aquatic animals other than fish, such as crustaceans (shrimp/lobsters/crabs), shellfish, cephalopods (octopus/squid) and echinoderms (starfish/sea urchins). The term is not normally applied to harvesting fish raised in controlled cultivations (fish farming). Nor is it normally applied to hunting aquatic mammals, where terms like whaling and sealing are used instead.\nFishing has been an important part of human culture since hunter-gatherer times. It is one of the few food production activities that has persisted from prehistory into the modern age, surviving both the Neolithic Revolution and successive Industrial Revolutions. In addition to fishing for food, people commonly fish as a recreational pastime. Fishing tournaments are held, and caught fish are sometimes kept long-term as preserved or living trophies. When BioBlitzes occur, fish are typically caught, identified, and then released.\nAccording to the United Nations FAO statistics, the total number of commercial fishers and fish farmers is estimated to be 39.0 million. Fishing industries and aquaculture provide direct and indirect employment to over 500 million people in developing countries. In 2005, the worldwide \"per capita\" consumption of fish captured from wild fisheries was , with an additional harvested from fish farms.\nHistory.\nFishing is an ancient practice that dates back to at least the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic period about 40,000 years ago. Isotopic analysis of the remains of Tianyuan man, a 40,000-year-old modern human from eastern Asia, has shown that he regularly consumed freshwater fish. Archaeology features such as shell middens, discarded fish bones, and cave paintings show that seafood was important for survival and consumed in significant quantities. Fishing in Africa is evident very early on in human history. Neanderthals were fishing by about 200,000 BC. People could have developed basketry for fish traps, using spinning and early forms of knitting to make fishing nets able to catch more fish.\nDuring this period, most people lived a hunter-gatherer lifestyle and were, of necessity, constantly on the move. However, where there are early examples of permanent settlements (though not necessarily permanently occupied) such as those at Lepenski Vir, they are almost always associated with fishing as a major source of food.\nTrawling.\nThe British dogger was a very early type of sailing trawler from the 17th century, but the modern fishing trawler was developed in the 19th century, at the English fishing port of Brixham. By the early 19th century, the fishers at Brixham needed to expand their fishing area further than ever before due to the ongoing depletion of stocks that was occurring in the overfished waters of South Devon. The Brixham trawler that evolved there was of a sleek build and had a tall gaff rig, which gave the vessel sufficient speed to make long-distance trips out to the fishing grounds in the ocean. They were also sufficiently robust to be able to tow large trawls in deep water. The great trawling fleet that built up at Brixham earned the village the title of 'Mother of Deep-Sea Fisheries'.\nThis revolutionary design made large-scale trawling in the ocean possible for the first time, resulting in a massive migration of fishers from the ports in the south of England, to villages further north, such as Scarborough, Hull, Grimsby, Harwich and Yarmouth, that were points of access to the large fishing grounds in the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe small village of Grimsby grew to become the largest fishing port in the world by the mid 19th century. An Act of Parliament was first obtained in 1796, which authorised the construction of new quays and dredging of the Haven to make it deeper. It was only in 1846, with the tremendous expansion in the fishing industry, that the Grimsby Dock Company was formed. The foundation stone for the Royal Dock was laid by Albert the Prince consort in 1849. The dock covered and was formally opened by Queen Victoria in 1854 as the first modern fishing port.\nThe elegant Brixham trawler spread across the world, influencing fishing fleets everywhere. By the end of the 19th century, there were over 3,000 fishing trawlers in commission in Britain, with almost 1,000 at Grimsby. These trawlers were sold to fishers around Europe, including from the Netherlands and Scandinavia. Twelve trawlers went on to form the nucleus of the German fishing fleet.\nThe earliest steam-powered fishing boats first appeared in the 1870s and used the trawl system of fishing as well as lines and drift nets. These were large boats, usually in length with a beam of around . They weighed 40\u201350 tons and travelled at . David Allen designed and made the earliest purpose-built fishing vessels in Leith, Scotland in March 1875, when he converted a drifter to steam power. In 1877, he built the first screw propelled steam trawler in the world.\nSteam trawlers were introduced at Grimsby and Hull in the 1880s. In 1890 it was estimated that there were 20,000 men on the North Sea. The steam drifter was not used in the herring fishery until 1897. The last sailing fishing trawler was built in 1925 in Grimsby. Trawler designs adapted as the way they were powered changed from sail to coal-fired steam by World War I to diesel and turbines by the end of World War II.\nIn 1931, the first powered drum was created by Laurie Jarelainen. The drum was a circular device that was set to the side of the boat and would draw in the nets. Since World War II, radio navigation aids and fish finders have been widely used. The first trawlers fished over the side, rather than over the stern. The first purpose-built stern trawler was \"Fairtry\" built in 1953 at Aberdeen, Scotland. The ship was much larger than any other trawlers then in operation and inaugurated the era of the 'super trawler'. As the ship pulled its nets over the stern, it could lift out a much greater haul of up to 60 tons. The ship served as a basis for the expansion of 'super trawlers' around the world in the following decades.\nRecreational fishing.\nThe early evolution of fishing as recreation is not clear. For example, there is anecdotal evidence for fly fishing in Japan. However, fly fishing was likely to have been a means of survival, rather than recreation. The earliest English essay on recreational fishing was published in 1496, by Dame Juliana Berners, the prioress of the Benedictine Sopwell Nunnery. The essay was titled \"Treatyse of Fysshynge wyth an Angle\", and included detailed information on fishing waters, the construction of rods and lines, and the use of natural baits and artificial flies.\nRecreational fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. Leonard Mascall in 1589 wrote \"A booke of Fishing with Hooke and Line\" along with many others he produced in his life on game and wildlife in England at the time. \"The Compleat Angler\" was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye. It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse. A second part to the book was added by Walton's friend Charles Cotton.\nCharles Kirby designed an improved fishing hook in 1655 that remains relatively unchanged to this day. He went on to invent the Kirby bend, a distinctive hook with an offset point, still commonly used today.\nThe 18th century was mainly an era of consolidation of the techniques developed in the previous century. Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line. The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialised for different roles. Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it much greater strength and flexibility.\nThe industry also became commercialised \u2013 rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing-related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his shop in 1761, and his establishment remained a market leader for the next century. He received a royal warrant from three successive monarchs starting with King George IV. He also invented the multiplying winch. The commercialization of the industry came at a time of expanded interest in fishing as a recreational hobby for members of the aristocracy.\nThe impact of the Industrial Revolution was first felt in the manufacture of fly lines. Instead of anglers twisting their lines \u2013 a laborious and time-consuming process \u2013 the new textile spinning machines allowed for a variety of tapered lines to be easily manufactured and marketed.\nBritish fly fishing continued to develop in the 19th century, with the emergence of fly fishing clubs, along with the appearance of several books on the subject of fly tying and fly fishing techniques.\nBy the mid to late 19th century, expanding leisure opportunities for the middle and lower classes began to have an effect on fly fishing, which steadily grew in mass appeal. The expansion of the railway network in Britain allowed the less affluent for the first time to take weekend trips to the seaside or rivers for fishing. Richer hobbyists ventured further abroad. The large rivers of Norway replete with large stocks of salmon began to attract fishers from England in large numbers in the middle of the century \u2013 \"Jones's guide to Norway, and salmon-fisher's pocket companion\", published in 1848, was written by Frederic Tolfrey and was a popular guide to the country.\nModern reel design had begun in England during the latter part of the 18th century, and the predominant model in use was known as the 'Nottingham reel'. The reel was a wide drum that spooled out freely and was ideal for allowing the bait to drift a long way out with the current. Geared multiplying reels never successfully caught on in Britain, but had more success in the United States, where George Snyder of Kentucky modified similar models into his bait-casting reel, the first American-made design in 1810.\nThe material used for the rod itself changed from the heavy woods native to England to lighter and more elastic varieties imported from abroad, especially from South America and the West Indies. Bamboo rods became the generally favoured option from the mid-19th century, and several strips of the material were cut from the cane, milled into shape, and then glued together to form the light, strong, hexagonal rods with a solid core that were superior to anything that preceded them. George Cotton and his predecessors fished their flies with long rods, and light lines allowing the wind to do most of the work of getting the fly to the fish.\nTackle design began to improve in the 1880s. The introduction of new woods to the manufacture of fly rods made it possible to cast flies into the wind on silk lines, instead of horse hair. These lines allowed for a much greater casting distance. However, these early fly lines proved troublesome as they had to be coated with various dressings to make them float and needed to be taken off the reel and dried every four hours or so to prevent them from becoming waterlogged. Another negative consequence was that it became easy for the much longer line to get into a tangle \u2013 this was called a 'tangle' in Britain, and a 'backlash' in the US. This problem spurred the invention of the regulator to evenly spool the line out and prevent tangling.\nThe American, Charles F. Orvis, designed and distributed a novel reel and fly design in 1874, described by reel historian Jim Brown as the \"benchmark of American reel design,\" and the first fully modern fly reel.\nAlbert Illingworth, 1st Baron Illingworth a textiles magnate, patented the modern form of fixed-spool spinning reel in 1905. When casting Illingworth's reel design, the line was drawn off the leading edge of the spool but was restrained and rewound by a line pickup, a device which orbits around the stationary spool. Because the line did not have to pull against a rotating spool, much lighter lures could be cast than with conventional reels.\nThe development of inexpensive fiberglass rods, synthetic fly lines, and monofilament leaders in the early 1950s revived the popularity of fly fishing.\nTechniques.\nThere are many fishing techniques and tactics for catching fish. The term can also be applied to methods for catching other aquatic animals such as molluscs (shellfish, squid, octopus) and edible marine invertebrates.\nFishing techniques include hand gathering, spearfishing, netting, angling, bowfishing and trapping, as well as less common techniques such as gaffing, snagging, clubbing and the use of specially trained animals such as cormorants and otters. There are also destructive fishing techniques (such as electrocution, blasting and poisoning) that can do irreversible damage to the local ecosystems by killing/sterilizing entire fish stocks, habitat destruction and/or upsetting the equilibrium of interspecific competitions, and such practices are often deemed illegal and liable to criminal punishments.\nRecreational, commercial and artisanal fishers use different techniques, and also, sometimes, the same techniques. Recreational fishers fish for pleasure, sport, or to provide food for themselves, while commercial fishers fish for profit. Artisanal fishers use traditional, low-tech methods, for survival in third-world countries, and as a cultural heritage in other countries. Usually, recreational fishers use angling methods and commercial fishers use netting methods. A modern development is to fish with the assistance of a drone.\nWhy a fish bites a baited hook or lure involves several factors related to the sensory physiology, behaviour, feeding ecology, and biology of the fish as well as the environment and characteristics of the bait/hook/lure. There is an intricate link between various fishing techniques and knowledge about the fish and their behaviour including migration, foraging and habitat. The effective use of fishing techniques often depends on this additional knowledge. Some fishers follow fishing folklores which claim that fish feeding patterns are influenced by the position of the sun and the moon.\nTackle.\nFishing tackle is the equipment used by fishers when fishing. Almost any equipment or gear used for fishing can be called fishing tackle, although the term is most commonly associated with gear used in angling. Some examples are hooks, lines, sinkers, floats, rods, reels, baits, lures, spears, nets, gaffs, traps, waders, and tackle boxes. Fishing techniques refers to the ways the tackle is used when fishing.\nTackle that is attached to the end of a fishing line is collectively called terminal tackle. These include hooks, sinkers, floats, leader lines, swivels, split rings, and any wires, snaps, beads, spoons, blades, spinners and clevises used to attach spinner blades to fishing lures. People also tend to use dead or live bait fish as another form of bait.\nFishing vessels.\nA fishing vessel is a boat or ship used to catch fish in the sea, or on a lake or river. Many different kinds of vessels are used in commercial, artisanal, and recreational fishing.\nAccording to the FAO, in 2004 there were four million commercial fishing vessels. About 1.3 million of these are decked vessels with enclosed areas. Nearly all of these decked vessels are mechanised, and 40,000 of them are over 100 tons. At the other extreme, two-thirds (1.8 million) of the undecked boats are traditional craft of various types, powered only by sail and oars. These boats are used by artisan fishers.\nIt is difficult to estimate how many recreational fishing boats there are, although the number is high. The term is fluid since some recreational boats may also be used for fishing from time to time. Unlike most commercial fishing vessels, recreational fishing boats are often not dedicated just to fishing. Just about anything that will stay afloat can be called a recreational fishing boat, so long as a fisher periodically climbs aboard with the intent to catch a fish. Fish are caught for recreational purposes from boats which range from dugout canoes, float tubes, kayaks, rafts, stand up paddleboards, pontoon boats and small dinghies to runabouts, cabin cruisers and cruising yachts to large, hi-tech and luxurious big game rigs. Larger boats, purpose-built with recreational fishing in mind, usually have large, open cockpits at the stern, designed for convenient fishing.\nTraditional fishing.\nTraditional fishing is any kind of small scale, commercial or subsistence fishing practices using traditional techniques such as rod and tackle, arrows and harpoons, throw nets and drag nets, etc.\nRecreational fishing.\nRecreational and sport fishing refer to fishing primarily for pleasure or competition. Recreational fishing has conventions, rules, licensing restrictions and laws that limit how fish may be caught; typically, these prohibit the use of nets and the catching of fish with hooks not in the mouth. The most common form of recreational fishing is done with a rod, reel, line, hooks and any one of a wide range of baits or lures such as artificial flies. The practice of catching or attempting to catch fish with a hook is generally known as angling. In angling, it is sometimes expected or required that fish be returned to the water (catch and release). Recreational or sport fishermen may log their catches or participate in fishing competitions.\nThe estimated global number of recreational fishers varies from 220 million to a maximum number of 700 million fishers globally, which is thought to be double the number of individuals working as commercial fishers. In the United States alone it was estimated that 50.1 million people engaged in fishing activities in both saltwater and freshwater environments.\nBig-game fishing is fishing from boats to catch large open-water species such as swordfish, tuna, sharks, and marlin. Sportfishing (sometimes game fishing) is recreational fishing where the primary reward is the challenge of finding and catching the fish rather than the culinary or financial value of the fish's flesh. Fish sought after include tarpon, sailfish, mackerel, grouper and many others.\nFishing industry.\nThe fishing industry includes any industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products. It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors. The commercial activity is aimed at the delivery of fish and other seafood products for human consumption or use as raw material in other industrial processes. In 2022 24% of fishers and fish farmers and 62% of workers in post-harvest sector were women.\nThere are three principal industry sectors:\nCommercial fishing.\nCommercial fishing is the capture of fish for commercial purposes. Those who practice it must often pursue fish far from the land under adverse conditions. Commercial fishermen harvest a wide range of aquatic species, from tuna, cod and salmon to shrimp, krill, lobster, clams, squid and crab, in various fisheries for these species. Commercial fishing methods have become very efficient using large nets and sea-going processing factories. Individual fishing quotas and international treaties seek to control the species and quantities caught.\nA commercial fishing enterprise may vary from one person with a small boat with hand-casting nets or a few pot traps, to a huge fleet of trawlers processing tons of fish every day.\nCommercial fishing gear includes weights, nets (e.g. purse seine), seine nets (e.g. beach seine), trawls (e.g. bottom trawl), dredges, hooks and line (e.g. long line and handline), lift nets, gillnets, entangling nets and traps.\nAccording to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the total world capture fisheries production in 2000 was 86 million tons (FAO 2002). The top producing countries were, in order, the People's Republic of China (excluding Hong Kong and Taiwan), Peru, Japan, the United States, Chile, Indonesia, Russia, India, Thailand, Norway, and Iceland. Those countries accounted for more than half of the world's production; China alone accounted for a third of the world's production. Of that production, over 90% was marine and less than 10% was inland.\nA small number of species support the majority of the world's fisheries. Some of these species are herring, cod, sardine, anchovy, tuna, flounder, mullet, squid, shrimp, salmon, crab, lobster, oyster and scallops. All except these last four provided a worldwide catch of well over a million tonnes in 1999, with herring and sardines together providing a catch of over 22 million metric tons in 1999. Many other species as well are fished in smaller numbers.\nFish farms.\nFish farming is the principal form of aquaculture, while other methods may fall under mariculture. It involves raising fish commercially in tanks or enclosures, usually for food. A facility that releases juvenile fish into the wild for recreational fishing or to supplement a species' natural population is generally referred to as a fish hatchery. Fish species raised by fish farms include salmon, carp, tilapia, catfish, white seabass and trout.\nIncreased demands on wild fisheries by commercial fishing has caused widespread overfishing. Fish farming offers an alternative solution to the increasing market demand for fish.\nFish products.\nFish and fish products are consumed as food all over the world. With other seafoods, it provides the world's prime source of high-quality protein: 14\u201316 percent of the animal protein consumed worldwide. Over one billion people rely on fish as their primary source of animal protein.\nFish and other aquatic organisms are also processed into various food and non-food products, such as sharkskin leather, pigments made from the inky secretions of cuttlefish, isinglass used for the clarification of wine and beer, fish emulsion used as a fertiliser, fish glue, fish oil and fish meal.\nFish are also collected live for research and the aquarium trade.\nFisheries management.\nFisheries management draws on fisheries science to find ways to protect fishery resources so sustainable exploitation is possible. Modern fisheries management is often referred to as a governmental system of management rules based on defined objectives and a mix of management means to implement the rules, which are put in place by a system of monitoring control and surveillance.\nFisheries science is the academic discipline of managing and understanding fisheries. It is a multidisciplinary science, which draws on the disciplines of oceanography, marine biology, marine conservation, ecology, population dynamics, economics and management in an attempt to provide an integrated picture of fisheries. In some cases new disciplines have emerged, such as bioeconomics.\nSustainability.\nStocks fished within biologically sustainable levels decreased from 90% in 1974 to 62.3% in 2021. Issues involved in the long term sustainability of fishing include overfishing, by-catch, marine pollution, environmental effects of fishing, ghost fishing, climate change, fisheries-induced evolution and fish farming.\nConservation issues are part of marine conservation, and are addressed in fisheries science programs. There is a growing gap between how many fish are available to be caught and humanity's desire to catch them, a problem that gets worse as the world population grows.\nSimilar to other environmental issues, there can be conflict between the fishermen who depend on fishing for their livelihoods and fishery scientists who realise that if future fish populations are to be sustainable then some fisheries must limit fishing or cease operations.\nAnimal welfare concerns.\nHistorically, some doubted that fish could experience pain. Laboratory experiments have shown that fish do react to painful stimuli (e.g., injections of bee venom) in a similar way to mammals. This is controversial and has been disputed. The expansion of fish farming as well as animal welfare concerns in society has led to research into more humane and faster ways of killing fish.\nIn large-scale operations like fish farms, stunning fish with electricity or putting them into water saturated with nitrogen so that they cannot breathe, results in death more rapidly than just taking them out of the water. For sport fishing, it is recommended that fish be killed soon after catching them by hitting them on the head followed by bleeding out or by stabbing the brain with a sharp object (called pithing or \"ike jime\" in Japanese). Some believe it is not cruel if you release the catch back to where it was caught however a study in 2018 states that the hook damages an important part of the feeding mechanism by which the fish sucks in food, ignoring the issue of pain.\nWhen fishing there are high chances of catching other marine wildlife in a fishing net. There are over 100 different fishing regulations on paper for reducing this bycatch.\nPlastic pollution.\nAbandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear includes netting, mono/multifilament lines, hooks, ropes, floats, buoys, sinkers, anchors, metallic materials and fish aggregating devices (FADs) made of non-biodegradable materials such as concrete, metal and polymers. It has been estimated that global fishing gear losses each year include 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines used. Abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) can have serious impacts on marine organisms through entanglement and ingestion. The potential for fishing gear to become ALDFG depends on a number of factors including: \nCultural impact.\nCommunity.\nFor communities like fishing villages, fisheries provide not only a source of food and work but also a community and cultural identity.\nEconomic.\nSome locations may be regarded as fishing destinations, which anglers visit on vacation or for competitions. The economic impact of fishing by visitors may be a significant, or even primary driver of tourism revenue for some destinations.\nSemantic.\nA \"fishing expedition\" is a situation where an interviewer implies they know more than they do to trick their target into divulging more information than they wish to reveal. Other examples of fishing terms that carry a negative connotation are: \"fishing for compliments\", \"to be fooled hook, line and sinker\" (to be fooled beyond merely \"taking the bait\"), and the internet scam of phishing, in which a third party will duplicate a website where the user would put sensitive information (such as bank codes).\nReligious.\nFishing has had an effect on major religions, including Christianity, Hinduism, and the various new age religions. Jesus was said to participate in fishing excursions, and a number of the miracles and many parables and stories reported in the Bible involve fish or fishing. Since the Apostle Peter was a fisherman, the Catholic Church has adopted the use of the fishermans ring into the Pope's traditional vestments.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO (https://). Text taken from https://, United Nations Environment Programme. "}
{"id": "36585", "revid": "4626582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36585", "title": "Orange Park", "text": "Orange Park may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36586", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36586", "title": "Svante Arrhenius", "text": "Swedish scientist (1859\u20131927)\nSvante August Arrhenius ( , ; 19 February 1859 \u2013 2 October 1927) was a Swedish scientist. Originally a physicist, but often referred to as a chemist, Arrhenius was one of the founders of the science of physical chemistry. In 1903, he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, becoming the first Swedish Nobel laureate. In 1905, he became the director of the Nobel Institute, where he remained until his death.\nArrhenius was the first to use the principles of physical chemistry to estimate the extent to which increases in the atmospheric carbon dioxide are responsible for the Earth's increasing surface temperature. His work played an important role in the emergence of modern climate science. In the 1960s, Charles David Keeling reliably measured the level of carbon dioxide present in the air showing it was increasing and that, according to the greenhouse hypothesis, it was sufficient to cause significant global warming.\nThe Arrhenius equation, Arrhenius acid, Arrhenius base, lunar crater Arrhenius, Martian crater Arrhenius, the mountain of Arrheniusfjellet, and the Arrhenius Labs at Stockholm University were so named to commemorate his contributions to science.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nArrhenius was born on 19 February 1859 at Vik (which can also be spelled as Wik or Wijk), near Uppsala, Kingdom of Sweden, the son of Svante Gustav and Carolina Thunberg Arrhenius, who were Lutheran. His father had been a land surveyor for Uppsala University, moving up to a supervisory position. At the age of three, Arrhenius taught himself to read without the encouragement of his parents and, by watching his father's addition of numbers in his account books, became an arithmetical prodigy. In later life, Arrhenius was profoundly passionate about mathematical concepts, data analysis and discovering their relationships and laws.\nAt age eight, he entered the local cathedral school, starting in the fifth grade, distinguishing himself in physics and mathematics, and graduating as the youngest and most able student in 1876.\nIonic disassociation.\nAt the University of Uppsala, he was dissatisfied with the chief instructor of physics and the only faculty member who could have supervised him in chemistry, Per Teodor Cleve, so he left to study at the Physical Institute of the Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm under the physicist Erik Edlund in 1881.\nHis work focused on the conductivities of electrolytes. In 1884, based on this work, he submitted a 150-page dissertation on electrolytic conductivity to Uppsala for the doctorate. It did not impress the professors, who included Cleve, and he received a fourth-class degree, but upon his defense it was reclassified as third-class. Later, extensions of this very work would earn him the 1903 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.\nArrhenius put forth 56 theses in his 1884 dissertation, most of which would still be accepted today unchanged or with minor modifications. The most important idea in the dissertation was his explanation of the fact that solid crystalline salts disassociate into paired charged particles when dissolved, for which he would win the 1903 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Arrhenius's explanation was that in forming a solution, the salt disassociates into charged particles that Michael Faraday had given the name ions many years earlier. Faraday's belief had been that ions were produced in the process of electrolysis, that is, an external direct current source of electricity was necessary to form ions. Arrhenius proposed that, even in the absence of an electric current, aqueous solutions of salts contained ions. He thus proposed that chemical reactions in solution were reactions between ions.\nThe dissertation did not impress the professors at Uppsala, but Arrhenius sent it to a number of scientists in Europe who were developing the new science of physical chemistry, such as Rudolf Clausius, Wilhelm Ostwald, and Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff. \nThey were far more impressed, and Ostwald even came to Uppsala to persuade Arrhenius to join his research team in Riga. Arrhenius declined, however, as he preferred to stay in Sweden-Norway for a while (his father was very ill and would die in 1885) and had received an appointment at Uppsala.\nIn an extension of his ionic theory Arrhenius proposed definitions for acids and bases, in 1884. He believed that acids were substances that produce hydrogen ions in solution and that bases were substances that produce hydroxide ions in solution.\nMiddle period.\nIn 1885, Arrhenius next received a travel grant from the Swedish Academy of Sciences, which enabled him to study with Ostwald in Riga (now in Latvia), with Friedrich Kohlrausch in W\u00fcrzburg, Germany, with Ludwig Boltzmann in Graz, Austria, and with Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff in Amsterdam.\nIn 1889, Arrhenius explained the fact that most reactions require added heat energy to proceed by formulating the concept of activation energy, an energy barrier that must be overcome before two molecules will react. The Arrhenius equation gives the quantitative basis of the relationship between the activation energy and the rate at which a reaction proceeds.\nIn 1891, he became a lecturer at the Stockholm University College (\"Stockholms H\u00f6gskola\", now Stockholm University), being promoted to professor of physics (with much opposition) in 1895, and rector in 1896.\nNobel Prizes.\nAbout 1900, Arrhenius became involved in setting up the Nobel Institutes and the Nobel Prizes. He was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1901. For the rest of his life, he would be a member of the Nobel Committee on Physics and a de facto member of the Nobel Committee on Chemistry. He used his positions to arrange prizes for his friends (Jacobus van 't Hoff, Wilhelm Ostwald, Theodore Richards) and to attempt to deny them to his enemies (Paul Ehrlich, Walther Nernst, Dmitri Mendeleev). In 1901 Arrhenius was elected to the Swedish Academy of Sciences, against strong opposition. In 1903 he became the first Swede to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. \nIn 1905, upon the founding of the Nobel Institute for Physical Research at Stockholm, he was appointed rector of the institute, the position where he remained until retirement in 1927.\nIn 1911, he won the first Willard Gibbs Award.\nSociety memberships.\nHe was elected an International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1908.\nHe was elected an Honorary Member of the Netherlands Chemical Society in 1909.\nHe became a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1910.\nHe was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1911.\nIn 1912, he was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences\nIn 1919, he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nLater years.\nEventually, Arrhenius's theories became generally accepted and he turned to other scientific topics. In 1902, he began to investigate physiological problems in terms of chemical theory. He determined that reactions in living organisms and in the test tube followed the same laws.\nIn 1904, he delivered at the University of California a course of lectures, the object of which was to illustrate the application of the methods of physical chemistry to the study of the theory of toxins and antitoxins, and which were published in 1907 under the title \"Immunochemistry\".\nHe also turned his attention to geology (the origin of ice ages), astronomy, physical cosmology, and astrophysics, accounting for the birth of the Solar System by interstellar collision. \nHe considered radiation pressure as accounting for comets, the solar corona, the aurora borealis, and zodiacal light.\nHe thought life might have been carried from planet to planet by the transport of spores, the theory now known as panspermia. He thought of the idea of a universal language, proposing a modification of the English language.\nHe was a board member for the \"Swedish Society for Racial Hygiene\" (founded 1909), which endorsed mendelism at the time, and contributed to the topic of contraceptives around 1910. However, until 1938 information and sale of contraceptives was prohibited in the Kingdom of Sweden. Gordon Stein wrote that Svante Arrhenius was an atheist. Other sources present him as a Lutheran.In his last years he wrote both textbooks and popular books, trying to emphasize the need for further work on the topics he discussed. In September 1927, he came down with an attack of acute intestinal catarrh and died on 2 October. He was buried in Uppsala.\nMarriages and family.\nHe was married twice, first to his former pupil Sofia Rudbeck (1894\u20131896), with whom he had one son, Olof Arrhenius, and then to Maria Johansson (1905\u20131927), with whom he had two daughters and a son.\nArrhenius was the grandfather of bacteriologist Agnes Wold, chemist Svante Wold, and ocean biogeochemist Gustaf Arrhenius.\nSvante Thunberg, father of climate activist Greta Thunberg and an ancestral cousin of Arrhenius, is named after him.\nGreenhouse effect.\nIn developing a theory to explain the ice ages, Arrhenius, in 1896, was the first to use basic principles of physical chemistry to calculate estimates of the extent to which increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) will increase Earth's surface temperature through the greenhouse effect. These calculations led him to conclude that human-caused CO2 emissions, from fossil-fuel burning and other combustion processes, are large enough to cause global warming. This conclusion has been extensively tested, winning a place at the core of modern climate science. Arrhenius, in this work, built upon the prior work of other famous scientists, including Joseph Fourier, John Tyndall, and Claude Pouillet. Arrhenius wanted to determine whether greenhouse gases could contribute to the explanation of the temperature variation between glacial and inter-glacial periods. Arrhenius used infrared observations of the moon \u2013 by Frank Washington Very and Samuel Pierpont Langley at the Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh \u2013 to calculate how much of infrared (heat) radiation is captured by CO2 and water (H2O) vapour in Earth's atmosphere. Using 'Stefan's law' (better known as the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law), he formulated what he referred to as a 'rule'. \nIn its original form, Arrhenius's rule reads as follows:\n\"if the quantity of carbonic acid increases in geometric progression, the augmentation of the temperature will increase nearly in arithmetic progression.\"\nHere, Arrhenius refers to CO2 as carbonic acid (which refers only to the aqueous form H2CO3 in modern usage). The following formulation of Arrhenius's rule is still in use today:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the concentration of CO2 at the beginning (time-zero) of the period being studied (if the same concentration unit is used for both formula_3 and formula_2, then it doesn't matter which concentration unit is used); formula_3 is the CO2 concentration at end of the period being studied; \"ln\" is the natural logarithm (= log base e (log\"e\")); and formula_6 is the augmentation of the temperature, in other words the change in the rate of heating Earth's surface (radiative forcing), which is measured in Watts per square meter. Derivations from atmospheric radiative transfer models have found that formula_7 (alpha) for CO2 is 5.35 (\u00b1 10%) W/m2 for Earth's atmosphere.\nBased on information from his colleague Arvid H\u00f6gbom, Arrhenius was the first person to predict that emissions of carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels and other combustion processes were large enough to cause global warming. In his calculation Arrhenius included the feedback from changes in water vapor as well as latitudinal effects, but he omitted clouds, convection of heat upward in the atmosphere, and other essential factors. His work is currently seen less as an accurate quantification of global warming than as the first demonstration that increases in atmospheric CO2 will cause global warming, everything else being equal.\nArrhenius's absorption values for CO2 and his conclusions met criticism by Knut \u00c5ngstr\u00f6m in 1900, who published the first modern infrared absorption spectrum of CO2 with two absorption bands, and published experimental results that seemed to show that absorption of infrared radiation by the gas in the atmosphere was already \"saturated\" so that adding more could make no difference. Arrhenius replied strongly in 1901 (\"Annalen der Physik\"), dismissing the critique altogether. He touched on the subject briefly in a technical book titled \"Lehrbuch der kosmischen Physik\" (1903). He later wrote \"V\u00e4rldarnas utveckling\" (1906) (German: \"Das Werden der Welten\" [1907], English: https:// [1908]) directed at a general audience, where he suggested that the human emission of CO2 would be strong enough to prevent the world from entering a new ice age, and that a warmer earth would be needed to feed the rapidly increasing population:\n \"To a certain extent the temperature of the earth's surface, as we shall presently see, is conditioned by the properties of the atmosphere surrounding it, and particularly by the permeability of the latter for the rays of heat.\" (p. 46)\n \"That the atmospheric envelopes limit the heat losses from the planets had been suggested about 1800 by the great French physicist Fourier. His ideas were further developed afterwards by Pouillet and Tyndall. Their theory has been styled the hot-house theory, because they thought that the atmosphere acted after the manner of the glass panes of hot-houses.\" (p. 51)\n \"If the quantity of carbonic acid [ CO2 + H2O \u2192 H2CO3 (carbonic acid) ] in the air should sink to one-half its present percentage, the temperature would fall by about 4\u00b0; a diminution to one-quarter would reduce the temperature by 8\u00b0. On the other hand, any doubling of the percentage of carbon dioxide in the air would raise the temperature of the earth's surface by 4\u00b0; and if the carbon dioxide were increased fourfold, the temperature would rise by 8\u00b0.\" (p. 53)\n \"Although the sea, by absorbing carbonic acid, acts as a regulator of huge capacity, which takes up about five-sixths of the produced carbonic acid, we yet recognize that the slight percentage of carbonic acid in the atmosphere may by the advances of industry be changed to a noticeable degree in the course of a few centuries.\" (p. 54)\n \"Since, now, warm ages have alternated with glacial periods, even after man appeared on the earth, we have to ask ourselves: Is it probable that we shall in the coming geological ages be visited by a new ice period that will drive us from our temperate countries into the hotter climates of Africa? There does not appear to be much ground for such an apprehension. The enormous combustion of coal by our industrial establishments suffices to increase the percentage of carbon dioxide in the air to a perceptible degree.\" (p. 61)\n \"We often hear lamentations that the coal stored up in the earth is wasted by the present generation without any thought of the future, and we are terrified by the awful destruction of life and property which has followed the volcanic eruptions of our days. We may find a kind of consolation in the consideration that here, as in every other case, there is good mixed with the evil. By the influence of the increasing percentage of carbonic acid in the atmosphere, we may hope to enjoy ages with more equable and better climates, especially as regards the colder regions of the earth, ages when the earth will bring forth much more abundant crops than at present, for the benefit of rapidly propagating mankind.\" (p. 63)\nAt this time, the accepted consensus explanation is that, historically, orbital forcing has set the timing for ice ages, with CO2 acting as an essential amplifying feedback. However, CO2 releases since the industrial revolution have increased CO2 to a level not found since 10 to 15 million years ago, when the global average surface temperature was up to warmer than now and almost all ice had melted, raising world sea-levels to about 100 feet (30 m.) higher than today's.\nArrhenius estimated based on the CO2 levels at his time, that reducing levels by 0.62\u20130.55 would decrease temperatures by 4\u20135\u00a0\u00b0C (Celsius) and an increase of 2.5 to 3 times of CO2 would cause a temperature rise of 8\u20139\u00a0\u00b0C in the Arctic. In his book \"Worlds in the Making\" he described the \"hot-house\" theory of the atmosphere.\nIn 1971, S. Ichtiaque Rasool and Stephen Henry Schneider determined that doubling the atmospheric concentration of CO2 would increase the Earth's temperature by about 0.8\u00b0C and an increase by a factor of ten would increase temperature by 2.5\u00b0C. Their conclusion was that we could not prevent the coming ice age, no matter how much coal were to be burned. Arrhenius and \u00c5ngstr\u00f6m were both qualitatively correct, and both quantitatively wrong.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36587", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36587", "title": "UN Trade and Development", "text": "Permanent intergovernmental body\nUN Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is an intergovernmental organization within the United Nations Secretariat that promotes the interests of developing countries in world trade. It was established in 1964 by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development but rebranded to its current name on the occasion of its 60th anniversary in 2024. It reports to both the General Assembly and the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). UNCTAD is composed of 195 member states and works with non-governmental organizations worldwide; its permanent secretariat is at UNOG in Geneva, Switzerland.\nThe primary objective of UNCTAD is to formulate policies relating to all aspects of development, including trade, aid, transport, finance and technology. It was created in response to concerns among developing countries that existing international institutions like GATT (since replaced by the World Trade Organization), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Bank were not properly organized to handle the particular problems of developing countries; UNCTAD would provide a forum where developing nations could discuss and address problems relating to their economic development.\nOne of UNCTAD's principal achievements was conceiving and implementing the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), which promotes the export of manufactured goods from developing countries. In the 1970s and 1980s, UNCTAD was closely associated with the New International Economic Order (NIEO), a set of proposals that sought to reduce economic dependency and inequality between developing and developed countries.\nUNCTAD conferences ordinarily take place every four years, with the first occurring in Geneva in 1964; fifteen subsequent meetings have taken place worldwide, with the most recent held in Bridgetown, Barbados, from 3\u20138 October 2021 (albeit virtually, due to the COVID-19 pandemic).\nUNCTAD has 400 staff members and a biannual (2010\u20132011) regular budget of US$138\u00a0million in core expenditures and US$72\u00a0million in extra-budgetary technical assistance funds. It is a member of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, a consortium of UN entities that work to promote sustainable socioeconomic development.\nMembership.\nUNCTAD has 195 member states: all UN members plus UN Observer states, the Holy See and Palestine. UNCTAD members are divided into four categories based on United Nations Regional Groups, with five members unassigned: Kiribati, Nauru, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tuvalu. List A consists mostly of countries in the UN's African Group and Asia-Pacific Group. List B consists of countries of the Western European and Others Group. List C consists of countries of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States (GRULAC). List D consists of countries of the Eastern European Group.\nThe lists, originally defined in 19th General Assembly resolution 1995 serve to balance geographical distribution of member states' representation on the Trade Development Board and other UNCTAD structures. The lists are similar to those of UNIDO, a UN specialized agency.\nThe full list is as follows:\nList A (98 members): Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Republic of Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.\nList B (32 members): Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.\nList C (33 members): Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela.\nList D (25 members): Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Montenegro, Poland, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.\nNot assigned countries (7 members): Armenia, Kiribati, Nauru, Palestine, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tuvalu.\nOther states that do not participate are Cook Islands, Niue, and the states with limited recognition.\nMeetings.\nThe inter-governmental work is done at five levels of meetings:\nThe 15th quadrennial meeting took place virtually in Bridgetown, Barbados, from 25 to 30 April 2021.\nGeneva, 1964.\nIn response to developing countries (Least Developed Country, LDC) anxiety at their worsening position in world trade, the United Nations General Assembly voted for a 'one-off' conference. These early discussions paved the way for new IMF facilities to provide finance for shortfalls in commodity earnings and for the Generalised Preference Schemes which increased access to Northern markets for manufactured imports from the South. At Geneva, the LDCs were successful in their proposal for the conference with its secretariat to become a permanent organ of the UN, with meetings every four years. At the Geneva meeting, Ra\u00fal Prebisch\u2014a prominent Argentinian economist from the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)\u2014became the organization's first secretary-general.\nNew Delhi, 1968.\nThe New Delhi Conference, held in February and March 1968, was a forum that allowed developing countries to reach an agreement on the basic principles of their development policies. The conference in New Delhi was an opportunity for schemes to be finally approved. The conference provided a major impetus in persuading the North to follow up on UNCTAD I resolutions, in establishing generalized preferences. The target for private and official flows to LDCs was raised to 1% of the North's GNP, but the developed countries failed to achieve the target by a specific date. This has proven a continuing point of debate at UNCTAD conferences.\nThe conference led to the International Sugar Agreement, which seeks to stabilize world sugar prices.\nSantiago, 1972.\nThe Santiago Conference, 15 April 1972, was the third occasion on which developing countries confronted the rich with the need to use trade and aid measures more effectively to improve living standards in the developing world. Discussion centred on the international monetary system and specifically on the South's proposal that a higher proportion of new special drawing rights (SDRs) should be allocated to LDCs as a form of aid (the so-called 'link'). In Santiago, substantial disagreements arose within the Group of 77 (G77) despite preconference meetings. There was disagreement over the SDR proposal and between those in the G77 who wanted fundamental changes such as a change in the voting allocations in the South's favour at the IMF and those (mainly the Latin American countries) who wanted much milder reforms. This internal dissent seriously weakened the group's negotiating position and led to a final agreed motion which recommended that the IMF should examine the link and that further research be conducted into general reforms. This avoided firm commitments to act on the 'link' or general reform, and the motion was passed by the conference.\nNairobi, 1976, and Manila, 1979.\nUNCTAD IV, held in Nairobi in May 1976, showed relative success compared to its predecessors. An Overseas Development Institute briefing paper of April 1979 highlights one reason for success as being down to the 1973 Oil Crisis and the encouragement of LDCs to make gains through producers of other commodities. The principal result of the conference was the adoption of the Integrated Programme for Commodities. The programme covered the principal commodity exports and its objectives aside from the stabilisation of commodity prices were: \"Just and remunerative pricing, taking into account world inflation\", the expansion of processing, distribution and control of technology by LDCs and improved access to markets.\nUNCTAD V, held in Manila in 1979 in the wake of the Nairobi Conference, focused on the key issues of protectionism in developing countries and the need for structural change, trade in commodities and manufacturing aid and international monetary reform, technology, shipping, and economic co-operation among developing countries. An Overseas Development Institute briefing paper written in 1979 focuses its attention on the key issues regarding the LDCs' role as the Group of 77 in the international community.\nBelgrade, 1983.\nThe sixth UN Conference on Trade and Development in Belgrade, 6\u201330 June 1983, was held against the background of earlier UNCTADs which have substantially failed to resolve many of the disagreements between the developed and developing countries and of a world economy in its worst recession since the early 1930s. The key issues of the time were finance and adjustment, commodity price stabilisation and trade.\nBridgetown, 2021.\nThe fifteenth session of UNCTAD was originally scheduled for 2020 but was delayed until 2021 due to COVID-19.\nThis was the first time the conference was held in a Small Island Developing State (SIDS).\nAchievements.\nOne of UNCTAD's earliest and most notable accomplishments was the formulation and implementation of the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), which offered special tariff concessions to exports of manufactured goods by developing countries. Accepting this argument, the developed countries formulated the GSP scheme under which manufacturers' exports and imports of some agricultural goods from the developing countries enter duty-free or at reduced rates in the developed countries. Since imports of such items from other developed countries are subject to the normal rates of duties, imports of the same items from developing countries would enjoy a competitive advantage.\nReports.\nUNCTAD produces a number of topical reports, including:\nOther.\nUNCTAD conducts technical cooperation programmes such as ASYCUDA, DMFAS, EMPRETEC and WAIPA.\nIn addition, UNCTAD conducts certain technical cooperation in collaboration with the World Trade Organization through the joint International Trade Centre (ITC), a technical cooperation agency targeting operational and enterprise-oriented aspects of trade development.\nUNCTAD hosts the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR).\nPartnership initiatives.\nUNCTAD is a founding member of the United Nations Sustainable Stock Exchanges (SSE) initiative along with the Principles for Responsible Investment, the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP-FI), and the UN Global Compact.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36588", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36588", "title": "Svante August Arrhenius", "text": ""}
{"id": "36592", "revid": "50527965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36592", "title": "Gus Grissom", "text": "American astronaut (1926\u20131967)\nVirgil Ivan \"Gus\" Grissom (April 3, 1926 \u2013 January 27, 1967) was an American engineer and pilot in the United States Air Force, as well as one of the original Mercury Seven selected by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for Project Mercury, a program to train and launch astronauts into outer space. Grissom went on to be a Project Gemini and Apollo program astronaut for NASA. As a member of the NASA Astronaut Corps, Grissom was the second American to fly in space in 1961. He was also the second American to fly in space twice, preceded only by Joe Walker with his sub-orbital X-15 flights.\nGrissom was a World War II and Korean War veteran, mechanical engineer, and USAF test pilot. He was a recipient of the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Air Medal with an oak leaf cluster, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, and, posthumously, the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.\nAs commander of \"AS-204\" (Apollo 1), Grissom died with astronauts Ed White and Roger B. Chaffee on January 27, 1967, during a pre-launch test for the Apollo 1 mission at Cape Kennedy, Florida.\nEarly life.\nVirgil Ivan Grissom was born in the small town of Mitchell, Indiana, on April 3, 1926, to Dennis David Grissom, a signalman for the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, and Cecile King Grissom, a homemaker. Virgil was the family's second child; his older sister, Lena, died a year prior to Gus' birth. He was followed by three younger siblings: a sister, Wilma, and two brothers, Norman and Lowell. Grissom started school at Riley grade school. His interest in flying began during that time, building model airplanes. He received his nickname when his friend was reading his name on a scorecard upside down and misread \"Griss\" as \"Gus\".\nAs a youth, Grissom attended the local Church of Christ, where he remained a lifelong member. He joined the local Boy Scout Troop and earned the rank of Star Scout. Grissom credited the Scouts for his love of hunting and fishing. He was the leader of the honor guard in his troop. His first jobs were delivering newspapers for \"The Indianapolis Star\" in the morning and the \"Bedford Times\" in the evening. In the summer he picked fruit in area orchards and worked at a dry-goods store. He also worked at a local meat market, a service station, and a clothing store in Mitchell.\nGrissom started attending Mitchell High School in 1940. He wanted to play varsity basketball but he was too short. His father encouraged him to find sports he was more suited for, and he joined the swimming team. Although he excelled at mathematics, Grissom was an average high school student in other subjects. He graduated from high school in 1944.\nIn addition, Grissom occasionally spent time at a local airport in Bedford, Indiana, where he first became interested in aviation. A local attorney who owned a small plane would take him on flights and taught him the basics of flying.\nGrissom was a Freemason.\nWorld War II.\nWorld War II began while Grissom was still in high school, but he was eager to join the armed services upon graduation. Grissom enlisted as an aviation cadet in the U.S. Army Air Forces during his senior year in high school, and completed an entrance exam in November 1943. Grissom was inducted into the U.S. Army Air Forces on August 8, 1944, at Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana. He was sent to Sheppard Field in Wichita Falls, Texas, for five weeks of basic flight training, and was later stationed at Brooks Field in San Antonio, Texas. In January 1945 Grissom was assigned to Boca Raton Army Airfield in Florida. Although he was interested in becoming a pilot, most of Grissom's time before his discharge in 1945 was spent as a clerk.\nPost-war employment.\nGrissom was discharged from military service in November 1945, after the war had ended, and returned to Mitchell, where he took a job at Carpenter Body Works, a local bus manufacturing business. Grissom was determined to make his career in aviation and attend college. Using the G.I. Bill for partial payment of his school tuition, Grissom enrolled at Purdue University in September 1946.\nDue to a shortage of campus housing during her husband's first semester in college in West Lafayette, Indiana, Grissom's wife, Betty, stayed in Mitchell living with her parents, while Grissom lived in a rented apartment with another male student. Betty Grissom joined her husband on campus during his second semester, and the couple settled into a small, one-bedroom apartment. Grissom continued his studies at Purdue, worked part-time as a cook at a local restaurant, and took summer classes to finish college early, while his wife worked the night shift as a long-distance operator for the Indiana Bell Telephone Company to help pay for his schooling and their living expenses. Grissom graduated from Purdue with a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering in February 1950.\nKorean War.\nAfter he graduated from Purdue, Grissom re-enlisted in the newly formed U.S. Air Force. He was accepted into the Air Cadet Basic Training Program at Randolph Air Force Base in Universal City, Texas. Upon completion of the program, he was assigned to Williams Air Force Base in Mesa, Arizona, where his wife, Betty, and infant son, Scott, joined him, but the family remained there only briefly. In March 1951, Grissom received his pilot wings and a commission as a second lieutenant. Nine months later, in December 1951, Grissom and his family moved into new living quarters in Presque Isle, Maine, where he was assigned to Presque Isle Air Force Base and became a member of the 75th Fighter-Interceptor Squadron.\nWith the ongoing Korean War, Grissom's squadron was dispatched to the war zone in February 1952. There he flew as an F-86 Sabre replacement pilot and was reassigned to the 334th Fighter Squadron of the 4th Fighter Interceptor Wing stationed at Kimpo Air Base. He flew one hundred combat missions during approximately six months of service in Korea, including multiple occasions when he broke up air raids from North Korean MiGs. On March 11, 1952, Grissom was promoted to first lieutenant and was cited for his \"superlative airmanship\" for his actions on March 23, 1952, when he flew cover for a photo reconnaissance mission. Grissom was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Air Medal with an oak leaf cluster for his military service in Korea.\nAfter flying his quota of one hundred missions, Grissom asked to remain in Korea to fly another twenty-five flights, but his request was denied. Grissom returned to the United States to serve as a flight instructor at Bryan AFB in Bryan, Texas, where he was joined by his wife, Betty, and son, Scott. The Grissoms' second child, Mark, was born there in 1953. Grissom soon learned that flight instructors faced their own set of on-the-job risks. During a training exercise with a cadet, the trainee pilot caused a flap to break off from their two-seat trainer, sending it into a roll. Grissom quickly climbed from the rear seat of the small aircraft to take over the controls and safely land it.\nIn August 1955, Grissom was reassigned to the U.S. Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base near Dayton, Ohio of Air University. After completing the year-long course he earned a bachelor's degree in aeromechanics in 1956. In October 1956, he entered the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base in California, and returned to Wright-Patterson AFB in Ohio in May 1957, after attaining the rank of captain. Grissom served as a test pilot assigned to the fighter branch.\nNASA career.\nIn 1959, Grissom received an official teletype message instructing him to report to an address in Washington, D.C., wearing civilian clothes. The message was classified \"Top Secret\" and Grissom was ordered not to discuss its contents with anyone. Of the 508 military candidates who were considered, he was one of 110 test pilots whose credentials had earned them an invitation to learn more about the U.S. space program in general and its Project Mercury. Grissom was intrigued by the program, but knew that competition for the final spots would be fierce.\nGrissom passed the initial screening in Washington, D.C., and was among the thirty-nine candidates sent to the Lovelace Clinic in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and the Aeromedical Laboratory of the Wright Air Development Center in Dayton, Ohio, to undergo extensive physical and psychological testing. He was nearly disqualified when doctors discovered that he suffered from hay fever, but was permitted to continue after he argued that his allergies would not be a problem due to the absence of ragweed pollen in space.\nOn April 13, 1959, Grissom received official notification that he had been selected as one of the seven Project Mercury astronauts. Grissom and the six other men, after taking a leave of absence from their respective branches of the military service, reported to the Space Task Group at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia on April 27, 1959, to begin their astronaut training.\nProject Mercury.\nOn July 21, 1961, Grissom was pilot of the second Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 4. Grissom named his spacecraft \"Liberty Bell 7\" after the Liberty Bell, and drew a crack on it as a nod to the bell. \"Liberty Bell 7\" was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, a sub-orbital flight that lasted 15 minutes and 37 seconds. After splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean, the \"Liberty Bell 7\"'s emergency explosive bolts unexpectedly fired, blowing off the hatch and causing water to flood into the spacecraft. Grissom quickly exited through the open hatch and into the ocean. While waiting for recovery helicopters from to pick him up, Grissom struggled to keep from drowning after his spacesuit began losing buoyancy due to an open air inlet. Grissom managed to stay afloat until he was pulled from the water by a helicopter and taken to the U.S. Navy ship. In the meantime another recovery helicopter tried to lift and retrieve the \"Liberty Bell 7\", but the flooding spacecraft became too heavy, forcing the recovery crew to cut it loose, and it ultimately sank.\nWhen reporters at a news conference surrounded Grissom after his space flight to ask how he felt, Grissom replied, \"Well, I was scared a good portion of the time; I guess that's a pretty good indication.\" Grissom stated he had done nothing to cause the hatch to blow, and no definitive explanation for the incident was found. Robert F. Thompson, director of Mercury operations, was dispatched to by Space Task Group Director Robert Gilruth and spoke with Grissom upon his arrival on the aircraft carrier. Grissom explained that he had got ahead in the mission timeline and had removed the detonator cap, and also pulled the safety pin. Once the pin was removed, the trigger was no longer held in place and could have inadvertently fired as a result of ocean wave action, bobbing as a result of helicopter rotor wash, or other activity. NASA officials concluded Grissom had not necessarily initiated the firing of the explosive hatch, which would have required pressing a plunger that required five pounds of force to depress. Hitting this metal trigger with the hand typically left a large bruise, but Grissom was found not to have any of the telltale hand bruising.\nWhile the debate continued about the premature detonation of \"Liberty Bell 7\"'s hatch bolts, precautions were initiated for subsequent flights. Fellow Mercury astronaut Wally Schirra, at the end of his October 3, 1962, flight, remained inside his spacecraft until it was safely aboard the recovery ship, and made a point of deliberately blowing the hatch to get out of the spacecraft, bruising his hand.\nGrissom's spacecraft was recovered in 1999, but no evidence was found that could conclusively explain how the explosive hatch release had occurred. Later, Guenter Wendt, pad leader for the early American crewed space launches, wrote that he believed a small cover over the external release actuator was accidentally lost sometime during the flight or splashdown. Another possible explanation was that the hatch's T-handle may have been tugged by a stray parachute suspension line, or was perhaps damaged by the heat of re-entry, and after cooling upon splashdown it contracted and caught fire. It has also been suggested that a static electricity discharge during initial contact between the spacecraft and the rescue helicopter may have caused the hatch's explosive bolts to blow. The co-pilot of the helicopter, U.S. Marine Corps Lieutenant John Reinhard, had the job of using a cutting pole to snip off an antenna before the helicopter could latch onto the capsule. In the 1990s, he told a researcher that he remembered seeing an electric arc jump between the capsule and his pole right before the hatch blew. Jim Lewis, the pilot of Grissom's rescue helicopter, told \"Smithsonian Magazine\" that closer inspection of film footage made him remember the day in better detail. He recalled that \"Reinhard must have cut the antenna a mere second or two before I got us in a position for him to attach our harness to the capsule lifting bale,\" indicating that the timing of the helicopter's approach aligned with the static discharge theory.\nProject Gemini.\nIn early 1964, Alan Shepard was grounded after being diagnosed with M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease and Grissom was designated command pilot for Gemini 3, the first crewed Project Gemini flight, which flew on March 23, 1965. This mission made Grissom the first human and thus first NASA astronaut to fly into space twice. The two-man flight on Gemini 3 with Grissom and John W. Young made three orbits of the Earth and lasted for 4 hours, 52 minutes and 31 seconds. Grissom was one of the eight pilots of the NASA paraglider research vehicle (Paresev).\nGrissom, the shortest of the original seven astronauts at five feet seven inches tall, worked very closely with the engineers and technicians from McDonnell Aircraft who built the Gemini spacecraft. Because of his involvement in the design of the first three spacecraft, his fellow astronauts humorously referred to the craft as \"the Gusmobile\". By July 1963 NASA discovered 14 out of its 16 astronauts could not fit themselves into the cabin and the later cockpits were modified. During this time Grissom invented the multi-axis translation thruster controller used to push the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft in linear directions for rendezvous and docking.\nIn a joking nod to the sinking of his Mercury craft, Grissom named the first Gemini spacecraft \"Molly Brown\" (after the popular Broadway show, \"The Unsinkable Molly Brown\"). Some NASA publicity officials were unhappy with this name and asked Grissom and his pilot, John Young, to come up with a new one. When they offered \"Titanic\" as an alternate, NASA executives decided to allow them to use the name of \"Molly Brown\" for Gemini 3, but did not use it in official references. Much to the agency's chagrin, CAPCOM Gordon Cooper gave Gemini 3 its sendoff on launch with the remark to Grissom and Young, \"You're on your way, \"Molly Brown\"!\" Ground controllers also used it to refer to the spacecraft throughout its flight.\nAfter the safe return of Gemini 3, NASA announced new spacecraft would not be nicknamed. Hence, Gemini 4 was not called \"American Eagle\" as its crew had planned. The practice of nicknaming spacecraft resumed in 1967, when managers realized that the Apollo flights needed a name for each of two flight elements, the Command Module (CSM) and the Lunar Module. Lobbying by the astronauts and senior NASA administrators also had an effect. Apollo 9 used the name \"Gumdrop\" for the Command Module and \"Spider\" for the Lunar Module. However, Wally Schirra was prevented from naming his Apollo 7 spacecraft \"Phoenix\" in honor of the Apollo 1 crew because some believed that its nickname as a metaphor for \"fire\" might be misunderstood.\nApollo program.\nGrissom was backup command pilot for Gemini 6A when he was transferred to the Apollo program and was assigned as commander of the first crewed mission, AS-204, with Senior Pilot Ed White, who had flown in space on the Gemini 4 mission, when he became the first American to make a spacewalk, and Pilot Roger B. Chaffee. The three men were granted permission to refer to their flight as \"Apollo 1\" on their mission insignia patch.\nProblems with the simulator proved extremely annoying to Grissom, who told a reporter the problems with Apollo 1 came \"in bushelfuls\" and that he was skeptical of its chances to complete its fourteen-day mission. Grissom earned the nickname \"Gruff Gus\" by being outspoken about the technical deficiencies of the spacecraft. The engineers who programmed the Apollo training simulator had a difficult time keeping the simulator in sync with the continuous changes being made to the spacecraft. According to backup astronaut Walter Cunningham, \"We knew that the spacecraft was, you know, in poor shape relative to what it ought to be. We felt like we could fly it, but let's face it, it just wasn't as good as it should have been for the job of flying the first crewed Apollo mission.\"\nNASA pressed on. In mid-January 1967, \"preparations were being made for the final pre-flight tests of Spacecraft 012.\" On January 22, 1967, before returning to Cape Kennedy to conduct the January 27 plugs-out test that ended his life, Grissom's wife, Betty, later recalled that he took a lemon from a tree in his back yard and explained that he intended to hang it on that spacecraft, although he actually hung the lemon on the simulator (a duplicate of the Apollo spacecraft).\nPersonal life.\nGrissom met Betty Lavonne Moore (1927\u20132018), in high school. They were married on July 6, 1945, at First Baptist Church in Mitchell when he was home on leave during World War II. The couple had two sons, Scott (1950), and Mark (1953).\nTwo of Grissom's pastimes were hunting and fishing. The family also enjoyed water sports and skiing.\nDeath.\nBefore Apollo 1's planned launch on February 21, 1967, the Command Module interior caught fire and burned on January 27, 1967, during a pre-launch test on Launch Pad 34 at Cape Kennedy. Astronauts Grissom, White, and Chaffee, who were working inside the closed Command Module, were asphyxiated and died. During the test, Grissom said, \"How are we going to get to the Moon if we can't talk between two or three buildings?\", then shouted \"fire!\". The fire's ignition source was damaged wiring. The pilots' deaths were attributed to lethal hazards in the early CSM design and conditions of the test, including a pressurized 100 percent oxygen prelaunch atmosphere, wiring and plumbing flaws, flammable materials used in the cockpit and in the astronauts' flight suits, and an inward-opening hatch that could not be opened quickly in an emergency and not at all with full internal pressure.\nGrissom's funeral services and burial at Arlington National Cemetery were held on January 31, 1967. Dignitaries in attendance included President Lyndon B. Johnson, members of the U.S. Congress, and fellow NASA astronauts, among others. Grissom was interred at Arlington National Cemetery, in Arlington County, Virginia, beside Roger Chaffee. White's remains are interred at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York.\nLegacy.\nAfter the accident, NASA decided to give the flight the official designation of Apollo 1 and skip to Apollo 4 for the first uncrewed flight of the Saturn V, counting the two uncrewed suborbital tests, AS-201 and 202, as part of the sequence. The Apollo spacecraft problems were corrected, with Apollo 7, commanded by Wally Schirra, launched on October 11, 1968, more than a year and a half after the Apollo 1 accident. The Apollo program reached its objective of successfully landing men on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with Apollo 11.\nAt the time of his death, Grissom had attained the rank of lieutenant colonel and had logged a total of 4,600 hours flying time, including 3,500 hours in jet airplanes. Some contend that Grissom could have been selected as one of the astronauts to walk on the Moon. Deke Slayton wrote that he had hoped for one of the original Mercury astronauts to go to the Moon, noting: \"It wasn't just a cut-and-dried decision as to who should make the first steps on the Moon. If I had to select on that basis, my first choice would have been Gus, which both Chris Kraft and Bob Gilruth seconded.\" Ultimately, Alan Shepard, one of the original seven NASA astronauts, would receive the honor of commanding the Apollo 14 lunar landing.\n\"Liberty Bell 7\" spacesuit controversy.\nWhen the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame opened in 1990, his family lent it the spacesuit worn by Grissom during Mercury 4 along with other personal artifacts belonging to the astronaut. In 2002, the museum went into bankruptcy and was taken over by a NASA contractor, whereupon the family sought the exhibit's return. All the artifacts were returned to them except the spacesuit, which NASA claimed was government property. NASA insisted Grissom got authorization to use the spacesuit for a show and tell at his son's school in 1965 and never returned it, but some of Grissom's family members claimed the astronaut rescued the spacesuit from a scrap heap. As of December 2016,[ [update]] the space suit was part of the Kennedy Space Center Hall of Fame's Heroes and Legends exhibit.\nAwards and honors.\nTo celebrate his spaceflight in 1961, Grissom was made honorary Mayor of Newport News, Virginia, and a new library was dubbed the Virgil I. Grissom Library in the Denbigh section of Newport News, Virginia.\nThe airport in Bedford, Indiana, where Grissom flew as a teenager was renamed Virgil I. Grissom Municipal Airport in 1965. A three-ton piece of limestone, inscribed with his name, was unveiled at the airport. His fellow astronauts ribbed him about the name, saying that airports were normally named for dead aviators. Grissom replied, \"But this time they've named one for a live one.\" Virgil Grissom Elementary School in Old Bridge, New Jersey, was named for Grissom the year before his death. His death forced the cancellation of a student project to design a flag to represent Grissom and their school, which would have flown on the mission.\nGrissom was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his Mercury flight and was awarded it a second time for his role in Gemini 3. The Apollo 1 crew was awarded the medal posthumously in a 1969 presentation of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to the Apollo 11 crew.\nGrissom's family received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978 from President Carter (White's and Chaffee's families received it in 1997).\nGrissom was granted an honorary doctorate from Florida Institute of Technology in 1962, the first-ever awarded by the university. Grissom was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981, and the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1987. Grissom was posthumously inducted into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1990. His wife, Betty Lavonne Moore, donated his Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the accompanying museum.\nGrissom posthumously received AIAA's Haley Astronautics Award for 1968.\nMemorials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf we die, we want people to accept it. We are in a risky business and we hope that if anything happens to us it will not delay the program. The conquest of space is worth the risk of life.\n\u2014Grissom, after his Gemini mission, March 1965\nThe dismantled Launch Pad 34 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station bears two memorial plaques to the crew of Apollo 1. The Kennedy Space Center features a memorial exhibit honoring the Apollo 1 crew in the Apollo/Saturn V Center, which includes artifacts and personal mementos of Grissom, Chaffee, and White. Grissom's name is included on the plaque left on the Moon with the \"Fallen Astronaut\" statue in 1971 by the crew of Apollo 15.\nThe Grissom Memorial, a tall limestone monument representing the Redstone rocket and his Mercury space capsule was dedicated in downtown Mitchell, Indiana, in 1981. The Virgil I. Grissom Memorial in Spring Mill State Park, near Grissom's hometown of Mitchell, Indiana, was dedicated in 1971, the tenth anniversary of his Mercury flight. The governor declared it a state holiday for the second year in a row. The \"Gus Grissom Stakes\" is a thoroughbred horse race run in Indiana each fall; originally held at Hoosier Park in Anderson, it was moved to Horseshoe Indianapolis in Shelbyville in 2014.\nGrissom Island is an artificial island off of Long Beach, California, created in 1966 for drilling oil (along with White, Chaffee and Freeman Islands). Virgil \"Gus\" Grissom Park opened in 1971 in Fullerton, California. His widow and son were invited to the dedication ceremony and planted the first large tree in the park. Grissom is named with his Apollo 1 crewmates on the Space Mirror Memorial, which was dedicated in 1991. His son, Gary Grissom, said, \"When I was younger, I thought NASA would do something. It's a shame it has taken this long\".\n\"Navi\" (\"Ivan\" spelled backwards), is a seldom-used nickname for the star Gamma Cassiopeiae. Grissom used this name, plus two others for White and Chaffee, on his Apollo 1 mission planning star charts as a joke, and the succeeding Apollo astronauts kept using the names as a memorial. Grissom crater is one of several located on the far side of the Moon named for Apollo astronauts. The name was created and used unofficially by the Apollo 8 astronauts and was adopted as the official name by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in 1970. 2161 Grissom is a main belt asteroid that was discovered in 1963 and officially designated in 1981. The name references his launch date of July 21, 1961. \"Grissom Hill\", one of the \"Apollo 1 Hills\" on Mars was named by NASA on January 27, 2004, the 37th anniversary of the Apollo 1 fire.\nBunker Hill Air Force Base in Peru, Indiana, was renamed on May 12, 1968, to \"Grissom Air Force Base\". During the dedication ceremony, his son said, \"Of all the honors he won, none would please him more than this one today.\" In 1994, it was again renamed to \"Grissom Air Reserve Base\" following the USAF's realignment program. The three-letter identifier of the VHF Omni Directional Radio Range (VOR) located at Grissom Air Reserve Base is GUS. In 2000, classes of the United States Air Force Academy began selecting a Class Exemplar who embodies the type of person they strive to be. The class of 2007 selected Grissom. An academic building was renamed Grissom Hall in 1968 at the former Chanute Air Force Base, Rantoul, Illinois, where Minuteman missile maintenance training was conducted. It was one of five buildings renamed for deceased Air Force personnel.\nThe Virgil I. Grissom Museum, dedicated in 1971 by Governor Edgar Whitcomb, is located just inside the entrance to Spring Mill State Park in Mitchell, Indiana. The \"Molly Brown\" was transferred to be displayed in the museum in 1974. His boyhood home in Mitchell, Indiana, is located on Grissom Avenue. The street was renamed in his honor after his Mercury flight.\nSchools.\nFlorida Institute of Technology dedicated Grissom Hall, a residence hall, in 1967. State University of New York at Fredonia dubbed their new residence hall Grissom Hall in 1967. Grissom Hall, dedicated in 1968 at Purdue University, was the home of the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics for several decades. It is currently home of the Purdue department of Industrial Engineering.\nVirgil I. Grissom Elementary School was built in Houston, Texas, in 1967. Virgil Grissom Elementary School in Princeton, Iowa was one of four schools in Iowa named after astronauts in late 1967. Grissom's family members attended the 1968 dedication of Virgil I. Grissom Middle School in Mishawaka, Indiana. School No. 7 in Rochester, New York, was named for Grissom in April 1968. Devault Elementary School in Gary, Indiana, was renamed Grissom Elementary School in 1969 after Devault was convicted of conspiring to forge purchase orders. Virgil I. Grissom Middle School was dedicated in November 1969 in Sterling Heights, Michigan. Virgil I. Grissom High School was built in 1969 in Huntsville, Alabama. The school board in the Hegewisch community of Chicago, Illinois, voted to name their new school under construction Virgil I. Grissom Elementary School in March 1969. Grissom Elementary School in Tulsa, Oklahoma, was founded in 1969 and dedicated by Betty Grissom in 1970. Grissom Memorial Elementary School was dedicated in 1973 in Muncie, Indiana. Virgil I. Grissom Middle School was founded in Tinley Park, Illinois, in 1975.\nVirgil I. \"Gus\" Grissom Elementary School was operated by the Department of Defense Dependents Schools at the former Clark Air Base, Philippines. Originally named the Wurtsmith Hill School, it was renamed on November 14, 1968. It housed 3rd and 4th grade students. The school was severely damaged by the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991.\nFilm and television.\nGrissom has been noted and remembered in many film and television productions. Before he became widely known as an astronaut, the film \"Air Cadet\" (1951) starring Richard Long and Rock Hudson briefly featured Grissom early in the movie as a U.S. Air Force candidate for flight school at Randolph Field, San Antonio, Texas. Grissom was depicted by Fred Ward in the film \"The Right Stuff\" (1983) and (very briefly) in the film \"Apollo 13\" (1995) by Steve Bernie. He was portrayed in the 1998 HBO miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\" (1998) by Mark Rolston. Actor Kevin McCorkle played Grissom in the third-season finale of the NBC television show \"American Dreams\". Bryan Cranston played Grissom as a variety-show guest in the film \"That Thing You Do!\" Actor Joel Johnstone portrays Gus Grissom in the 2015 ABC TV series \"The Astronaut Wives Club\". In 2016 Gus Grissom was included in the narrative of the movie \"Hidden Figures\". In 2018, he was portrayed by Shea Whigham in \"First Man\". In 2020's Disney+ miniseries \"The Right Stuff\", Grissom is portrayed by Michael Trotter.\nIn the 1984 film ', the Federation starship USS \"Grissom\" is named for Grissom. Another USS \"Grissom\" was featured in a 1990 episode of the TV series ', and was mentioned in a 1999 episode of '. The character Gil Grissom in the CBS television series ' and the character Virgil Tracy in the British television series \"Thunderbirds\" are also named after the astronaut. NASA footage, including Grissom's Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions, was released in high definition on the Discovery Channel in June 2008 in the television series \"\".\nWhen Grissom died, he was in the process of writing a book about Gemini.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36594", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36594", "title": "Ed White (astronaut)", "text": "American astronaut (1930\u20131967)\nEdward Higgins White II (November 14, 1930 \u2013 January 27, 1967) was an American aeronautical engineer, United States Air Force officer, test pilot, and NASA astronaut. He was a member of the crews of Gemini 4 and Apollo 1.\nAfter graduating from West Point in 1952 with a Bachelor of Science degree, White was sent to flight training, and assigned to the 22nd Fighter Day Squadron at Bitburg Air Base, West Germany, where he flew the F-86 Sabre and F-100 Super Sabre fighters. In 1958, he enrolled in the University of Michigan to study aeronautical engineering, receiving his Master of Science degree in 1959. White then received test pilot training at Edwards Air Force Base, California, before being assigned as a test pilot for the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio.\nWhite was selected as one of the second group of astronauts, the so-called \"Next Nine\", who were chosen to take part in the Gemini and Apollo missions. He was assigned as pilot of Gemini 4 alongside command pilot James McDivitt. On June 3, 1965, White became the first American to walk in space. He was then assigned as senior pilot of the first crewed Apollo mission, Apollo 1. White died on January 27, 1967, alongside astronauts Virgil \"Gus\" Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee in a fire during pre-launch testing for Apollo 1 at Cape Canaveral, Florida. He was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his flight in Gemini 4 and was then awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor posthumously.\nEarly life.\nEdward Higgins White II was born on November 14, 1930, in San Antonio, Texas, the son of Edward Higgins White Sr. (1901\u20131978), a West Point graduate (Class of 1924) who later rose to become a major general in the United States Air Force (USAF), and Mary Rosina White (n\u00e9e\u00a0Haller; 1900\u20131983). He had a younger brother, James Blair White (1942\u20131969), and an older sister, Jeanne. His interest in aviation was sparked at the age of twelve when his father took him for a ride in a North American T-6 Texan trainer. He became a member of the Boy Scouts of America, where he earned the rank of Second Class Scout.\nDue to the nature of his father's job, White's family moved often to different military bases across the country throughout his childhood. The White family moved from San Antonio, Texas to Dayton, Ohio, where he attended Oakwood Junior High School, and to Washington, D.C., where he attended Western High School. After graduating in 1948, he wanted to follow in his father's footsteps and attend West Point, but his family's peripatetic life presented a problem: an appointment to West Point from a United States Congressman was required, and the family had not been continuously resident in any one place for very long. White went down to the Capitol and knocked on Congressmen's doors seeking an appointment, armed with a glowing reference from his high school principal. He eventually secured one from Congressman Ross Rizley from Oklahoma.\nWhite entered West Point on July 15, 1948. He acquired the nickname \"Red\" from the color of his hair. While at West Point, White competed for a spot on the 1952 U.S. Olympic team in the 400 meter hurdles race, but missed qualification in the heat by 0.4 seconds. White was also a half-back on the West Point soccer team. His hobbies included squash, handball, swimming, golf, and photography. His classmates included Michael Collins, who later became an astronaut as well.\nMilitary service.\nUpon graduation with a Bachelor of Science degree from West Point, ranked 128th out of 523 in the Class of 1952, White was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Air Force. Under a 1949 agreement, up to 25percent of the graduating classes of West Point and the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis could volunteer for the Air Force. Between 1950, when the agreement became effective, and 1959, when the first class graduated from the United States Air Force Academy, about 3,200 West Point cadets and Annapolis midshipmen chose to do so. White received his initial pilot training at Bartow Air Base, Florida, and his jet training at James Connally Air Force Base, Texas. After receiving his pilot wings in 1953, White was assigned to Luke Air Force Base, Arizona, for Fighter Gunnery School. In February 1953, White married Patricia Eileen Finegan (1934\u20131983), whom he had met at a West Point football game. They had two children, Edward Higgins White III (born in 1953) and Bonnie Lynn White (born in 1956).\nWhite was assigned to the 22nd Fighter Squadron at Bitburg Air Base in West Germany, where he spent three and a half years flying North American F-86 Sabre and North American F-100 Super Sabre fighters. Among his colleagues were Buzz Aldrin, who graduated a year ahead of him at West Point, and James Salter. In 1957, White read an article about the astronauts of the future, and decided to become one. He believed that getting an advanced degree would improve his chances of being selected. Aldrin later recalled that White convinced him to follow this path as well. In September 1958, White enrolled in the University of Michigan under Air Force sponsorship to study aeronautical engineering. His classmates included James McDivitt, Jim Irwin and Ted Freeman. White was awarded his Master of Science degree in 1959.\nAfter it became clear that being a test pilot would also improve his chances of being selected to become an astronaut, White attended the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California, with class 59-C, which graduated in July 1959. McDivitt was one of his classmates. White was assigned to the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. There, he did flight tests for weapons development, and helped make recommendations for aircraft design on aircraft such as the Fairchild C-123 Provider, Convair C-131 Samaritan, Boeing C-135 Stratolifter, the North American F-100 Super Sabre, Convair F-102 Delta Dagger and Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star. As a weightlessness- and extended-flight-training captain, he piloted the planes that were used to train astronauts in weightlessness. His passengers included John Glenn, the first American to orbit the Earth, and Ham, the first hominid in space. During his career, White would log more than 3,000 flight hours with the Air Force, including about 2,200 hours in jets.\nNASA career.\nGemini program.\nWhite was one of eleven pilots whose names the Air Force submitted to NASA in 1962 as potential candidates for the second group of astronauts. He was then selected as one of 32 finalists who would undergo medical and psychological examinations at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio. White arrived at the Aerospace Medical Center at Brooks AFB on July 30, 1962. He ran around the perimeter of Brooks every day during the testing to keep in shape.\nWhite was one of nine men chosen by NASA as part of Astronaut Group 2 in September 1962. Their selection was announced at a press conference in Cullen Auditorium at the University of Houston on September 17, 1962. Like their predecessors, the Mercury Seven, each of the new astronauts was assigned an area of specialization within the crewed space program: in White's case, flight control systems.\nGemini 4.\nWhite was selected to be the pilot of Gemini 4, with McDivitt as his command pilot. The Chief of the Astronaut Office, Mercury Seven astronaut Deke Slayton, paired them because they knew each other well, having attended the University of Michigan and test pilot school together. The mission objectives were ill-defined at first, but consideration was given to performing extravehicular activity (EVA), space rendezvous and orbital station-keeping.\nKnowing that EVA (or spacewalk) was a possibility, McDivitt pressed for it to be included in the mission. As a result, NASA management agreed to ensure that the Gemini space suit for the mission was capable of being used for EVA. Kenneth S. Kleinknecht told the July 1964 press conference that announced the mission that one of the crew might open the hatch and stick his head outside, but this attracted little attention. On March 18, 1965, cosmonaut Alexei Leonov became the first man to perform an EVA, on the Voskhod 2 mission, but not until May 25 was EVA approved for Gemini 4 by NASA administrator James E. Webb.\nWhite was a devout Methodist. On the Gemini 4 mission he carried three pieces of religious jewelry to take with him on his EVA: a gold cross, a St. Christopher Medal and a Star of David. White commented: \"I felt while I couldn't take one for every religion in the country, I could take the items most familiar to me.\"\nOn June 3, 1965, the Gemini 4 crew was launched into space to begin its four-day mission. After separation from the Titan II upper stage, McDivitt attempted to rendezvous with the booster. However, this was unsuccessful since the astronauts were not adequately trained to rendezvous in orbit. The objective had to be abandoned since the allocated propellant had been used up, and the maneuvers had pushed the spacecraft's orbit too far away from Earth. The mission also included 11 different scientific experiments, including the use of a sextant for celestial navigation.\nAfter the failed rendezvous attempt, White appeared tired and hot, so the EVA was postponed from the second revolution to the third revolution. At 19:46 UTC, White became the first American to make an EVA. During his spacewalk, White used an oxygen-propelled gun called the Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit to propel himself. White found the experience so exhilarating that he was reluctant to terminate the EVA at the allotted time, and had to be ordered back into the spacecraft.\nWhile White was outside, a spare thermal glove floated away through the open hatch of the spacecraft, becoming an early piece of space debris in low Earth orbit, until it burned up upon re-entry into the Earth's atmosphere. There was a mechanical problem with the hatch mechanism, which made it difficult to open and to relatch. McDivitt was able to get the door locked by using his glove to push on the gears that controlled the mechanism. This added to the time constraint of the spacewalk and could have threatened the lives of both men if McDivitt had been unable to get the hatch latched, as they could not re-enter the atmosphere with an unsealed hatch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm coming back in... and it's the saddest moment of my life.\u2014\u200a\nWhen they returned to Earth, the two astronauts found that they were now celebrities. President Lyndon B. Johnson came to Houston to congratulate them, and he promoted them to the rank of lieutenant colonel. Later that week they traveled to the White House where Johnson presented them the NASA Exceptional Service Medal. They were given a ticker tape parade in Chicago, and went to the 1965 Paris Air Show, where they met cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin.\nWhite's next assignment after Gemini 4 was as the backup for Gemini 7 command pilot Frank Borman, with Michael Collins assigned as his pilot. He was also named the astronaut specialist for the flight control systems of the Apollo command module. Under the usual procedure of crew rotation in the Gemini program, White would have been in line for a second flight as the command pilot of Gemini 10 in July 1966, which would have made him the first of his group to fly twice. Instead, he was selected for the Apollo 1 spaceflight.\nApollo program.\nIn March 1966, White was selected as senior pilot (second seat) for the first crewed Apollo flight, designated AS-204. His fellow astronauts would be Command Pilot Virgil \"Gus\" Grissom, who had flown in space on the Mercury-Redstone 4 mission in 1961 and as commander of the Gemini 3 in 1965, and Pilot Roger Chaffee, who had yet to fly into space. The mission, which the men named \"Apollo 1\" in June, was originally planned for late 1966 to coincide with the last Gemini mission, but the impracticality of making the Gemini capsule and systems compatible with Apollo and delays in the spacecraft development pushed the launch into 1967.\nThe launch of Apollo 1 was planned for February 21, 1967. The crew entered the spacecraft at 13:00 on January 27, mounted atop its Saturn IB booster on Launch Pad 34 at Cape Kennedy, for a \"plugs-out\" test of the spacecraft. The test was to demonstrate all of the space vehicle systems and procedures, which included an abbreviated countdown and flight simulation. It was not classified as hazardous since the rocket would not be fueled during the test. The test's progress was delayed by problems with a cabin odor and poor communications between the ground stations and the crew. At 18:31, a fire broke out in the pure oxygen-filled cabin, killing all three crewmen.\nEmergency roles had called for White to actuate the inner hatch release handle; then, Grissom would assist him in the removal of the cover, while Chaffee would maintain communications. White had apparently tried to do his part: his body was found in his center seat, with his arms reaching over his head toward the hatch. Removing the cover to open the hatch was impossible because the plug door design required venting normally slightly greater-than-atmospheric pressure and pulling the cover into the cabin. Grissom was unable to reach the cabin vent control to his left, where the fire's source was located. The intense heat raised the cabin pressure even more, to , at which point the cabin walls ruptured. The astronauts were killed by asphyxiation, smoke inhalation, and thermal burns.\nAftermath.\nThe fire's ignition source was determined to be a spark that jumped from a wire on the far left of the spacecraft, under Grissom's seat. Their deaths were attributed to a wide range of lethal hazards in the early Apollo Command Module design: workmanship and conditions of the test, including the highly pressurized 100% oxygen pre-launch atmosphere, many wiring and plumbing flaws, flammable materials used in the cockpit and the astronauts' flight suits, and a hatch which could not be quickly opened in an emergency. After the incident, these problems were fixed, and the Apollo program carried on successfully to reach its objective of landing men on the Moon.\nWhite was buried with full military honors at West Point Cemetery while Grissom and Chaffee are both buried in Arlington National Cemetery. NASA officials attempted to pressure Patricia White, his widow, into allowing her husband also to be buried at Arlington, against what she knew to be his wishes; their efforts were foiled by astronaut Frank Borman. Patricia received $100,000 from the life insurance portion of the contract the astronauts signed to give two publishing firms exclusive rights to the stories and photographs of the astronauts and their families. She also received $16,250 annually for the life of the contract. Patricia later remarried and continued to reside in Houston. On September 6, 1983, she took her own life after surgery earlier in the year to remove a tumor.\nWhite's younger brother James resolved to follow in his older brother's footsteps. He graduated from the Air Force Academy and became a fighter pilot. He set his sights on becoming a test pilot and then an astronaut. He thought that air combat experience would facilitate this, so he volunteered for service in the Vietnam War. While flying a combat mission on November 24, 1969, with 357th Tactical Fighter Squadron, he was killed when his aircraft crashed. Nearly half a century later his remains were identified, and they were buried adjacent to White's in West Point Cemetery on June 19, 2018.\nOrganizations.\nWhite was a member of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots; associate member of Institute of Aerospace Sciences; Tau Beta Pi (Engineering Honorary); and Sigma Delta Psi (Athletic Honorary).\nAwards and honors.\nWhite and McDivitt were presented honorary doctorate degrees in astronautical science by the University of Michigan after their Gemini 4 flight. The duo were also awarded the Arnold Air Society's John F. Kennedy Trophy. White received the 1965 General Thomas D. White National Defense Award for his spacewalk. It is a trophy given by the National Geographic Society to outstanding air force personnel. He was inducted into the Aerospace Primus Club (the \"most exclusive club on Earth\") for his EVA. He was awarded the AIAA Haley Astronautics Award for 1967. The Apollo 1 crew was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal posthumously in a 1969 presentation of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to the Apollo 11 crew. President Clinton presented the White and Chaffee families with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1997 (Grissom's family received the medal in 1978).\nWhite, along with nine other Gemini astronauts, was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1982. He was inducted into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1993 and the National Aviation Hall of Fame on July 18, 2009.\nMemorials.\nSchools.\nMany schools have been named in honor of White:\nOmega Speedmaster \"Ed White\".\nThe Omega Speedmaster wristwatch reference 105.003 has come to be known as the \"Ed White\" as this reference was worn by White during his spacewalk. The Speedmaster remains the only watch qualified by NASA for EVA use.\nIn media.\nWhite was played by Steven Ruge in the 1995 film \"Apollo 13\", by Chris Isaak in the 1998 HBO miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\", and by Matt Lanter in the 2015 ABC TV series \"The Astronaut Wives Club\". In 2018, he was portrayed by Jason Clarke in \"First Man\". White's voice during the flight is used in the British band Lemon Jelly's 2003 song Space Walk.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36595", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36595", "title": "Roger B. Chaffee", "text": "American astronaut and pilot (1935\u20131967)\nRoger Bruce Chaffee (; February 15, 1935 \u2013 January 27, 1967) was an American naval officer, aviator and aeronautical engineer who was a NASA astronaut in the Apollo program.\nChaffee was born in Grand Rapids, Michigan, where he became an Eagle Scout. He graduated from Central High School in 1953, and accepted a Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC) scholarship. He began his college education at Illinois Institute of Technology, where he was involved in the fraternity Phi Kappa Sigma. He transferred to Purdue University in 1954, continuing his involvement in Phi Kappa Sigma serving as chapter president in 1956 and obtaining his private pilot's license.\nAfter graduating from Purdue in 1957 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Aeronautical Engineering, Chaffee completed his Navy training and was commissioned as an ensign. He began pilot training at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida, flying aircraft such as the T-34, T-28, and A3D. He became quality and safety control officer for Heavy Photographic Squadron 62 (VAP-62). His time in this unit included taking crucial photos of Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis, earning him the Air Medal. He was promoted to lieutenant commander in 1966.\nAlong with thirteen other pilots, Chaffee was selected to be an astronaut as part of NASA Astronaut Group 3 in 1963. He served as capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for the Gemini 3 and Gemini 4 missions and received his first spaceflight assignment in 1966 as the third-ranking pilot on Apollo 1. In 1967, he died in a fire along with fellow astronauts Virgil \"Gus\" Grissom and Ed White during a pre-launch test for the mission at what was then the Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34, Florida. He was posthumously awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor and a second Air Medal.\nEarly life.\nRoger Bruce Chaffee was born on February 15, 1935, in Grand Rapids, Michigan, the second child of Donald Lynn Chaffee (1910\u20131998) and Blanche May (Mike) Chaffee (n\u00e9e\u00a0Mosher; 1912\u20131996). He had an older sister, Donna, born two years earlier. In January 1935, in their hometown of Greenville, Michigan, his father was diagnosed with scarlet fever, so his mother moved in with her parents in Grand Rapids, where Roger was born. The family spent the next seven years in Greenville before moving to Grand Rapids, where his father took a job as the chief Army Ordnance inspector at the Doehler-Jarvis plant. Chaffee's interest in aerospace was sparked at a young age when his father, a former barnstorming pilot, took him on his first flight at the age of seven. Chaffee was thrilled by the flight and soon after started building model airplanes with his father.\nBoy Scouts.\nChaffee excelled as a Boy Scout, earning his first merit badge at the age of thirteen. He earned ten more badges that year. Many of these awards were typically earned by the older scouts. He continued his success by earning four more badges at the age of fourteen. He earned four badges for each of the next two years, almost all the badges available at the time. After becoming an Eagle Scout, he managed to earn another ten merit badges, for which he was awarded the bronze and gold palms. Between his camping trips with his family and his involvement with the Boy Scouts, Chaffee developed a passion for the outdoors.\nEducation.\nChaffee attended the Dickinson School in Grand Rapids, and later graduated from Central High School in the top 20% of his class in 1953. Turning down a possible appointment to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, he accepted a Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC) scholarship, and in September 1953 enrolled at the Illinois Institute of Technology. He performed well, making the Dean's List and finishing with a B+ average. While enrolled, he joined Phi Kappa Sigma.\nChaffee was passionate about flying, and had a strong aptitude for science and engineering. To apply those talents, he transferred to Purdue University in the autumn of 1954 to attend the school's well-known aeronautical engineering program. Before arriving in West Lafayette, he reported for an 8-week tour on as a part of the NROTC program. To qualify, he had to finish training and pass further tests. He initially failed the eye exam, but the physician permitted him to retake it the next morning, and he passed. He was then allowed to tour on \"Wisconsin\" to England, Scotland, France, and Cuba. Upon his return to American soil, he worked as a gear cutter.\nAfter starting classes at Purdue, Chaffee sought out a job to complement his coursework and involvement in the Phi Kappa Sigma social fraternity. His first job during his sophomore year was working as a server at one of the women's residences, but he disliked the job and sought new employment. He was hired as a draftsman at a small business near Purdue. As a junior, he was hired as a teaching assistant in the Mathematics Department to teach classes to freshman students. He was elected to the Tau Beta Pi national engineering honor society which is equivalent to Phi Beta Kappa in the non-engineering disciplines, and Sigma Gamma Tau engineering honor societies.\nIn 1955, Chaffee took four flying lessons, but he did not have enough money to get his private pilot's license. Two years later, the NROTC sponsored flight training for him to become a naval aviator. He soloed on March 29, 1957, and obtained his private pilot's license on May 24, 1957. He earned a Bachelor of Science degree, with distinction, in aeronautical engineering at Purdue in 1957.\nFamily.\nChaffee met his future wife Martha Louise Horn on a double-blind date in September 1955. They started dating, and he proposed to her on October 12, 1956. They married in Oklahoma City, Martha's hometown, on August 24, 1957. Martha was a homemaker. The couple had two children, Sheryl Lyn (born in 1958) and Stephen Bruce (born in 1961).\nNavy service.\nAfter graduation, Chaffee completed his Navy training on August 22, 1957, and received commission as an ensign. Following his honeymoon, he was assigned to the aircraft carrier for a six-week assignment in Norfolk with the Naval Air Force, U.S. Atlantic Fleet. By the time Chaffee arrived at the base, the ship had already left port. He temporarily worked at the base until October 1957, when he attended flight school at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida. He started his training by flying the T-28 and the T-34. He was posted to Naval Air Station Kingsville, Texas, from August 1958 to February 1959 as a part of Advanced Training Unit 212. In Kingsville, he trained on the F9F Cougar jet fighter. His daughter Sheryl was born the day before he left for his first aircraft carrier training. He was awarded his naval aviator wings in early 1959.\nChaffee was transferred to Naval Air Station Jacksonville, Florida, to continue his training. His first project was not flying, but repairing an A3D twin-engine jet photo reconnaissance plane. This plane was typically flown by pilots with the rank of lieutenant commander or above, but Chaffee became so familiar with the plane from repairing it he became one of the youngest pilots ever to fly it. He joined Attack Squadron 44 (VA-44) in September 1959, and from October 1959 to March 1960 he trained with Heavy Attack Squadron 3 (VAH-3).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere's only room for one mistake. You can buy the farm only once.\n\u2014Roger Chaffee\nChaffee received a variety of assignments and participated in multiple training duties over the next several years, spending most of his time in photo reconnaissance squadrons. He was stationed at NAS Jacksonville as safety officer and quality control officer for Heavy Photographic Squadron 62 (VAP-62) flying the A3D. He wrote a quality control manual for the squadron, although some of his peers saw this as too demanding. By coincidence, he was assigned to a mission where he flew over Cape Canaveral, during which aerial photographs of future launch sites were taken.\nBetween April 4, 1960, and October 25, 1962, including during the critical time of the Cuban Missile Crisis, Chaffee flew 82 missions over Cuba, sometimes up to three per day, and achieved over 100 flight hours each month. Some of these trips included shuttling three men per plane back and forth to Guantanamo Bay, including the pilot, co-pilot, and the photographer. Some biographies credit him with flying the U-2 plane to spy on Cuba, but this is erroneous since he was a Navy pilot and the U-2 was an Air Force plane.\nAfter this, Chaffee undertook aircraft carrier flight training, including time spent on performing both day and night flights. He said of day flying, \"Setting that big bird down on the flight deck was like landing on a postage stamp\"; and of night flying, \"Getting catapulted off that flight deck at night is like getting shot into a bottle of ink!\" While working in Jacksonville, he concurrently worked on a master's degree. He was on a cruise to Africa when his son Stephen was born in Oklahoma City.\nDuring Chaffee's Navy service he logged more than 2,300 hours flying time, including more than 2,000 hours in jet aircraft. On February 1, 1966, he was promoted to lieutenant commander.\nNASA career.\nSelection.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe world itself looks cleaner and so much more beautiful. Maybe we can make it that way\u2014the way God intended it to be\u2014by giving everybody that new perspective from out in space.\n\u2014Roger Chaffee\nIn August 1962, Chaffee confided in his family that he had submitted an application for the NASA astronaut training program, and informed his superiors of his desire to train as a test pilot for astronaut status. In mid-1962, he was accepted in the initial pool of 1,800 applicants for the third group of NASA astronauts. After his naval tour was over, and he had racked up over 1,800 hours of flying time, the Navy offered him the opportunity to continue work on his master's degree. In January 1963, he entered the U.S. Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, of Air University, to work on his Master of Science degree in reliability engineering.\nWhile at AFIT, Chaffee continued participating in astronaut candidate testing as the pool of candidates dropped to 271 in mid-1963. It was noted during testing that he had a very small lung capacity but he used it better than most people with greater capacity. On his return from a hunting trip to Fairborn, Ohio, on October 14, 1963, he found a message from NASA in Houston, Texas. He called them back, and discovered he had been chosen as an astronaut. On October 18, 1963, it was officially announced that he was one of fourteen chosen for NASA's third group of astronauts. He said, \"I was very pleased with the appointment. I've always wanted to fly and perform adventurous flying tasks all my life. Ever since the first seven Mercury astronauts were named, I've been keeping my studies up.\"\nTraining.\nPhase one of training for the third group of astronauts began in 1964 in lecture halls. Lectures in several fields were supplemented with trips to locations with geological significance so the astronauts gained hands-on experience. As well as piloting the spacecraft, the astronauts were to perform scientific experiments and measurements on the Moon. The astronauts traveled to the Grand Canyon to learn about geography and to Alaska, Iceland, and Hawaii to learn about rock formations and lava flows.\nThe second phase was contingency training, which focused on astronauts learning the skills required to survive if the landing did not occur where planned. The group started their training by being dropped off in the middle of the jungle in Panama. They performed the survival training in pairs, carrying only their parachutes and survival kits. Chaffee, with help from his Boy Scout training, foraged for enough food to survive during the three-day training mission. Following the jungle training, the astronauts traveled to an entirely different environment: the desert of Reno, Nevada. For clothing, the astronauts had only long underwear, shoes, and robes they manufactured from their parachutes. Lizards and snakes were the main source of food, and the astronauts used their parachutes as makeshift tents for shelter for the two days of desert training.\nThe third and final phase was operational training for the astronauts. This focused on giving them hands-on experience using the instruments and equipment required during their spaceflight. They received training in the effects of microgravity and rapid acceleration. The astronauts spent time in simulators, aboard cargo planes that simulated weightlessness, underwater to practice extravehicular activities (EVAs), and on visits to manufacturing plants to check on the progress of the hardware.\nProject Gemini.\nEvery astronaut was required to have a specialty, and Chaffee's specialty was communications. He focused on the Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (DSIF), which the astronauts needed for navigation in space.\nAt the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Chaffee served as capsule communicator (CAPCOM) in March 1965 for Gemini 3. Later that year, he was CAPCOM, along with Virgil \"Gus\" Grissom and Eugene Cernan, for the Gemini 4 mission, in which Ed White performed the first spacewalk by an American. As CAPCOM, Chaffee relayed information between the crew members and the Director of Flight Operations, Chris Kraft. He never got a seat on a Gemini mission, but was assigned to work on flight control, communications, instrumentation, and attitude and translation control systems in the Apollo program. During this time, along with Grissom, he also flew chase planes at an altitude of between to take motion pictures of the launch of an uncrewed Saturn 1B rocket.\nApollo program.\nChaffee received his first spaceflight assignment in January 1966, when he was selected for the first crewed Apollo-Saturn flight, AS-204. At the time, he was the youngest American astronaut to be selected for a mission. Joining Command Pilot Grissom and Senior Pilot White, he replaced the injured Donn F. Eisele in the third-ranked pilot position. Eisele required surgery for a dislocated shoulder, which he sustained aboard the KC-135 weightlessness training aircraft. He was reassigned to a second Apollo crew, commanded by Wally Schirra.\nThe crew announcement was made public on March 21, 1966. The two-week flight of Apollo1 was to test the spacecraft systems and the control and ground tracking facilities. While Chaffee had monitored the manufacture of the Gemini spacecraft, he had not witnessed the building of the Apollo spacecraft. Three days after being selected for the Apollo1 crew, he flew to the North American Aviation Plant in Downey, California, to see it.\nLater in April, the crew traveled to Chapel Hill, North Carolina, to study stars that were programmed into their flight computer. In October, the six crewmembers planned to test the spacecraft in sea level and altitude conditions. The failure of an oxygen regulator prevented them from performing the vacuum test, but they managed to complete the sea level test. They also performed egress tests, where capsule simulators were dropped in the Gulf of Mexico under various conditions and the crew had to exit the spacecraft. The crew was able to spend time with their families at Christmas. Chaffee entered a local Christmas decoration contest and he received first prize. Four Purdue astronauts were requested to attend the Rose Bowl as guests of honor; Grissom, Gene Cernan, Neil Armstrong, and Chaffee attended the game on January 2, 1967. Progress on pre-mission activities was nearing completion; NASA announced on Monday, January 23, that February 21 was the target launch date. The primary and backup crews moved back to the Cape for the last few weeks of training. They had their own living quarters, a private waiter and chef, and gymnasium to remain fit.\nOn Friday, January 27, Grissom, White, and Chaffee were participating in a \"plugs-out\" countdown demonstration test at Cape Kennedy in preparation for the planned February 21 launch. Chaffee was sitting at the right side of the cabin. His main role was to maintain communications with the blockhouse. A momentary power surge was detected at 23:30:55 GMT (6:30 pm EST), which was believed to accompany an electrical short in equipment located on the lower left side of the cabin, the presumed ignition source for the fire. At 23:31:04 GMT, a voice was heard declaring, \"[We]'ve got a fire in the cockpit.\" Most investigative listeners believe that voice was Chaffee's.\nAssigned emergency roles called for Grissom, in the left-hand seat, to open the cabin pressure vent valve, after which White in the center seat was to open the plug door hatch, while Chaffee in the right-hand seat was to maintain communications. Grissom was prevented from opening the valve by the intensity of the fire, which started in that region and spread from left to right. Despite this, White removed his restraints and apparently tried in vain to open the hatch, which was held closed by the cabin pressure. The increasing pressure finally burst the inner cabin wall on the right-hand side at 23:31:19 GMT. After approximately thirty seconds of being fed by a cabin atmosphere of pure oxygen at pressures of , and now fed by nitrogen-buffered ambient air, the primary fire decreased in intensity and started producing large amounts of smoke, which killed the astronauts. Chaffee lost consciousness because of a lack of oxygen which sent him into cardiac arrest. He died from asphyxia due to the toxic gases from the fire, with burns contributing to his death.\nFailed oxygen and ethylene glycol pipes near the fire's origin point continued burning an intense secondary fire which melted through the cabin floor. By the time firefighters were able to open the hatch, the fire had extinguished itself. The back of Chaffee's couch was found in the horizontal position, with the lower portion angled towards the floor. His helmet was closed and locked, his restraints were undone, and the hoses and electrical connections to the suit remained connected. As he was farthest from the origin of the fire, he suffered the least burn and suit damage.\nAftermath.\nShortly after the AS-204 fire in 1967, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Spaceflight George Mueller announced the mission would be officially designated as Apollo 1. The capsule underwent a significant redesign as a result of the disaster. The atmosphere in the cabin was changed from 100% oxygen to a 60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen environment at launch. The astronauts' spacesuits, originally made of nylon, were changed to beta cloth, a non-flammable, highly melt-resistant fabric woven from fiberglass and coated with Teflon. There were other changes, including replacing flammable cabin materials with self-extinguishing ones, and covering plumbing and wiring with protective insulation.\nChaffee and Grissom were buried in Arlington National Cemetery, while White was buried at West Point Cemetery. Chaffee's widow received $100,000 from the life insurance portion of the contract the astronauts signed with two publishing firms so they would have exclusive rights to stories and photographs of the astronauts and their families. She also received $16,250 per year for the life of the contract.\nMemorials.\nChaffee is memorialized in many ways, from the Chaffee Crater on the far side of the Moon, to the Roger B. Chaffee Planetarium in his hometown of Grand Rapids, Michigan. When the Kent County International Airport relocated farther out in suburban Grand Rapids in 1963, the main runway of the original airport was repurposed into a major roadway and named Roger B. Chaffee Boulevard. Another memorial is a hill on Mars, Chaffee Hill, south-southwest of Columbia Memorial Station, part of the Apollo 1 Hills. \"Regor\" (\"Roger\" spelled backwards), is a seldom-used nickname for the star Gamma Velorum. Grissom used this name, plus two others for White and himself, on his Apollo1 mission planning star charts as a joke, and the succeeding Apollo astronauts kept using the names as a memorial. A terrestrial memorial is Chaffee Island, an artificial island off Long Beach, California, created in 1966 for drilling oil (along with White, Grissom and Freeman Islands). A park in Fullerton, California, was named after Chaffee; parks were also named after his fellow Apollo1 comrades. Chaffee is named with his Apollo1 crewmates on the Space Mirror Memorial, which was dedicated in 1991. Chaffee's name is included on the plaque left on the Moon with the \"Fallen Astronaut\" statue in 1971 by the crew of Apollo 15.\nThe dismantled Launch Pad 34 at Cape Canaveral bears two memorial plaques:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They gave their lives in service to their country in the ongoing exploration of humankind's final frontier. Remember them not for how they died but for those ideals for which they lived.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In memory of those who made the ultimate sacrifice so others could reach for the stars. Ad astra per aspera (a rough road leads to the stars). God speed to the crew of Apollo 1.\nThe Roger B. Chaffee scholarship named for him has been awarded annually since 1967 to exceptional students in the Kent Intermediate School District for high school seniors who will be pursuing a career in math and science. Chaffee Hall, an engineering building, was dedicated to him at his alma mater, Purdue University, in 1968. Grissom High School, Ed White Middle School and Chaffee Elementary School in Huntsville, Alabama, were named for the Apollo1 astronauts.\nRoger That! is an annual event sponsored by the Grand Rapids Public Museum and Grand Valley State University that celebrates space exploration and the life of Chaffee, who was a Grand Rapids native.\nAwards and honors.\nChaffee was awarded the Navy Air Medal for his involvement in Heavy Photographic Squadron 62. He completed 82 classified missions \"of paramount military importance to the security of the United States\". The Apollo1 crew was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal posthumously in a 1969 presentation of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to the Apollo 11 crew. He was posthumously awarded a second Air Medal. He was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1983 and into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame, on October 4, 1997. Chaffee and White were awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor posthumously in 1997 (Grissom received the medal in 1978). He was later awarded the NASA Ambassador of Exploration Award for involvement in the U.S. space program in 2007.\nOn the television show \"\" a fictional 24th century spacecraft was named after him, designed by Doug Drexler. They named it after Chaffee as a reminder about the dangers of space exploration. \"Star Trek\" and NASA have a long history of collaborations going back to the late 1960s when the television show made its debut.\nIn 2018 a life-size bronze statue of Chaffee was unveiled outside the Grand Rapids Children's Museum in Chaffee's hometown. His wife, other family members, and astronaut Jack Lousma (a Grand Rapids native) were present for the event.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36596", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36596", "title": "Apollo 204", "text": ""}
{"id": "36598", "revid": "40721479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36598", "title": "AS-204", "text": "AS-204 was a Saturn IB launch vehicle that is associated with two missions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "36599", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36599", "title": "Apollo One", "text": ""}
{"id": "36600", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36600", "title": "ECMA", "text": "ECMA or Ecma may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36601", "revid": "37401930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36601", "title": "Loire (department)", "text": "Department in Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes, France\nLoire (; ; ; or \"Leir\") is a landlocked department in the Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region of France occupying the river Loire's upper reaches. Its prefecture is Saint-\u00c9tienne. It had a population of 765,634 in 2019.\nHistory.\nLoire was created in 1793 when the Rh\u00f4ne-et-Loire d\u00e9partement was split into two, about three years after it was created in 1790. This was a response to counter-revolutionary activities in Lyon which, by population, was the country's second largest city. By splitting Rh\u00f4ne-et-Loire the government sought to protect the French Revolution from the potential power and influence of counter revolutionary activity in the Lyon region.\nThe Loire d\u00e9partement roughly corresponds to the former province of Forez.\nThe departmental capitals (prefectures) throughout its history are as follows:\nGeography.\nLoire is part of the current administrative region of Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes and is surrounded by the d\u00e9partements of Rh\u00f4ne, Is\u00e8re, Ard\u00e8che, Haute-Loire, Puy-de-D\u00f4me, Allier, and Sa\u00f4ne-et-Loire.\nThe river Loire traverses the department from south to north.\nThe Loire d\u00e9partement is divided into three arrondissements:\nParts of the department belong to Parc naturel r\u00e9gional Livradois-Forez.\nDemographics.\nThe inhabitants of the d\u00e9partement are called \"Lig\u00e9riens\". The industrial city of Saint-\u00c9tienne with its agglomeration contains about half of the inhabitants of the d\u00e9partement.\nPopulation development since 1801:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is Saint-\u00c9tienne, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 6 communes with more than 15,000 inhabitants:\nPolitics.\nThe president of the Departmental Council is Georges Ziegler, elected in October 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36603", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36603", "title": "Rotaxane", "text": "Interlocked molecular structure resembling a dumbbell\nA rotaxane (from la \" rota\"\u00a0'wheel' and \" axis\"\u00a0'axle') is a mechanically interlocked molecular architecture consisting of a dumbbell-shaped molecule which is threaded through a macrocycle (see graphical representation). The two components of a rotaxane are kinetically trapped since the ends of the dumbbell (often called \"stoppers\") are larger than the internal diameter of the ring and prevent dissociation (unthreading) of the components since this would require significant distortion of the covalent bonds.\nMuch of the research concerning rotaxanes and other mechanically interlocked molecular architectures, such as catenanes, has been focused on their efficient synthesis or their utilization as artificial molecular machines. However, examples of rotaxane substructure have been found in naturally occurring peptides, including: cystine knot peptides, cyclotides or lasso-peptides such as microcin J25.\nSynthesis.\nThe earliest reported synthesis of a rotaxane in 1967 relied on the statistical probability that if two halves of a dumbbell-shaped molecule were reacted in the presence of a macrocycle that some small percentage would connect through the ring. To obtain a reasonable quantity of rotaxane, the macrocycle was attached to a solid-phase support and treated with both halves of the dumbbell 70 times and then severed from the support to give a 6% yield. However, the synthesis of rotaxanes has advanced significantly and efficient yields can be obtained by preorganizing the components utilizing hydrogen bonding, metal coordination, hydrophobic forces, covalent bonds, or coulombic interactions. The three most common strategies to synthesize rotaxane are \"capping\", \"clipping\", and \"slipping\", though others do exist. Recently, Leigh and co-workers described a new pathway to mechanically interlocked architectures involving a transition-metal center that can catalyse a reaction through the cavity of a macrocycle.\nCapping.\nSynthesis via the capping method relies strongly upon a thermodynamically driven template effect; that is, the \"thread\" is held within the \"macrocycle\" by non-covalent interactions, for example rotaxinations with cyclodextrin macrocycles involve exploitation of the hydrophobic effect. This dynamic complex or pseudorotaxane is then converted to the rotaxane by reacting the ends of the threaded guest with large groups, preventing disassociation.\nClipping.\nThe clipping method is similar to the capping reaction except that in this case the dumbbell shaped molecule is complete and is bound to a partial macrocycle. The partial macrocycle then undergoes a ring closing reaction around the dumbbell-shaped molecule, forming the rotaxane.\nSlipping.\nThe method of slipping is one which exploits the thermodynamic stability of the rotaxane. If the end groups of the dumbbell are an appropriate size it will be able to reversibly thread through the macrocycle at higher temperatures. By cooling the dynamic complex, it becomes kinetically trapped as a rotaxane at the lower temperature.\nSnapping.\nSnapping involves two separate parts of the thread, both containing a bulky group. one part of the thread is then threaded to the macrocycle, forming a semi rotaxane, and end is closed of by the other part of the thread forming the rotaxane.\n\"Active template\" methodology.\nLeigh and co-workers recently began to explore a strategy in which template ions could also play an active role in promoting the crucial final covalent bond forming reaction that captures the interlocked structure (i.e., the metal has a dual function, acting as a template for entwining the precursors and catalyzing covalent bond formation between the reactants).\nPotential applications.\nMolecular machines.\nRotaxane-based molecular machines have been of initial interest for their potential use in molecular electronics as logic molecular switching elements and as molecular shuttles. These molecular machines are usually based on the movement of the macrocycle on the dumbbell. The macrocycle can rotate around the axis of the dumbbell like a wheel and axle or it can slide along its axis from one site to another. Controlling the position of the macrocycle allows the rotaxane to function as a molecular switch, with each possible location of the macrocycle corresponding to a different state. These rotaxane machines can be manipulated both by chemical and photochemical inputs. Rotaxane based systems have also been shown to function as molecular muscles. In 2009, there was a report of a \"domino effect\" from one extremity to the other in a Glycorotaxane Molecular Machine. In this case, the 4\"C\"1 or 1\"C\"4 chair-like conformation of the mannopyranoside stopper can be controlled, depending on the localization of the macrocycle. In 2012, unique pseudo-macrocycles consisting of double-lasso molecular machines (also called rotamacrocycles) were reported in Chem. Sci. These structures can be tightened or loosened depending on pH. A controllable jump rope movement was also observed in these new molecular machines.\nUltrastable dyes.\nPotential application as long-lasting dyes is based on the enhanced stability of the inner portion of the dumbbell-shaped molecule. Studies with cyclodextrin-protected rotaxane azo dyes established this characteristic. More reactive squaraine dyes have also been shown to have enhanced stability by preventing nucleophilic attack of the inner squaraine moiety. The enhanced stability of rotaxane dyes is attributed to the insulating effect of the macrocycle, which is able to block interactions with other molecules.\nNanorecording.\nIn a nanorecording application, a certain rotaxane is deposited as a Langmuir\u2013Blodgett film on ITO-coated glass. When a positive voltage is applied with the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope probe, the rotaxane rings in the tip area switch to a different part of the dumbbell and the resulting new conformation makes the molecules stick out 0.3 nanometer from the surface. This height difference is sufficient for a memory dot. It is not yet known how to erase such a nanorecording film.\nNomenclature.\nAccepted nomenclature is to designate the number of components of the rotaxane in brackets as a prefix. Therefore, the rotaxane consisting of a single dumbbell-shaped axial molecule with a single macrocycle around its shaft is called a [2]rotaxane, and two cyanostar molecules around the central phosphate group of dialkylphosphate is a [3]rotaxane.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36605", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36605", "title": "Molecular electronics", "text": "Branch of chemistry and electronics\nMolecular electronics is the study and application of molecular building blocks for the fabrication of electronic components. It is an interdisciplinary area that spans physics, chemistry, and materials science. It provides a potential means to extend Moore's Law beyond the foreseen limits of small-scale conventional silicon integrated circuits.\nMolecular scale electronics.\nMolecular scale electronics, also called single-molecule electronics, is a branch of nanotechnology that uses single molecules, or nanoscale collections of single molecules, as electronic components. Because single molecules constitute the smallest stable structures possible, this miniaturization is the ultimate goal for shrinking electrical circuits.\nConventional electronic devices are traditionally made from bulk materials. Bulk methods have inherent limits, and are growing increasingly demanding and costly. Thus, the idea was born that the components could instead be built up atom by atom in a chemistry lab (bottom up) as opposed to carving them out of bulk material (top down). In single-molecule electronics, the bulk material is replaced by single molecules. The molecules used have properties that resemble traditional electronic components such as a wire, transistor, or rectifier.\nSingle-molecule electronics is an emerging field, and entire electronic circuits consisting exclusively of molecular sized compounds are still very far from being realized. However, the continuous demand for more computing power, together with the inherent limits of the present day lithographic methods make the transition seem unavoidable. Currently, the focus is on discovering molecules with interesting properties and on finding ways to obtain reliable and reproducible contacts between the molecular components and the bulk material of the electrodes.\nMolecular electronics operates at distances less than 100 nanometers. Miniaturization down to single molecules brings the scale down to a regime where quantum mechanics effects are important. In contrast to the case in conventional electronic components, where electrons can be filled in or drawn out more or less like a continuous flow of electric charge, the transfer of a single electron alters the system significantly. The significant amount of energy due to charging has to be taken into account when making calculations about the electronic properties of the setup and is highly sensitive to distances to conducting surfaces nearby.\nOne of the biggest problems with measuring on single molecules is to establish reproducible electrical contact with only one molecule and doing so without shortcutting the electrodes. Because the current photolithographic technology is unable to produce electrode gaps small enough to contact both ends of the molecules tested (in the order of nanometers), alternative strategies are used. These include molecular-sized gaps called break junctions, in which a thin electrode is stretched until it breaks. One of the ways to overcome the gap size issue is by trapping molecular functionalized nanoparticles (internanoparticle spacing is matchable to the size of molecules), and later target the molecule by place exchange reaction.\nAnother method is to use the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to contact molecules adhered at the other end to a metal substrate. Another popular way to anchor molecules to the electrodes is to make use of sulfur's high chemical affinity to gold; though useful, the anchoring is non-specific and thus anchors the molecules randomly to all gold surfaces, and the contact resistance is highly dependent on the precise atomic geometry around the site of anchoring and thereby inherently compromises the reproducibility of the connection. To circumvent the latter issue, experiments have shown that fullerenes could be a good candidate for use instead of sulfur because of the large conjugated \u03c0-system that can electrically contact many more atoms at once than a single atom of sulfur.\nThe shift from metal electrodes to semiconductor electrodes allows for more tailored properties and thus for more interesting applications. There are some concepts for contacting organic molecules using semiconductor-only electrodes, for example by using indium arsenide nanowires with an embedded segment of the wider bandgap material indium phosphide used as an electronic barrier to be bridged by molecules.\nOne of the biggest hindrances for single-molecule electronics to be commercially exploited is the lack of means to connect a molecular sized circuit to bulk electrodes in a way that gives reproducible results. Also problematic is that some measurements on single molecules are done at cryogenic temperatures, near absolute zero, which is very energy consuming.\nHistory.\nThe first time in history molecular electronics are mentioned was in 1956 by the German physicist Arthur von Hippel, who suggested a bottom-up procedure of developing electronics from atoms and molecules rather than using prefabricated materials, an idea he named molecular engineering. However the first breakthrough in the field is considered by many the article by Aviram and Ratner in 1974. In this article named Molecular Rectifiers, they presented a theoretical calculation of transport through a modified charge-transfer molecule with donor acceptor groups that would allow transport only in one direction, essentially like a semiconductor diode. This was a breakthrough that inspired many years of research in the field of molecular electronics.\nMolecular materials for electronics.\nThe biggest advantage of conductive polymers is their processability, mainly by dispersion. Conductive polymers are not plastics, i.e., they are not thermoformable, yet they are organic polymers, like (insulating) polymers. They can offer high electrical conductivity but have different mechanical properties than other commercially used polymers. The electrical properties can be fine-tuned using the methods of organic synthesis and of advanced dispersion.\nThe linear-backbone polymers such as polyacetylene, polypyrrole, and polyaniline are the main classes of conductive polymers. Poly(3-alkylthiophenes) are the archetypical materials for solar cells and transistors.\nConducting polymers have backbones of contiguous sp2 hybridized carbon centers. One valence electron on each center resides in a pz orbital, which is orthogonal to the other three sigma-bonds. The electrons in these delocalized orbitals have high mobility when the material is \"doped\" by oxidation, which removes some of these delocalized electrons. Thus the conjugated p-orbitals form a one-dimensional electronic band, and the electrons within this band become mobile when it is emptied partly. Despite intensive research, the relationship between morphology, chain structure, and conductivity is poorly understood yet.\nDue to their poor processability, conductive polymers have few large-scale applications. They have some promise in antistatic materials and have been built into commercial displays and batteries, but have had limits due to the production costs, material inconsistencies, toxicity, poor solubility in solvents, and inability to directly melt process. Nevertheless, conducting polymers are rapidly gaining attraction in new uses with increasingly processable materials with better electrical and physical properties and lower costs. With the availability of stable and reproducible dispersions, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and polyaniline have gained some large-scale applications. While PEDOT is mainly used in antistatic applications and as a transparent conductive layer in the form of PEDOT and polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSS, mixed form: PEDOT:PSS) dispersions, polyaniline is widely used to make printed circuit boards, in the final finish, to protect copper from corrosion and preventing its solderability. Newer nanostructured forms of conducting polymers provide fresh impetus to this field, with their higher surface area and better dispersability.\nRecently supramolecular chemistry has been introduced to the field, which provide new opportunity for developing next generation of molecular electronics. For example, two orders of magnitude current intensity enhancement was achieved by inserting cationic molecules into the cavity of pillar[5]arene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36610", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36610", "title": "1097", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1097 (MXCVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36611", "revid": "42151856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36611", "title": "The Stone Roses", "text": "English rock band\nThe Stone Roses were an English rock band formed in Manchester in 1983. They were one of the pioneering groups of the Madchester movement in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The band's classic and most prominent lineup consisted of vocalist Ian Brown, guitarist John Squire, bassist Gary \"Mani\" Mounfield, and drummer Alan \"Reni\" Wren.\nThe Stone Roses released their eponymous debut album in 1989. The album was a breakthrough success for the band, receiving widespread critical acclaim, and is regarded by many as one of the greatest British albums ever recorded. Following this success, the band sought to capitalize on their newfound fame by signing with a major label. However, their record label at the time, Silvertone, would not let them out of their contract, leading to a lengthy legal battle that culminated with the band signing with Geffen Records in 1991.\nThe Stone Roses released their second album, \"Second Coming\", in 1994, which received mixed reviews. The group soon disbanded after several lineup changes throughout the supporting tour, which began with Reni departing in early 1995, followed by Squire in April 1996. Brown and Mani dissolved the remains of the group in October 1996 following their appearance at the Reading Festival.\nFollowing much media speculation, the Stone Roses announced their reunion on 18 October 2011 and embarked on a world tour in 2012, including three homecoming shows in Heaton Park, Manchester. Plans to record a third album were also floated, but only two singles were released. In June 2012, Chris Coghill, the writer of the film \"Spike Island\", revealed that the band \"have at least three or four new tracks recorded\". In June 2013, a documentary about the band's reformation, directed by Shane Meadows and titled \"\", was released.\nIn 2016, the Stone Roses released their first new material in two decades. The band continued to tour until June 2017, at which point cryptic remarks by Brown indicated that the band had split again. This was later confirmed in a 2019 interview with Squire.\nHistory.\nFormation (1983\u20131984).\nIan Brown (initially the bassist) and guitarist John Squire, who knew each other from Altrincham Grammar School for Boys, formed a short-lived Clash-inspired band, The Patrol, in 1980 along with singer/guitarist Andy Couzens and drummer Simon Wolstencroft. They played several gigs in 1980 and recorded a demo tape, but towards the end of that year, they decided on a change of direction. During their last Patrol show, Brown had a taste of being a frontman, singing Sweet's \"Block Buster!\" to close the set. Pete Garner, a friend and roadie, stood in on bass while Couzens wanted to focus on guitar.\nIn 1981, the band members lost enthusiasm. Brown sold his bass guitar to buy a scooter, and Wolstencroft joined Johnny Marr and Andy Rourke's pre-The Smiths band Freak Party. Squire continued to practise guitar while working as an animator for Cosgrove Hall during the day, while Brown ran a Northern soul night in a Salford club. \nSquire and Couzens started a new band, the Fireside Chaps, with bassist Gary \"Mani\" Mounfield, later recruiting a singer named David \"Kaiser\" Carty and drummer Chris Goodwin. They changed their name to the Waterfront (after the 1954 film \"On the Waterfront\"), their sound influenced by 1960s groups and contemporary bands such as Orange Juice. Goodwin left before the band recorded their first demo and, shortly after it, Squire asked Brown to join as singer. A meeting with Geno Washington at a party at Brown's flat in Hulme, in which Washington told Brown that he would be a star and should be a singer, convinced Brown to take Squire up on his offer. Brown joined the Waterfront in late 1983, for a time sharing vocals with Kaiser.\nLike the earlier attempts at bands, the Waterfront fizzled out. In late 1983, Couzens decided to try again by starting a band and approached Brown. They decided on Wolstencroft (who had turned down the job of drummer in the Smiths) as drummer and Pete Garner as bassist (despite his admission that he could not play anything but \"Block Buster!\"). They also decided that they needed Squire in the band, and when he agreed the band's lineup was cemented. Leaving their previous bands behind, they worked solely on new material. Brown's vocal limitations prompted him to take singing lessons for three weeks. After rehearsing for some time without a band name, Squire came up with \"The Stone Roses\". Several stories later emerged suggesting that the band had initially been called \"English Rose\" or that the name was somehow linked to the Rolling Stones. These stories were untrue, Brown explaining: \"No, I don't know where that English Rose story came from. John thought up the name 'Stone Roses' - something with a contrast, two words that went against each other\". The band rehearsed for six months, during which time Wolstencroft had been auditioning for other bands, and he left to join Terry Hall's band the Colourfield. They got Goodwin to rejoin, but he lasted for only one rehearsal, so they advertised for a replacement and began auditioning, eventually recruiting Alan \"Reni\" Wren in May 1984.\nAfter rehearsing and writing songs over the summer, they recorded their first demo in late August, making 100 cassettes with artwork by Squire, and set about trying to get gigs. They played their first gig as the Stone Roses on 23 October 1984, supporting Pete Townshend at an anti-heroin concert at the Moonlight Club in London. Brown had sent a demo with an accompanying letter: \"I'm surrounded by skagheads, I wanna smash 'em. Can you give us a show?\" The show was seen by journalists including \"Sounds\"' Garry Johnson, who arranged to interview the band a few weeks later. The band received management offers and more gigs soon followed.\nHoward \"Ginger\" Jones, who had recently left his job as director and general manager of the Ha\u00e7ienda, producer Martin Hannett and Tim Chambers agreed to work with the band on an album, setting up Thin Line Records to release it. Jones took on management of the band, although they had already made a similar agreement with Caroline Reed in London. The band got their first positive press in late December, with Johnson tipping them for success in 1985 in \"Sounds\" magazine. A feature on the band followed in January.\nEarly tour and releases (1985\u20131988).\nThe band played their first headlining gig on 4 January 1985, supported by Last Party, after original headliners Mercenary Skank had pulled out. They had their first recording session with Martin Hannett in January 1985 at Strawberry Studios in Stockport, aiming to record tracks for a debut single and an album. Further sessions followed in March, during which they recorded their debut single, the double A-side \"So Young\"/\"Tell Me\". The band were invited to play a live session on Piccadilly Radio in March, premiering a new song, \"I Wanna Be Adored\". Tony Michaelides (aka Tony the Greek) from the station arranged for five local bands to play at Dingwalls in London on 8 February: Glee Company, Communal Drop, Fictitious Names, Laugh, and the Stone Roses. Mark Radcliffe, another Piccadilly DJ, was comp\u00e8re for the night. By this time, the Stone Roses had started to build a sizeable following in Manchester. Their first gig in the North of England, at Clouds in Preston, attracted a large audience and descended into a riot after technical problems and friction between the bands on the bill.\nThe Roses embarked on a tour of Sweden in April, with their first gig in Manchester following their return, at International 1, a venue run by future Stone Roses managers Matthew Cummins and Gareth Evans. A performance at a warehouse party on 20 July helped to build interest in the band, and in August they returned to the studio to record their debut album. Unhappy with the results and with the band's sound changing, it was shelved (later released as \"Garage Flower\"). The \"So Young\"/\"Tell Me\" single, however, was released on Thin Line Records in September.\nFrustrated with the lack of attention they were getting locally, the band engaged in a graffiti campaign, with Ian Brown and Reni spraying the band's name on walls from West Didsbury to the city centre. This brought them negative publicity but added to their increasing notoriety. In 1986, they began working on new material, including \"Sally Cinnamon\", and the planned follow-up singles to \"So Young\" (\"I Wanna Be Adored\" and \"This Is the One\") were shelved. They parted company with Jones and took on Gareth Evans as manager, using Evans' International 1 venue as their new rehearsal space. Around this time, the band played several UK tour dates, including 11 August 1986 at the Mardi Gras club in Liverpool with local promoter and record label owner Ken Kelly and his band Innervision, at which several record company executives would be in attendance.\nAs Brown and John Squire began collaborating more closely on songwriting, they decided to take a larger slice of the money than the other band members. Andy Couzens and Reni left the band in protest, although they soon returned. Couzens played an ill-fated gig with the band at the end of May before being pushed out of the band by Evans after flying home alone while the rest of the band returned in their van. Although they failed to achieve further success in 1986, their repertoire expanded to include songs such as \"Sugar Spun Sister\", influenced by bands like the Jesus &amp; Mary Chain and the indie-pop era Primal Scream (\"Velocity Girl\" being a major influence on \"Made of Stone\"), and they stopped playing the older songs.\nIn December 1986, they recorded their first demo as a four-piece, including the first studio recordings of \"Sugar Spun Sister\" and \"Elephant Stone\". In early 1987, Evans negotiated a deal with Black/FM Revolver for a one-off release on the specially created Black Records label. By the time of the release of the single \"Sally Cinnamon\", the group's sound had changed considerably, with chiming guitar hooks and a strong melody, alienating some of their old fans but attracting many new ones. \"Sally Cinnamon\" sold out its 1,000-copy run but failed to make the desired impact.\nIn June, Pete Garner announced that he had decided to leave the band, although he stayed until they found a replacement. He played his final gig with the band at the 'Larks in the Park' festival in Liverpool. Rob Hampson was Garner's replacement, with Garner teaching him the bass parts before leaving, although Hampson lasted only a week. A more permanent replacement was found in the form of former Waterfront bassist Mani, who played his first gig with the band in November 1987. Brown recalled, \"When Mani joined it almost changed overnight. It became a totally different groove ... Straight away, everything just fell into place\".\nIn early 1988, the band played at Dingwalls in London, a show attended by representatives of Zomba and Rough Trade's Geoff Travis, and both subsequently wanted to sign the band. Rough Trade even funded studio time to record a single, \"Elephant Stone\", with Peter Hook producing. Hook was considered to produce an album for the band but was unavailable due to commitments with New Order, so Travis suggested John Leckie. In May, the band played a high-profile concert at Manchester's International 2 with James, organized by Dave Haslam to raise funds for a campaign against Clause 28. The band attempted to usurp James by putting up posters around town listing the Stone Roses as headliners and delaying their start time to get the headline slot themselves and limit the time that James could play for. In the audience was a sixteen-year-old Liam Gallagher, who was inspired to form a band himself. Noel Gallagher also stated that he was inspired to do the same by attending one of their gigs. Also in the audience was Glaswegian Roddy McKenna, A&amp;R executive with Zomba, who later signed the band to the label. He asked if they could be transferred internally to Andrew Lauder's newly created guitar-based Silvertone Records subsidiary. The band signed an eight-album deal, buying the \"Elephant Stone\" tapes from Rough Trade and releasing them as a single in October 1988.\nThe band were co-managed by Matthew Cummins, who died in 2007 following an accident. DJ Dave Booth was also influential in the band's early days, supporting their live performances at warehouse parties.\nDebut album and breakthrough success (1989\u20131991).\nIn 1988 and early 1989 the Stone Roses recorded their debut album at Battery Studios and Konk Studios in London and Rockfield Studios in Wales, produced by Leckie. The first single for Silvertone, \"Elephant Stone\", made little impact, and in early 1989 the band's performances outside the north-west were still attracting small audiences. \"Made of Stone\" received more press attention and was picked up for airplay by DJ Richard Skinner on his late night Radio One show, but peaked at number ninety on the UK Singles Chart. \"The Stone Roses\" was released in April / May 1989, initially to mostly positive reviews, and entered the UK Albums Chart at number 32 in mid-May, the highest position it would reach that year. This was followed with the single \"She Bangs the Drums\", which gave them a top forty UK hit, and a number one on the UK Independent Chart, and by that point they were receiving much greater press attention and were selling out shows across the country. The band gained widespread notoriety when, one minute into a live 1989 TV performance on the BBC's \"The Late Show\", the power failed, prompting Ian Brown to repeatedly squeal \"Amateurs!\" at Tracey MacLeod. Later in 1989 the band released a double A-side single, \"Fools Gold\"/\"What the World Is Waiting For\", which reached number eight on the UK Singles Chart in November. Originally intended as a B-side, \"Fools Gold\" quickly became the Roses' most famous song and a performance of it on \"Top of the Pops\" cemented their national fame. It gave them their first top ten hit and the album rose to number nineteen in the chart early the following year.\nTheir biggest headline gigs in 1989 were to 4,000 people at Blackpool's Empress Ballroom on Saturday 12 August and to 7,000 people at London's Alexandra Palace on Saturday 18 November. The former of these was released as a in 1991 and later on YouTube.\nThe group won four \"NME\" Readers poll awards that year; Band of the Year, Best New Band, Single of the Year (for \"Fools Gold\") and Album of the Year (for their debut album). \"The Stone Roses\" is now considered one of the greatest British albums, although the band themselves were unhappy with the sound on the album, Squire describing it as \"twee\" and not \"fat or hard enough\". Ian Brown was quoted in \"NME\" in December 1989 as saying \"We're the most important group in the world, because we've got the best songs and we haven't even begun to show our potential yet.\"\nIn 1990, the Stone Roses' infamous paint attack on Revolver Records occurred, as a result of a conflict between the band and the label. The band was unhappy with how the label handled the release of their single \"Sally Cinnamon\" and the accompanying video without their permission.\nTo express their frustration, they decided to take matters into their own hands by visiting the label's office and throwing paint at the staff and property, including label founder Paul Birch's wife. The incident caused significant damage and led to legal consequences for the band members. \nIn the BBC documentary \"Blood on the Turntable: War of the Roses\", Mani said that the group asked to stop at FADS DIY store in Northenden, on the outskirts of Manchester, to get tins of paint and overalls so Squire could \"do some art\".\nThe band were subsequently arrested and appeared at Wolverhampton Magistrates' Court, charged with causing \u00a315,000\u201320,000 in damage.\nFollowing the incident, Mr Birch said he estimated that the media hype alone had bought the group in excess of a quarter of a million pounds in publicity.\nMani said that Geezer Butler and Tony Iommi from Black Sabbath congratulated them for the incident.\nThe Stone Roses' outdoor concert at Spike Island in Widnes on 27 May 1990 was attended by some 27,000 people, the support acts included DJs Dave Haslam, Paul Oakenfold, Frankie Bones, Dave Booth, a Zimbabwean drum orchestra, and the reggae artist Gary Clail. The event, considered a failure at the time due to sound problems and bad organisation, has become legendary over the years as a \"Woodstock for the baggy generation\". In mid-2010 footage of the concert was published on YouTube.\nBy July the band had released their final single for Silvertone, \"One Love\", which reached number four in the UK Singles Chart, their highest placing yet. It was to be the Roses' last original release for four years as they entered a protracted legal battle to terminate their five-year contract with Silvertone, unhappy with how they had been paid by the label. Silvertone owners Zomba Records took out an injunction against the band in September 1990 to prevent them from recording with any other label, but in May 1991 the court sided with the group, which was then released from its contract. The Stone Roses subsequently signed with Geffen Records (garnering a million-pound advance for their next record) and began work on their second album. However, Silvertone appealed against the ruling, delaying the record for another year.\n\"Second Coming\" and breakup (1992\u20131996).\nFollowing the court case the Stone Roses separated themselves from Manchester's club culture and spent much of 1992 and 1993 travelling in Europe before starting work on their second album in mid-1993. Progress was slow, hampered by Brown's and Squire's new fatherhood and the death of several people close to the band. John Leckie ultimately left the project as the band would not sign a production contract. Afterwards the Stone Roses assumed production duties with engineer Simon Dawson at Rockfield Studios in Wales, where they spent 347 ten-hour days working on the album.\nThe Stone Roses finally released the album, \"Second Coming\", on 5 December 1994. Mostly written by John Squire, the music now had a shady, heavy blues rock sound, dominated by Squire's guitar riffs and solos. \"Love Spreads\" reached number two on the UK Singles Chart. \"Second Coming\" received a mixed reception from the British press, which music journalist Simon Reynolds attributed to \"the resentment that the Roses, divorced from the cultural moment that gave them meaning, were now just another band\".\nIn March 1995, just two weeks before a tour in support of \"Second Coming\" was due to begin, Reni exited the band, following a disagreement with Ian Brown. A replacement drummer was found in Robbie Maddix, who had previously worked with Rebel MC. Also recruited around this time for the live shows was session-keyboardist/programmer Nigel Ipinson, who had previously played with the band on the \"Chic Remix\" re-working of \"Begging You\" for its release as a single. A secret \"come-back\" tour of the UK was planned for April 1995 but cancelled after the music press announced the dates. A major blow was the cancellation of their engagement at the Glastonbury Festival in June 1995. John Squire had suffered a mountain-biking accident in northern California weeks before the show, breaking his collarbone. The band finally organised a full UK tour for November and December 1995 and all dates sold out in a day.\nJohn Squire announced his departure on 1 April 1996, releasing a statement saying it was: \"the inevitable conclusion to the gradual social and musical separation that we have undergone in the past few years\". Simply Red's 1987/88 tour guitarist Aziz Ibrahim, a former classmate of Pete Garner's at Burnage High School, was recruited as a replacement. The band continued for another six months, but there was a noticeable deterioration in the quality of its public performances after Squire's loss, and at Benicassim Festival and the Reading Festival Brown's voice was described as \"so off-key it was excruciating to have to listen\". The music press was united in its criticism, the \"NME\" describing \"I Am the Resurrection\" as \"more like the eternal crucifixion\". Brown and Mani dissolved the group in October 1996.\nPost-Roses (1997\u20132010).\nIan Brown, John Squire and Mani have all had successful careers since the Roses' breakup. Squire formed the Seahorses, who released one album before breaking up, as well as releasing two solo albums. In 2007 he told a reporter that he was giving up music for good to focus on his career as a painter. Brown has released seven solo albums, a remixes and a greatest hits collection all but one of which have charted in the top 5 of the UK Albums Chart. Mani joined Primal Scream as bassist in 1996 and remained in the band until the Stone Roses reunited.\nReni remained inactive for the most part after the Roses' breakup. He started a new band, The Rub, in 1999, and played several gigs but nothing has been heard of The Rub since. In an interview in 2005 he said he was writing new songs to perform with Mani.\nRumours of a reunion surfaced and were dismissed repeatedly in the time between the break-up and the eventual reunion.\nThe 20th-anniversary edition of the band's debut album was released in August 2009, remastered by John Leckie and Ian Brown, including a collectors' box-set edition and the previously unreleased song \"Pearl Bastard\".\nReunion, new material and second disbandment (2011\u20132017).\nAfter the newspaper \"The Sun\" published a story on 14 October 2011 citing that the Roses had signed for a series of gigs across the UK, rumours again began to circulate. The \"NME\" reported that Alan 'Reni' Wren had responded to these rumours, contacting them with a cryptic message that read: \"Not before 9T will I wear the hat 4 the Roses again\". On 17 October, Dynamo told \"The Sun\" that Brown had confirmed the reunion by saying that the band were \"ready to take the world by storm\", and that Brown had sent him a text message with the words \"It's happening\". On 18 October 2011, the Stone Roses announced at a press conference the end of a fifteen-year split. An \"extensive\" Reunion Tour of the world, starting in Warrington, for a low-key warm-up show, was scheduled. However, the main attractions of the tour were three homecoming shows at Heaton Park, Manchester, on 29\u201330 June and 1 July 2012 plus one show in Dublin's Phoenix Park on 5 July 2012. In a press conference interview, the members of the Stone Roses said they had plans to record a third album. 150,000 tickets for the two Heaton Park shows sold out in 14 minutes, with the band then announcing a third show at the venue to be held on 1 July 2012. They then announced a show would take place in Ireland, with Ian Brown saying \"After Manchester, Ireland is always next on our list\". The first leg of the tour would consist of two warm-up gigs in Barcelona in early June and then shows in the Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark, Hungary, Germany and France.\nOn 2 December 2011, Ian Brown and John Squire performed together live for the first time since 1995. They joined Mick Jones from the Clash, the Farm and Pete Wylie at the Manchester Ritz in aid of the Justice for Hillsborough campaign. They performed on versions of the Clash's \"Bankrobber\" and \"Armagideon Time\" as well as the Stone Roses' \"Elizabeth My Dear\". On 23 May 2012, the Stone Roses held their first public concert since their reunion, playing an 11-song set before 1000 fans at Parr Hall in Warrington. The show, which was only announced that afternoon, was free to attend for those who brought a Stone Roses CD, LP or t-shirt with them.\nOn 26 November 2012, it was announced via the event's Facebook page that the band would play the Isle of Wight Festival in June 2013. The Stone Roses played at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on 12 and 19 April 2013. The Stone Roses also played at Finsbury Park, London on 7 and 8 June 2013 and Glasgow Green, Glasgow on 15 June 2013.\nA documentary was planned for the Stone Roses' reunion, with film director Shane Meadows chosen to film it. The documentary, titled \"\", received its world premiere at Trafford Park in Manchester on 30 May 2013 and was simultaneously broadcast live in many cinemas across the United Kingdom. It had its general release on 5 June 2013.\nOn 2 November 2015, the band announced two gigs at Manchester's City of Manchester Stadium on 17 and 18 June 2016 (a further two shows being added on 15 and 19 after these sold out), and a headline slot at the T in the Park 2016 festival on 8 July 2016 at Strathallan Castle, Scotland.\nOn 12 May 2016, the band released \"All for One\", their first new release in more than 20 years. A second single, titled \"Beautiful Thing\", was released on 9 June.\nOn 26 September 2016, the band announced three stadium gigs in the UK for 2017 - The SSE Arena in Belfast (Odyssey Complex) on 13 June, Wembley Stadium in London on 17 June and Hampden Park in Glasgow on 24 June. In December 2016, two more dates were added at the Leeds First Direct Arena on 20 and 21 June 2017.\nOn 24 June 2017, the Stone Roses played at Hampden Park in Glasgow. During the performance Ian Brown addressed the crowd with the statement \"Don't be sad that it's over, be happy that it happened\", leading many to speculate that the performance would be their final concert. This would turn out to be true, as on 16 September 2019, Squire confirmed in an interview with \"The Guardian\" that the band had disbanded.\nIn November 2023, Pete Garner, the original bassist for the Stone Roses, died at the age of 59.\nThe band's renowned bassist Gary \"Mani\" Mounfield died on 20 November 2025 at the age of 63.\nMusical style and influences.\nThe Stone Roses' influences included garage rock, electronic dance music, krautrock, northern soul, punk rock, reggae, soul and artists such as the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Simon and Garfunkel, the Smiths, the Byrds, Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin, the Jesus and Mary Chain, Sex Pistols and the Clash.\nThe band were part of the Madchester music scene, a music scene that mixed alternative rock, psychedelic rock and electronic dance music.\nThe band went on to influence other artists, most notably Oasis and the Verve, of which Noel Gallagher was quoted in an interview saying \"when I heard 'Sally Cinnamon' for the first time, I knew what my destiny was\". Gallagher's brother and Oasis' lead singer Liam stated that they were the first band he saw live and that seeing them perform influenced him to become a singer. Kevin Cummins, photographer of the 18 November 1989 NME cover displaying the Stone Roses in blue paint, was reportedly told it was \"the greatest NME cover of all time\" by Liam Gallagher and Richard Ashcroft.\nThe band is closely associated with the English Premier League football club Manchester United, with three of the band's four founding members being supporters of the club. The band's single \"This is the One\" has been played before Manchester United home matches at Old Trafford since the early 2000s. In 2024, the band partnered with Manchester United and their kit supplier Adidas to launch a clothing line based around the band's iconography\nRelationship with the media.\nAs John Robb commented: \"The Stone Roses would stonewall the journalist[s]. With shy guffaws, muttered asides, dispassionate staring, foot-shuffling silences and complete mind-numbing gaps, punctuated by the odd piece of incisive home-spun philosophy from Brown, who occasionally hinted at a well-read mind. There would be complete silence from John Squire, witty banter from Reni, and Mani spouting off if he let his guard drop.\" However, Robb clarified they \"were no fools when it came to the media\". He concluded: \"One feature of the band's career had been their ability to stay on the news pages of the rock press almost permanently for years on end, including the years when they did fuck all. And they did this by hardly saying anything at all.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36615", "revid": "50936682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36615", "title": "Fatboy Slim", "text": "English musician and DJ (born 1963)\nNorman Quentin Cook (born Quentin Leo Cook, 31 July 1963), known professionally as Fatboy Slim, is an English musician and DJ who helped popularise the big beat genre in the 1990s. His music makes extensive use of samples from eclectic genres, combined with pop structures, processed rhythms and \"sloganistic\" vocals.\nIn the 1980s, Cook was the bassist for the indie rock band the Housemartins, who achieved a UK number-one single with their cover of \"Caravan of Love\". After the Housemartins split, Cook moved to Brighton to pursue dance music. He formed the electronic group Beats International, who produced the number-one single \"Dub Be Good to Me\" in 1990, and played in the band Freak Power. He also released house records under names including Pizzaman and the Mighty Dub Katz.\nIn 1996, Cook released his first album as Fatboy Slim, \"Better Living Through Chemistry\", followed by successful remixes for Wildchild and Cornershop. His second album, \"You've Come a Long Way, Baby,\" was certified platinum and produced the successful singles \"The Rockafeller Skank\", \"Praise You\" and \"Right Here, Right Now\". \"Halfway Between the Gutter and the Stars\" (2000) produced the single \"Weapon of Choice\", which won six awards at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards. \"Palookaville\" (2004) was less successful, attributed to the declining popularity of dance music and a more obscure style. In 2009, Cook released an album as the Brighton Port Authority, a collaboration with artists including David Byrne. He collaborated with Byrne again on the album \"Here Lies Love\" (2010), a concept album that was adapted into a stage musical in 2013. In later years, Cook has focused on DJ performances over creating music. \nCook has a Grammy Award, nine MTV Video Music Awards, two Brit Awards and an Ivor Novello Award. He was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Original Score for \"Here Lies Love\" in 2024. In 2023, he was awarded the Guinness world record for the most UK number-one singles by one musician as a member of different acts. Cook's marriage to the BBC presenter Zoe Ball was highly publicised.\nEarly life and education.\nQuentin Leo Cook was born on 31 July 1963 in Bromley in Kent, England, the youngest of three. His mother was a teacher in a hospital school, and his father was an environmentalist consultant who was appointed an Order of the British Empire for introducing bottle banks into the UK. His family belonged to the Kosmon faith, an obscure religious order.\nCook was raised in Reigate, Surrey, which he later described as a \"suburban hell\". He attended Reigate Grammar School, where he took violin lessons alongside the future prime minister Keir Starmer. At school, he became a fan of punk music and edited a punk fanzine. He adopted the name Norman when he was bullied for the name Quentin, which his classmates associated with the gay actor Quentin Crisp. He collected records and began DJing at 15.\nAt sixth form college, Cook met the songwriter Paul Heaton, with whom he formed a punk band, the Stomping Pond Frogs. He failed his A-level exams as he was focusing on playing music, and had to retake them. Cook moved to Brighton to attend Brighton Polytechnic from 1982 to 1985 and gained a in British studies. In Brighton, he worked as a DJ and was taught how to mix by the DJ Carl Cox. He appeared as a porter in the music video for the 1982 song \"Goody Two Shoes\" by Adam Ant.\nCareer.\n1985\u20131988: the Housemartins.\nWhile Cook was in Brighton, Heaton formed a band, the Housemartins. When their original bassist quit in 1985, Cook moved to Hull to join them. Cook said he learned to play the bass guitar in about a week. In 1986, the Housemartins reached number one on the UK singles chart with a cover of the 1985 Isley-Jasper-Isley song \"Caravan of Love\". \nCook was frustrated playing \"white English pop\" in the Housemartins. He was interested in hip-hop and dance music, but felt it was inappropriate for a white English man to work in this genre, and that no one would take him seriously. He was uncomfortable with acts such as Level 42 or Simply Red, who he felt \"kind of pretend to be black\". While with the Housemartins, Cook began working on dance music using a TEAC 144 Portastudio and Roland S-10 synthesiser, with no intention of releasing it. He also created a megamix, \"The Finest Ingredients\", that was played by the BBC DJ John Peel.\n1988\u20131995: Beats International, Freak Power and remixes.\nThe Housemartins broke up in 1988. Heaton and the drummer, Dave Hemingway, went on to form the Beautiful South, and Cook returned to Brighton to pursue dance music. He invested in further equipment, including a mixing console, an eight-track reel-to-reel, an Atari ST computer, an Akai S950 sampler and, later, a Roland TB-303 synthesiser.\nCook released successful remixes such as \"Blame It on the Bassline\" with MC Wildski, which reached number 29 on the UK singles chart. He also formed a sound system collective, Beats International, with a collection of MCs and singers. Their single \"Dub Be Good to Me\" (1990) reached number one, but their second album, \"Excursion on the Version\" (1991), was a commercial failure. \nAfter Beats International disbanded in 1992, Cook's marriage ended and he suffered a mental breakdown. According to Cook, he became a self-destructive workaholic, drank heavily and alienated his friends. When therapy was ineffective, he began self-medicating with ecstasy. Facing bankruptcy, he took work composing for a \"Smurfs\" video game. \nCook formed an acid jazz band, Freak Power, with musicians including the trombonist Ashley Slater, which released the successful 1993 single \"Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out\" on Island Records. Cook felt uncomfortable in the band, and recalled thinking on stage: \"I'm a really crap guitarist. What am I doing here? I've spent the last 10 years getting pissed in nightclubs, learning how to DJ.\" \nIn 1993, Cook and John Reid formed the house duo Pizzaman. Their only album, \"Pizzamania\", produced three top-40 singles. Cook also released music as the Mighty Dub Katz, recording two or three tracks a week in his home studio. As Cook's record contract with Island forbade him from releasing or promoting music on other labels under his own name, he released them under aliases including Cheeky Boy, Sunny Side Up, Yum Yum Head Food and the Feelgood Factor, often on his own label, Southern Fried Records. Cook said his names reflect the fact that he did not take his work seriously, and that he was not afraid to say \"this is me pretending to be someone else, so let's make this fun\".\n1995\u20131997: Fatboy Slim and \"Better Living Through Chemistry\".\nCook adopted the stage name Fatboy Slim in 1995. He said of the name: \"It doesn't mean anything. I've told so many different lies over the years about it I can't actually remember the truth. It's just an oxymoron \u2013 a word that can't exist. It kind of suits me \u2013 it's kind of goofy and ironic.\" Around this period, the house music label Loaded Records created a new imprint in Brighton, Skint Records. Its first record was the Fatboy Slim track \"Santa Cruz\" in 1995. It sold only 800 copies, but attracted attention in the underground dance music scene in the UK. Cook was surprised to hear \"Santa Cruz\" played at an event in London by the Chemical Brothers, then known as the Dust Brothers, and said it was \"like meeting the rest of my long-lost family\".\nCook co-founded a popular club night in Brighton, the Big Beat Boutique, where he played music from genres including northern soul, acid house, hip-hop and reggae, combined with breakbeats. The scene became the foundation of big beat music. Cook later wrote of the \"enormous collective pride\" in the big beat genre being named after the venue, just as house and garage music had been named after venues in Chicago and New York City. Cook described it as a \"very productive time\", when acts such as the Chemical Brothers, Death in Vegas, Monkey Mafia, Bentley Rhythm Ace and FC Kahuna were \"breaking rules and feeding off each other\". Cook's friends encouraged him to make music similar to the style he was playing in his DJ sets. He released the first Fatboy Slim album, \"Better Living Through Chemistry,\" in 1996 on Skint. According to \"The Independent\", by 1997, Cook had become \"part of an elite coterie of superstar DJs\" who earned large fees to perform at international venues and were \"guaranteed to fill dance floors from Manchester to Madrid\".\n1998\u20131999: \"You've Come a Long Way, Baby\" and international success.\nIn 1998, Cook's remix of \"Renegade Master\" by Wildchild reached number three on the UK singles chart, and his remix of \"Brimful of Asha\" by Cornershop reached number one. Cook said the tracks represented a creative breakthrough: \"That's when I was like, I've nailed it now, I've got the formula.\" He began receiving interest from artists such as Madonna and Robbie Williams. He turned down an offer from the Pet Shop Boys to produce their next album, as he liked their music but felt it did not suit his style.\nFor his second album,\"You've Come a Long Way, Baby\" (1998), Cook aimed to create a coherent album using \"all the ideas that had been brewing and fermenting\" in the big beat scene. He created three successful singles in one week: \"The Rockafeller Skank\", \"Praise You\" and \"Right Here, Right Now\". \"Praise You\" was the first Fatboy Slim UK number-one single, and its music video, directed by Spike Jonze, won numerous awards. On 9 September 1999, Cook performed \"Praise You\" at the 1999 MTV Video Music Awards in New York City and won three awards, including Breakthrough Video. Four days later, \"You've Come a Long Way, Baby\" was certified platinum. That year, Cook won the Brit Award for Best British Dance Act. He also married the BBC presenter Zoe Ball, triggering attention from the tabloid media.\n2000\u20132003: \"Halfway Between the Gutter and the Stars\" and Brighton beach.\nIn 2000, dance music was at peak popularity, controlling 13.3% of the UK album charts. Cook was a key figure in the rising popularity of club culture in the UK, along with acts such as Chemical Brothers, Basement Jaxx, Underworld, Groove Armada and Leftfield. That year, Cook released his third Fatboy Slim album, \"Halfway Between the Gutter and the Stars\", featuring collaborations with Macy Gray and Bootsy Collins. He attempted to create a less radio-friendly album, saying: \"I'm much happier at number nine in the charts than at number one because you're still top ten but it's a lot less work and stress.\"\nThe video for \"Weapon of Choice\", directed by Spike Jonze and featuring Christopher Walken dancing through a hotel, won six awards at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards. Cook earned the Guinness world records for the most MTV Video Awards won by a DJ and the most MTV Video Awards won for a single video. The album also included \"Sunset (Bird of Prey)\", whose video used the 1964 \"Daisy Girl\" campaign ad. In the same year, Cook released \"The Fatboy Slim\" \"/ Norman Cook Collection\", a compilation of his remixes from the 1980s and early 90s.\nIn 2001, Cook held a free beach concert, Big Beach Boutique, in Brighton. It followed a screening of a cricket match organised by Channel 4, and was attended by around 60,000 people. The set was released as the 2002 album \"Live on Brighton Beach\". By 2002, according to the \"Daily Telegraph\", Fatboy Slim was the \"world's biggest DJ\". That July, he played a second free concert on Brighton beach, Big Beach Boutique II. It was attended by around 250,000 people, four times more than expected. Local authorities were severely underprepared, which led to more than 170 injuries and six arrests. Two people died in the hours after the concert. The cleanup operation lasted days and cost over \u00a3300,000, with 160 tonnes of rubbish collected from the beach. However, Cook was supported by Brighton residents. The Brighton newspaper \"The Argus\" printed a supplement to publish the letters supporting him, and BBC Southern Counties Radio received many positive calls. \nIn 2001, Cook won his second Brit Award for Best British Dance Act. Cook released a live album and DVD of the Brighton beach performance, \"Big Beach Boutique II\", in 2003. He contributed production to \"Crazy Beat\" and \"Gene by Gene\" on the 2003 Blur album \"Think Tank.\"\n2004\u20132008: \"Palookaville\".\nBy 2004, dance music was in commercial decline, replaced by a resurgence of guitar bands. That year, Cook released his fourth album, \"Palookaville\". It sold far fewer copies than his previous albums, which Cook credited to its more obscure musical style. Cook said he was \"happy to take my foot off the gas for a bit\" and receive less tabloid attention. \nAfter the \"Big Beach Boutique II\" DVD became a bestseller in Brazil, Cook played to an estimated 360,000 people in Rio in 2004. He returned many times in the following years, and performed on the reality TV show \"Big Brother Brasil\" in 2005. His 2007 tour was released on DVD as \"Adventures\" \"in Brazil\". Cook filled the Friday night headline slot on the Other Stage at Glastonbury Festival 2005. In June 2006, he played a headline performance at the RockNess festival on the shores of Loch Ness. \"The Greatest Hits \u2013 Why Try Harder\" was released that month, including the new tracks \"Champion Sound\" and \"That Old Pair of Jeans\".\nOn New Year's Day, 2007, Cook held another performance on Brighton beach, Big Beach Boutique 3. Tickets were only available to residents of Brighton and Hove, capped at 20,000. Big Beach Boutique 4 took place on September 27, 2008, with the same ticket procedures.\n2008\u20132012: the Brighton Port Authority and \"Here Lies Love\".\nIn 2008, Cook remixed the track \"Amazonas\" for the charity Bottletop. That year, Cook formed a virtual band, the Brighton Port Authority, featuring Iggy Pop, David Byrne, Dizzee Rascal, Martha Wainwright and Ashley Beedle. They released an album, \"I Think We're Gonna Need a Bigger Boat\", in 2009. Cook produced two tracks on \"The Revolution\" \"Presents\", a 2009 compilation album by various Cuban musicians. He said later: \"I'm not Paul Simon \u2013 I'm not the world's best musical ambassador, it wasn't my forte.\"\nIn 2008, Cook played at Glastonbury Festival, the O2 Wireless Festival, Rockness Festival and Coachella. He played an unadvertised concert at Glastonbury 2009, and headlined the east dance stage at Glastonbury 2010. Cook collaborated with Byrne again on \"Here Lies Love\" (2010), a concept album about the life of the Philippines First Lady Imelda Marcos. A musical based on the album premiered in 2013 at the Public Theater in New York City, and opened on Broadway in 2023.\nIn the 2010s, as EDM grew in popularity worldwide, Cook began performing more frequently in the United States. On 18 June 2010, he performed in Cape Town, South Africa, as part of the Cool Britannia FIFA World Cup music festival at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. In 2011, he received PRS for Music award for Outstanding Contribution to Music at the Ivor Novello Awards. On 30 May, he was the headliner at Movement Electronic Music Festival in Detroit. He played and headlined Bestival on the Isle of Wight on 11 September.\nCook performed \"Right Here, Right Now\" and \"The Rockefeller Skank\" at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London. On 1 September, he performed at Brighton Pride. In March 2012, Cook hosted a one-hour radio programme, \"On The Road To Big Beach Bootique 5\", on XFM. It consisted of 10 shows.\n2013\u2014present: singles and performances.\nIn 2013, Cook performed at Ultra Music Festival in Miami. On 6 March, Cook became the first DJ to perform at the House of Commons in Westminster, London, in aid of the Last Night a DJ Saved My Life Foundation, which encourages young people to become involved in their communities. Cook said later that it was a \"milestone\" to perform there years after the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, which clamped down on raves: \"Isn't it brilliant that finally we've wormed our way into the public's consciousness to the extent that we're not seen as a bunch of drug-taking anarchists any more? Dance music is here to stay.\"\nIn 2013, Cook released \"Eat, Sleep, Rave, Repeat\", with Riva Starr and Beardyman, which reached number three in the UK and introduced Fatboy Slim to younger audiences. Supported by a remix from Scottish DJ Calvin Harris, it topped the UK Dance Chart that year. Cook contributed to \"Bem Brasil\", a 2014 compilation of Brazilian music remixed by various DJs and producers. In 2015, he received the Alumnus Award from the University of Brighton for his contribution to the music industry and support for the university.\nAs of 2015, Cook was performing about 70 DJ sets a year, and declined many opportunities to perform more. He was not interested in further fame or success, saying \"Nowadays I'd rather go sideways than up. I don't want to do things on a bigger scale. I want to do things that are interesting.\" On 15 May 2016, he played a private two-hour set \"Baby Loves Disco\" for preschool children and their parents during the Brighton Fringe. At Glastonbury 2016, he played the John Peel stage for the first time. In 2017, he released the single \"Where U Iz\".\nAt a concert in Gateshead, England, in October 2019, Cook performed a mashup of his track \"Right Here, Right Now\" and Greta Thunberg's speech at the United Nations, which went viral. Cook made a cameo as a DJ in the 2019 satire film \"Greed,\" and played himself in the third series of the Channel 4 sitcom \"Derry Girls\", broadcast in 2022.During the COVID-19 lockdowns, Cook posted mixes online and worked at the cafe he owns in Hove. He said: \"It was interesting, because I've never done an honest job for years. It kept me sane, really.\" In May 2021, he performed in Liverpool as part of the government's trials to restart mass audience events following the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2022, Cook gave lessons in DJ equipment as part of an NHS initiative to create art events for people with mental health problems. In July, the 20th anniversary of Big Beach Boutique II, Cook headlined the On the Beach festival in Brighton.\nCook collaborated with the British singer Rita Ora on the 2023 single \"Praising You\", a reworking of his track \"Praise You\". At Glastonbury 2023, Cook played the song \"Insomnia\" by Faithless as a tribute to the Faithless singer, Maxi Jazz. That October, he was awarded the Guinness world record for the most UK number-one singles by one musician as a member of different acts. He also performed a secret gig at the Prince Albert pub in Brighton to support its campaign against property development in the North Laine.\nIn June 2024, Cook released the single \"Role Model\", featuring the vocalist Dan Diamond. The music video, his first in nearly 20 years, features celebrities edited with deepfake technology, such as David Bowie, Bill Murray and Muhammad Ali. In July, Cook joined his former bandmate Paul Heaton to play bass on the 1986 Housemartins song \"Happy Hour\" at Glastonbury 2024. That December, Cook said he had lost interest in creating music and was focusing on DJ performances. Cook estimated that his performance at Glastonbury 2025 was his 100th Glastonbury performance, including performances on large stages and small tents.\nStyle.\nCook pioneered the 1990s electronic genre big beat, which \"Sound on Sound\" likened to a \"pop art-styled collage\" of samples. The \"Pitchfork\" writer Brad Shoup described \"You've Come A Long Way, Baby\" as \"pure pop\", unlike the stranger or harsher music of other big beat acts such as the Chemical Brothers or the Prodigy. Another \"Pitchfork\" critic, Marc Hogan, characterised the Fatboy Slim formula as \"eclectic samples, sloganistic vocal snippets, and an all-around drunken good-time spirit\". \"DJ Mag\" wrote that Cook created \"big brash party tunes for big communal occasions\" and was a \"showman\" and entertainer. Cook wrote that his method was to combine breakbeats from hip-hop, the \"anarchic rebellion\" of punk, the energy of acid house and the hooks of pop music. He differentiated himself from other dance acts by using traditional song structures, such as verses, choruses and middle eights, to arrange \"dance floor ingredients ... in a manner that the human brain would associate with pop music\". \nCook estimated that most of his tracks contained only 20% original material, with some containing none at all, and said he was proud of creating music that did not resemble the acts he sampled. As he felt sampling hit songs would be too easy, he instead sampled vocal and drum parts from used vinyl records, creating a library of sounds. Cook's approach was to \"take the best bits out of all the music you've grown up with \u2013 the Beatles, punk, rap and acid house \u2013 and you have an attractive and accessible package\". He said he was unable to write traditional songs.\nMost Fatboy Slim albums are assembled from samples combined with synthesiser lines from a Roland TB-303 and parts played on a Studio Electronics keyboard. Cook manipulated samples through methods such as time-stretching and distortion, using Akai S900 and S950 samplers, and sequenced them using an Atari ST computer running C-Lab Creator. He created drum tracks by sampling individual drum hits from vinyl break beats, then programming new patterns. Most Fatboy Slim tracks have two drum tracks playing simultaneously: one \"modern and crisp and clean-sounding\" and another \"older and dirtier\" with less \"punch\". Cook continued using the same equipment even as more sophisticated technology emerged. He began using a MacBook with Ableton Live, but found the lack of limits and no opportunity to \"bend the rules\" made the process less exciting.\nCook said he had never created overtly political music, and that when he tried to make \"angry\" music it \"comes out slightly light-hearted ... so it's about the party and the rhythm\". He took accusations that he \"made dance music for people who don't like dance music\" as a compliment, saying he made it more accessible. He said his music was for \"people who do shit jobs all week and on Friday and Saturday nights they get to be glamorous and exciting ... My music is for the hips not the head... It's not supposed to be dissected by journalists, you're not supposed to sit at home with the lyric sheet wondering what they mean, reading the sleeve notes.\" Fatboy Slim tracks have been used extensively in adverts, film and television. Cook said: \"I make a certain kind of instrumental music they like using. You can hear 15 seconds of my stuff and it makes complete sense.\" \nCook performs in Hawaiian shirts with no shoes, and said: \"I decided I had to be like James Brown without the band. I started cheerleading the crowd and showing off.\" He believes DJs should communicate with the crowd through their expressions and body language and respond to them, and said: \"The more the crowd give me back, the more I wanna give them and it becomes a cycle of nonsense \u2013 sometimes to ludicrous extremes.\" He described Jon Carter and Carl Cox as DJs he learned from and whose stage styles he adopted. He resisted pressure from record companies to perform with live musicians, as he felt the appeal of his music was in \"the grit and character\" of the samples, and to recreate them would be \"like hearing a wedding covers band\".\nPersonal life.\nCook's first marriage, to a nurse, ended in the early 1990s. Cook met the BBC presenter Zoe Ball in Ibiza in 1998. They married in 1999 and had their first child in 2000. Their relationship attracted extensive tabloid attention, and Cook said he was a victim of the News International phone hacking scandal. \"The Independent\" described Cook and Ball as \"the It Couple (or, one of them) of Cool Britannia\". They separated in 2003, but reconciled and had a second child in 2010. As of 2004, they lived on Western Esplanade in Hove. On 24 September, 2016, Cook and Ball announced their separation after 18 years. Their son Woody is also a DJ.\nFor several years, Cook used drugs including cocaine, ecstasy and ketamine, and performed while intoxicated. After he became a father, he worried that his drug use affected his relationships. On 4 March 2009, Cook checked into a rehabilitation centre in Bournemouth for alcoholism. His performance at Snowbombing, a week-long winter sports and music festival held in the Austrian ski resort of Mayrhofen, was cancelled, with the slot filled by 2ManyDJs. Cook left the clinic at the end of March. As of March 2022, he had been sober for 13 years. Cook said performing sober gave him stage fright for the first time.\nIn 2002, Cook changed his name by deed poll to Norman Quentin Cook. In the same year, he purchased a 12% share in Brighton &amp; Hove Albion Football Club, which he has supported since moving to Brighton in the 1980s. In June 2013, Cook opened the Big Beach Cafe in Hove in a property previously owned by Heather Mills, and worked there during the COVID-19 lockdowns. He sold the cafe in November 2025, saying he no longer had time to run it as his business partner was retiring. Cook also owned a Japanese restaurant in Brighton, Oki-Nami, and the Spotted Pig, a Michelin-starred gastropub in New York City that closed in 2016. He collects objects bearing the smiley symbol, and in 2019 he curated a smiley exhibition in Lisbon with the Portuguese artist Vhils.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36623", "revid": "30973818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36623", "title": "George C. Marshall", "text": "American general and statesman (1880\u20131959)\nGeorge Catlett Marshall Jr. (31 December 1880 \u2013 16 October 1959) was an American army officer and statesman. He rose through the United States Army to become Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army under presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, then served as Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense under Truman. Winston Churchill lauded Marshall as the \"organizer of victory\" for his leadership of the Allied victory in World War II. During the subsequent year, he unsuccessfully tried to prevent the continuation of the Chinese Civil War. As Secretary of State, Marshall advocated for a U.S. economic and political commitment to post-war European recovery, including the Marshall Plan that bore his name. In recognition of this work, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953, the only Army general ever to receive the honor.\nBorn in Uniontown, Pennsylvania, Marshall graduated from the Virginia Military Institute (VMI) in 1901. He received his commission as a second lieutenant of Infantry in February 1902 and immediately went to the Philippines. He served in the United States and overseas in positions of increasing rank, including platoon leader and company commander in the Philippines during the Philippine\u2013American War. He was the top-ranked of the five Honor Graduates of his Infantry-Cavalry School Course in 1907 and graduated first in his 1908 Army Staff College class. In 1916 Marshall was assigned as aide-de-camp to J. Franklin Bell, the commander of the Western Department. After the nation entered the First World War in 1917, Marshall served with Bell, who commanded the Department of the East. He was assigned to the staff of the 1st Division; he assisted with the organization's mobilization and training in the United States, as well as planning of its combat operations in France. Subsequently assigned to the staff of the American Expeditionary Forces headquarters, he was a key planner of American operations, including the Meuse-Argonne Offensive.\nFollowing his service in World War I, Marshall became an aide-de-camp to Army chief of staff John J. Pershing. Marshall later served on the Army staff, was the executive officer of the 15th Infantry Regiment in China and was an instructor at the Army War College. In 1927, he became assistant commandant of the Army's Infantry School, where he modernized command and staff processes, which proved to be of major benefit during World War II. In 1932 and 1933, he commanded the 8th Infantry Regiment and Fort Screven, Georgia. Marshall commanded 5th Brigade, 3rd Infantry Division and Vancouver Barracks from 1936 to 1938; he received promotion to brigadier general. During this command, Marshall was also responsible for 35 Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camps in Oregon and Southern Washington. In July 1938, Marshall was assigned to the War Plans Division on the War Department staff; he later became the Army's deputy chief of staff. When Chief of Staff Malin Craig retired in 1939, Marshall assumed the role of Chief of Staff in an acting capacity before his appointment to the position, which he held until the war's end in 1945.\nAs the U.S. Army's Chief of Staff, Marshall worked closely with Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to organize the largest military expansion in U.S. history, and was ultimately promoted to five-star rank as General of the Army. Marshall coordinated Allied operations in Europe and the Pacific until the end of the war. In addition to accolades from Winston Churchill and other Allied leaders, \"Time\" magazine named Marshall its Man of the Year for 1943 and 1947. Marshall retired from active service in 1945, but remained on active duty, as required for holders of five-star rank. From 15 December 1945 to January 1947, Marshall served as a special envoy to China in an unsuccessful effort to negotiate a coalition government between the Nationalists of Chiang Kai-shek and the Communists of Mao Zedong.\nAs Secretary of State from 1947 to 1949, Marshall advocated rebuilding Europe, a program that became known as the Marshall Plan, and which led to his being awarded the 1953 Nobel Peace Prize. After resigning as Secretary of State, Marshall served as chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission and president of the American National Red Cross. As Secretary of Defense at the start of the Korean War, Marshall worked to restore the military's confidence and morale after the end of its post-World War II demobilization and then its initial buildup for combat in Korea and operations during the Cold War. Resigning as Defense Secretary, Marshall retired to his home in Virginia. He died in 1959 and was buried with honors at Arlington National Cemetery.\nEarly life and education.\nGeorge Catlett Marshall Jr. was born in Uniontown, Pennsylvania, the youngest of three children born to George Catlett Marshall and Laura Emily (n\u00e9e Bradford) Marshall. Both sides of his family were long from Kentucky, but cherished their Virginia roots. He was also a first cousin, three times removed, of former chief justice John Marshall. He was also a distant cousin of Richard J. Marshall. Marshall's father was active in the coal and coke business. Later, when asked about his political allegiances, Marshall often joked that his father had been a Democrat and his mother a Republican, whereas he was an Episcopalian.\nMarshall was educated at Miss Alcinda Thompson's private school in Uniontown and spent a year at Uniontown's Central School. Having decided early in life that he desired a career in the military, but unlikely to obtain an appointment to the United States Military Academy because of his average grades, he looked to the Virginia Military Institute (VMI) for a formal education. Marshall's brother Stuart, a VMI alumnus, believed George would not succeed and argued that their mother should not let George attend out of concern that he would \"disgrace the family name.\" Determined to \"wipe his brother's face,\" Marshall enrolled at the age of sixteen in December 1897. To pay for his tuition and expenses, Marshall's mother sold parcels of land she owned in Uniontown and Augusta, Kentucky.\nAt the start of his college career, Marshall was subjected to a hazing incident in which upperclassmen positioned an unsheathed bayonet with the point up and directed him to squat over it. After twenty minutes, Marshall fainted and fell. When he awoke, he had a deep laceration to one of his buttocks. While being treated for his injury, Marshall refused to inform on his classmates. Impressed with his bravery, the hazers never bothered him again.\nDuring his years at VMI, Marshall always ranked first in military discipline and about midway academically. He attained the rank of first captain, the highest a cadet could achieve, and graduated 15th of 34 in the Class of 1901. Marshall received a diploma, not a degree. At the time of his graduation, the top five or six VMI graduates received bachelor's degrees. The rest received diplomas attesting to their status as graduates. He played tackle on the football team and in 1900 he was selected for All-Southern honors.\nEarly infantry career and the Philippines.\nFollowing his graduation from VMI, Marshall served as Commandant of Students at the Danville Military Institute in Danville, Virginia. He took a competitive examination for a commission in the United States Army, which had greatly expanded to deal with the Spanish\u2013American War and Philippine\u2013American War. Marshall passed and used endorsements his father obtained from both of Pennsylvania's U.S. senators to bolster his application. VMI Superintendent Scott Shipp also supported Marshall's application, and in a letter to President William McKinley compared him favorably to other VMI graduates serving in the Army, saying Marshall was \"Fully the equal of the best.\" He was commissioned a second lieutenant of Infantry in February 1902. In a matter of days he married, resigned the Danville job, and shipped out to serve with the 30th Infantry Regiment in the Philippines.\nPrior to World War I, Marshall received various postings in the United States and the Philippines, including serving as an infantry platoon leader and company commander during the Philippine\u2013American War and other guerrilla uprisings. He was schooled in modern warfare, including tours from 1906 to 1910 as both a student and an instructor. He was ranked first of five Honor Graduates of his Infantry-Cavalry School Course (now the United States Army Command and General Staff College) in 1907 and graduated first in his 1908 Army Staff College (now the United States Army War College) class. After graduating in 1908, Marshall was assigned as an instructor at the Fort Leavenworth Infantry-Cavalry School. While on the faculty, he met Hunter Liggett, who was then commanding a battalion at Fort Leavenworth. Though Marshall was subordinate to Liggett, Liggett volunteered to study the curriculum under Marshall's tutelage; Marshall made the lessons and practical exercises available to Liggett, critiqued Liggett's answers, then shared with him the faculty's schoolhouse solutions.\nBeginning in 1913, Marshall served as aide-de-camp to Major General J. Franklin Bell, the commander of the Department of the Philippines. He continued in this role during Bell's command of the army's Western Department at the Presidio of San Francisco. In the summer and fall of 1916, Marshall was responsible for organizing several Western Department Citizens' Military Training Camps. After the American entry into World War I in April 1917, Marshall relocated with Bell to Governors Island, New York, when Bell was reassigned as commander of the Department of the East. Shortly afterwards, Marshall was assigned to help oversee the mobilization of the 1st Division for service in France.\nWorld War I.\nShortly after the American entry into World War I in April 1917, Marshall had roles as a planner of both training and operations. In the summer, he was assigned as assistant chief of staff for operations on the staff of the newly created 1st Division, commanded by Major General William L. Sibert, a fifty-six-year-old engineer officer. After overseeing the division's mobilization and organization in Texas, he departed for France with the division staff in mid-1917. On the long ocean voyage, his roommate was the division's assistant chief of staff for training, Major Lesley J. McNair; the two formed a personal and professional bond that they maintained for the rest of their careers. Marshall was the first passenger from the first boat transporting American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) soldiers to set foot in Europe, and one of the first to enter the trenches of the Western Front.\nAfter arriving in France, Marshall served with the 1st Division on the Saint-Mihiel, Picardy, and Cantigny fronts. Although the division was designated as a Regular Army formation, most of the officers and men serving within its ranks were almost completely lacking in combat experience. They were also deficient \"in training, staff work, and logistical problems. More than half of its soldiers were new recruits. Only a few of its non-commissioned officers had been in the Army for two years or more, and nearly all of the lieutenants had been commissioned less than six months\".\nIn late 1917, General John J. Pershing, the commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of the AEF, inspected the 1st Division. Unimpressed by what he observed, Pershing began to berate Sibert in front of Sibert's staff. Sibert took Pershing's criticism in silence, but when Pershing turned his attention to the division chief of staff, Marshall angrily interceded to inform Pershing of logistical and administrative difficulties of which Pershing was unaware. Marshall also informed Pershing that the AEF staff had not been very helpful in dealing with the problems. Sibert and his staff were concerned that Marshall's willingness to confront Pershing had probably cost him his career. Instead, Pershing began to seek out Marshall and ask for his advice whenever he visited the 1st Division, which, over the winter, \"completed extensive training, much of it under French tutelage\". By mid-April 1918 the division, now commanded by Major General Robert Lee Bullard, was deemed to have progressed enough in its training to have its own sector of the Western Front to hold.\nMarshall won recognition and acclaim for his planning of the Battle of Cantigny, which took place from 28 to 31 May 1918; Marshall's success resulted in the first notable American victory of the war. As he conducted pre-attack planning, Marshall traveled alone under cover of darkness to personally view the terrain and mentally map it. Marshall ventured beyond the front lines and far into no-man's land, often under friendly artillery fire and routinely risking discovery and capture by Imperial German Army troops. On 26 May, he was injured while traveling to several subordinate units to conduct pre-attack coordination. As he departed the division headquarters area, his horse stumbled, fell, and rolled over; Marshall's left foot was caught in the stirrup, and he sustained a severe sprain and bruise. A physician bound Marshall's injured ankle and foot with adhesive tape so he could avoid medical evacuation and remain with the division to oversee the attack. In 1920, Marshall was awarded the Citation Star for his heroism during this battle. When the Silver Star medal was created in 1932, Citation Stars were converted to the new award.\nIn mid-1918, Pershing brought Marshall on to the AEF operations staff, G-3, where he worked closely with Pershing and was a key planner of American operations. He was instrumental in the planning and coordination of the Meuse\u2013Argonne offensive, which contributed to the defeat of the German Empire on the Western Front in 1918. In August, he was assigned as assistant chief of operations (G-3) for First Army, which was commanded first by Pershing, then by Liggett. At the end of the war, Marshall held the permanent rank of captain and the temporary rank of colonel and was recommended for promotion to temporary brigadier general in October 1918, but the Armistice with Germany on 11 November 1918 occurred before the recommendation was acted on.\nAfter the Armistice, Marshall served as chief of staff for the VIII Corps. For his services during the war he was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal, the citation for which reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBetween the wars.\nAfter the war, Marshall reverted to his permanent rank of captain. In 1919, he became an aide-de-camp to General Pershing. Between 1920 and 1924, while Pershing was Army chief of staff, Marshall worked on a number of projects that focused on training and teaching modern, mechanized warfare. He taught at the Army War College and was a key planner in the War Department. He then served as executive officer of the 15th Infantry Regiment in the Republic of China, where he remained for three years and learned to speak basic Mandarin. In 1927, as a lieutenant colonel, he was appointed assistant commandant of the Infantry School at Fort Benning, where he initiated major changes to modernize command and staff processes, which proved to be of major benefit during World War II. Marshall placed Edwin F. Harding in charge of the Infantry School's publications, and Harding became editor of \"Infantry in Battle\", a book that codified the lessons of World War I. \"Infantry in Battle\" is still used as an officer's training manual in the Infantry Officer's Course and was the training manual for most of the infantry officers and leaders of World War II.\nMarshall's first wife died in 1927. The following year, while stationed at Fort Benning, Marshall met Katherine Tupper Brown at a dinner party. They married on 15 October 1930, at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Baltimore, Maryland. The wedding made headlines as General Pershing served as Marshall's best man.\nFrom June 1932 to June 1933, Marshall was the commanding officer of the 8th Infantry Regiment at Fort Screven, Georgia. From July 1933 to October 1933 he was commander of Fort Moultrie, South Carolina, and District I of the Civilian Conservation Corps. He was promoted to colonel in September 1933.\nDuring the Great Depression, Marshall became a strong supporter of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal. Army chief of staff Douglas MacArthur, who was a Republican and with whom Marshall had a contentious relationship, did not appreciate Marshall's views. After only a few months at Ft. Moultrie, MacArthur engineered Marshall's abrupt transfer to Chicago, where he served as senior instructor and chief of staff for the Illinois National Guard's 33rd Division from November 1933 to August 1936.\nMarshall was assigned to command the 5th Brigade of the 3rd Infantry Division and Vancouver Barracks in Vancouver, Washington, from 1936 to 1938, and was promoted to brigadier general in October 1936. In addition to obtaining a long-sought and significant troop command, traditionally viewed as an indispensable step to the pinnacle of the US Army, Marshall was also responsible for 35 Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camps in Oregon and southern Washington. As post commander Marshall made a concerted effort to cultivate relations with the city of Portland and to enhance the image of the US Army in the region. With the CCC, he initiated a series of measures to improve the morale of the participants and to make the experience beneficial in their later life. He started a newspaper for the CCC region that provided a vehicle to promote CCC successes, and he initiated a variety of programs that developed participants' skills and improved their health. Marshall's inspections of the CCC camps gave him and his wife Katherine the chance to enjoy the beauty of the American Pacific Northwest and made that assignment what he called \"the most instructive service I ever had, and the most interesting.\"\nIn July 1938, Marshall was assigned to the War Plans Division in Washington, D.C., and subsequently reassigned as Deputy Chief of Staff. In that capacity, then-Brigadier General Marshall attended a White House conference at which President Franklin D. Roosevelt proposed a plan to expand the United States Army Air Corps by 15,000 aircraft per year in preparation for World War II. With all other attendees voicing support, Marshall was the only one to disagree, pointing out the lack of consideration for logistical support or training. Marshall also spoke in favor of a large ground army although Roosevelt had said a large air force would be a greater deterrent to enemies, pointing out that the United States Army did not yet have a single division at full operational strength. Despite others' belief then that Marshall had ended his career, his willingness to express disagreement resulted in Roosevelt nominating Marshall to be the Army Chief of Staff.\nUpon the retirement of General Malin Craig on 1 July 1939, Marshall became acting chief of staff. Several generals were candidates to succeed Craig, including Hugh Aloysius Drum. Roosevelt favored Marshall because he was more supportive of New Deal liberalism than the conservative and still-influential Douglas MacArthur, who had been chief of staff from 1930 to 1935, and because of the recommendations of Pershing, Craig, Louis A. Johnson, and Roosevelt's close advisor Harry Hopkins. Marshall was sworn in as chief of staff on 1 September 1939, just hours after the Wehrmacht launched its invasion of Poland. He held this post until retiring in November 1945. At the time of the appointment, Marshall was 34th overall in seniority, outranked by 21 major generals and 11 brigadier generals, but was fifth in line for the position of chief of staff under an unwritten rule that candidates should be able to serve a full four-year term before reaching the mandatory retirement age of 64.\nOn 11 May 1940, the United States Congress cut $10 million from a $28 million appropriation budget for equipment to detect Imperial Japanese Armed Forces aircraft off the West Coast of the United States. Marshall met with Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. and they went to see Roosevelt; Marshall emphasized the supreme importance of getting the full amount and told Roosevelt \"you have got to do something and you've got to do it today\". Marshall's advocacy worked and he got \"all he wanted and more\".\nIn 1941, Marshall became a Freemason, raised \"at sight\" by the grand master of the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia. (\"At sight\" is the procedure by which a grand master confers on a candidate all three Masonic degrees \u2013 Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master \u2013 at one time.)\nWorld War II.\nAs Chief of Staff, Marshall organized the largest military expansion in American history, inheriting an outmoded, poorly equipped Regular Army of 189,000 men and, partly drawing from his experience teaching and developing techniques of modern warfare as an instructor at the Army War College, coordinated the large-scale expansion and modernization of the U.S. Army. Under his name were produced significant works of doctrine such as Field Manual 100-5. During his first week in office, he advised Roosevelt to issue an executive order expanding the Regular Army to 227,000 troops and the National Guard to 235,000 reservists, although the President could not immediately act because the United States Congress still favored isolationism.\nMarshall's efforts to expand the United States Armed Forces began to have more success after the Axis powers conquered most of Western Europe in the Battle of France. Beginning in July 1940, he was greatly assisted in this effort by newly appointed Secretary of War Henry Stimson, whom Marshall would gradually displace as the most significant leader of the U.S. military apparatus in a deviation from the United States' tradition of civilian control of the military. Though he had never actually led troops in combat, Marshall was a skilled organizer with a talent for inspiring other officers. Many of the American generals who were given top commands during the war were either picked or recommended by Marshall, including Dwight D. Eisenhower, Jacob L. Devers, George S. Patton, Terry de la Mesa Allen Sr., Lloyd Fredendall, Lesley J. McNair, Mark Wayne Clark and Omar Bradley.\nExpands military force fortyfold.\nFaced with the necessity of turning former civilians into an army of over eight million soldiers by 1942 (a fortyfold increase within three years), Marshall directed McNair as commander of Army Ground Forces to focus efforts on rapidly producing large numbers of soldiers. With the exception of airborne forces, Marshall approved McNair's concept of an abbreviated training schedule for men entering Army land forces training, particularly in regard to basic infantry skills, weapons proficiency, and combat tactics. At the time, most U.S. commanders at lower levels had little or no combat experience of any kind. Without the input of experienced British or Allied combat officers on the nature of modern warfare and enemy tactics, many resorted to formulaic training methods emphasizing static defense and orderly large-scale advances by motorized convoys over improved roads. In consequence, Army forces deploying to Africa in Operation Torch suffered serious initial reverses when they encountered German armored units in Africa in the Battle of Kasserine Pass and other major battles. Even as late as 1944, American soldiers undergoing stateside training in preparation for deployment against German forces in Europe were not being trained in combat procedures and tactics in use there.\nReplacement system criticized.\nOriginally, Marshall had planned a 265-division army with a system of unit rotation such as that practiced by the British and other Allies. By mid-1943, however, after pressure from government and business leaders to preserve manpower for industry and agriculture, he had abandoned this plan in favor of a 90-division Army using individual replacements sent via a circuitous process from training to divisions in combat. The individual replacement system devised by Marshall and implemented by McNair exacerbated problems with unit cohesion and effective transfer of combat experience to new soldiers and officers. In Europe, where there were few pauses in combat with German forces, the individual replacement system had broken down completely by late 1944. Hastily trained replacements or service personnel reassigned as infantry were often given only a few weeks' refresher training before being thrown into battle with Army divisions locked in front-line combat.\nThe new men were often not even proficient in the use of their own weapons, and once in combat, could not receive enough practical instruction from veterans before being killed or wounded, sometimes within the first few days. Under such conditions, many soldiers suffered a crippling loss of morale, while veterans were kept at the front until they were killed, wounded, or incapacitated by battle fatigue or illness. Incidents of soldiers going AWOL from combat duty as well as battle fatigue and self-inflicted injury rose rapidly during the last eight months of the war with Nazi Germany. As one historian concluded, \"Had the Germans been given a free hand to devise a replacement system..., one that would do the Americans the most harm and the least good, they could not have done a better job.\"\nMarshall's abilities to pick competent field commanders during the early part of the war was decidedly mixed. He was instrumental in advancing the careers of the highly capable generals such as Dwight D. Eisenhower, Omar Bradley, George S. Patton, Walter Krueger and Mark W. Clark. A notable exception was his recommendation of the swaggering Lloyd Fredendall to Eisenhower for a major command in the American invasion of North Africa during Operation Torch. Marshall was especially fond of Fredendall, describing him as \"one of the best\" and remarking in a staff meeting when his name was mentioned, \"I like that man; you can see determination all over his face.\" Eisenhower duly picked him to command the 39,000-man Central Task Force (the largest of three) in Operation Torch. Both men would come to regret that decision, as Fredendall was the leader of U.S. Army forces at the disastrous Battle of Kasserine Pass.\nPlanned invasion of Europe.\nDuring World War II, Marshall was instrumental in preparing the U.S. Army and Army Air Forces for the invasion of Continental Europe. Marshall wrote the document that would become the central strategy for all Allied operations in Europe. During the Arcadia Conference, he convinced the United Kingdom to accept this strategy, including the focus on defeating Germany first and the establishment of international unified commands in control of all Allied forces in a given theatre. His push for unity of command, in particular through the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the American-British-Dutch-Australian Command, met with resistance from the British Armed Forces under Alan Brooke because the scheme would allow the United States to dominate the Western Allied war effort, but the British government ultimately approved.\nHe initially scheduled Operation Overlord for 1 April 1943, but met with strong opposition from Winston Churchill, who convinced Roosevelt to commit troops to Operation Husky for the invasion of Italy. Marshall and his advisors also opposed the Allied invasion of French North Africa after it became clear that Vichy France would offer resistance, concerns over an Axis intervention through Francoist Spain and Gibraltar, and suspicions that the operation was intended to defend European colonial territory with little strategic value to the war.\nWhen rumors circulated that Marshall would become the Supreme Commander of Operation Overlord, many critics viewed the potential transfer as a demotion, since he would leave his position as Chief of Staff of the Army and lose his seat on the Combined Chiefs of Staff. While Marshall enjoyed considerable success in working with Congress and Roosevelt, he refused to lobby for the position. Roosevelt selected Eisenhower, in large part because he did not want to do without Marshall in the Chief of Staff position. He told Marshall, \"I didn't feel I could sleep at ease if you were out of Washington.\"\nOn 16 December 1944, Marshall became the first American general to be promoted to the newly created rank of general of the Army, a five-star rank that placed senior American commanders on an equal footing with the field marshals of European Allies; Marshall had objected to being awarded the title of field marshal, as it would have given him the title of \"Marshal Marshall\".\nThroughout the remainder of World War II, Marshall coordinated Allied operations in both Europe and the Pacific. He was characterized as the organizer of Allied victory by Churchill. \"Time\" magazine named Marshall Man of the Year for 1943. Marshall resigned his post of chief of staff on 18 November 1945, but did not retire, as regulations stipulate that generals of the Army remain on active duty for life. He was succeeded as Army chief of staff by General of the Army Dwight Eisenhower. During this time, he also received a Bronze oak leaf cluster to his Army DSM for his unprecedented work from 1939 to 1945. The medal's citation reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnalysis of Pearl Harbor intelligence failure.\nAfter World War II ended, the Congressional Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack received testimony on the intelligence failure. It amassed 25,000 pages of documents, 40 volumes, and included nine reports and investigations, eight of which had been previously completed. These reports included criticism of Marshall for delaying sending Lieutenant General Walter Short, the Army commander in Hawaii, important information obtained from intercepted Japanese diplomatic messages. The report also criticized Marshall's lack of knowledge of the readiness of the Hawaiian Command during November and December 1941. Marshall also advised President Roosevelt to move part of the United States Pacific Fleet to the Atlantic Ocean to assist Neutrality Patrols, and that the defenses at Oahu made a Japanese attack on the island impossible. These recommendations were dismissed by the President but could have been catastrophic if they had not been.\nTen days after the attack, Short and Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, commander of the United States Pacific Fleet at Naval Station Pearl Harbor, were both relieved of their duties. The final report of the Joint Committee did not single out or fault Marshall. While the report was critical of the overall situation, the committee noted that subordinates had failed to pass on important information to their superiors, including to Marshall.\nA secret review of the Army's role, which resulted in the Clausen Report, was authorized by Secretary Henry Stimson. The report was critical of Short and also of Colonel Rufus S. Bratton of the Military Intelligence Division (G-2), who investigator Henry Clausen concluded arrived at the War Department later on the morning of 7 December 1941 than he initially claimed during testimony and invented a story about a warning to affected army commanders about the imminent Pearl Harbor Attack being delayed because he had been unable to get in touch with Marshall, an allegation which \"nearly destroyed\" Marshall.\nMission to China.\nOnly weeks after Marshall's retirement, in December 1945, President Harry Truman dispatched Marshall to the Republic of China, where he had served in the 1920s. His new mission was to prevent a resumption of the Chinese Civil War by brokering a coalition government between America's Kuomintang allies under Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and the Chinese Communist Party of Mao Zedong. Marshall had no leverage over the Communists but threatened to withdraw American aid essential to the Nationalists. Both sides rejected his proposals and he returned to the United States in January 1947. As Secretary of State, Marshall disagreed with the Defense and State Department views that Chiang's success was vital to American interests, insisting that U.S. troops not become involved. The war continued, and the Communists won in 1949.\nSecretary of State.\nAfter Marshall's return to the U.S. in early 1947, Truman appointed him Secretary of State. As one of the most well-regarded and least politicized national leaders, he made an ideal front office personality. He became the spokesman for the State Department's ambitious plans to rebuild Europe. He did not design the plans and paid little attention to details or negotiations. He also did not keep himself up-to-date with details of foreign affairs. As one biographer notes, he had never been a workaholic. He turned over major responsibilities to his deputies, especially Under-Secretary Robert A. Lovett, and refused to be troubled by minutiae. By 1948, with frailties building up, his participation was further curtailed. Marshall said, \"The fact of the matter is that Lovett bears the principal burden as I get away whenever possible.\"\nOn 5 June 1947, in a speech at Harvard University, he outlined the American proposal. The European Recovery Program, as it was formally known, became known as the Marshall Plan. Clark Clifford had suggested to Truman that the plan be called the Truman Plan, but Truman immediately dismissed that idea and insisted that it be called the Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan would help Europe rebuild and modernize its economy along American lines and open up new opportunities for international trade. Stalin ordered his satellites in Eastern Europe not to participate. Marshall was again named \"Man of the Year\" by \"Time\" in January 1948.\nTruman repeatedly rejected Marshall's advice on Middle Eastern policy. As Secretary of State, Marshall strongly opposed recognizing the newly formed state of Israel. Marshall felt that if the state of Israel was declared, a war would break out in the Middle East (which it did when the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War began one day after Israel declared independence). Marshall saw recognizing the Jewish state as a political move to gain American Jewish support in the upcoming election, in which Truman was expected to lose to Thomas E. Dewey. He told President Truman in May 1948, \"If you [recognize the state of Israel] and if I were to vote in the election, I would vote against you.\" However, Marshall refused to vote in any election as a matter of principle.\nDuring his tenure as Secretary of State, Marshall also urged Truman to immediately call for The Netherlands to stop their invasion of Indonesia, a former Dutch colony which had declared independence in 1945. The Netherlands ignored the Truman administration's initial entreaties. As a result, the Marshall Plan program for the Netherlands' economic recovery was put on hold and the Truman administration threatened to cut all economic aid. The Netherlands finally agreed to withdraw and transferred sovereignty following the Dutch\u2013Indonesian Round Table Conference in 1949.\nMarshall resigned as Secretary of State because of ill health on 7 January 1949. He was severely exhausted throughout his tenure in the position. Dean Acheson in late 1947 said he was underperforming like \"a four-engine bomber going only on one engine.\" Truman named him to the largely honorific positions of chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission and president of the American National Red Cross. He received the 1953 Nobel Peace Prize for his post-war work, despite the criticism that he was a warrior and not a pacifist.\nSecretary of Defense.\nWhen the early months of the Korean War showed how poorly prepared the Defense Department was, President Truman fired Secretary Louis A. Johnson and named Marshall as Secretary of Defense in September 1950. The appointment required a congressional waiver because the National Security Act of 1947 prohibited a uniformed military officer from serving in the post. This prohibition included Marshall since individuals promoted to General of the Army are not technically retired but remain officially on active duty. Marshall was the first person to be granted such a waiver; in 2017, Jim Mattis became the second and in January 2021, General Lloyd Austin became the third. Marshall's main role as Secretary of Defense was to restore confidence and morale to the Defense Department while rebuilding the United States Armed Forces following their post-World War II demobilization.\nKorean War.\nMarshall worked to provide more manpower to meet the demands of both the Korean War and the Cold War in Europe. To implement his priorities Marshall brought in a new leadership team, including Robert A. Lovett as his deputy and Anna M. Rosenberg, former head of the War Manpower Commission, as assistant secretary of defense for manpower. He also worked to rebuild the relationship between the Defense and State Departments, as well as the relationship between the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nMarshall participated in the post-Inchon landing discussion that led to authorizing Douglas MacArthur to conduct the UN offensive into North Korea. A secret \"eyes only\" signal from Marshall to MacArthur on 29 September 1950, declared the Truman administration's commitment: \"We want you to feel unhampered strategically and tactically to proceed north of the 38th Parallel\". At the same time, Marshall advised against public pronouncements which might lead to United Nations votes undermining or countermanding the initial mandate to restore the border between North and South Korea. Marshall and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were generally supportive of MacArthur because they were of the view that field commanders should be able to exercise their best judgment in accomplishing the intent of their superiors.\nFollowing Chinese military intervention in Korea during late November, Marshall and the Joint Chiefs of Staff sought ways to aid MacArthur while avoiding all-out war with China. In the debate over what to do about China's increased involvement, Marshall opposed a cease-fire on the grounds that it would make the U.S. look weak in China's eyes, leading to demands for future concessions. In addition, Marshall argued that the U.S. had a moral obligation to honor its commitment to South Korea. When British Prime Minister Clement Attlee suggested diplomatic overtures to China, Marshall opposed, arguing that it was impossible to negotiate with the Communist government. In addition, Marshall expressed concern that concessions to China would undermine confidence in the U.S. among its Asian allies, including Japan and the Philippines. When some in Congress favored expanding the war in Korea and confronting China, Marshall argued against a wider war in Korea, continuing instead to stress the importance of containing the Soviet Union during the Cold War battle for primacy in Europe.\nRelief of General MacArthur.\nIncreasingly concerned about public statements from MacArthur, commander of United Nations Command forces fighting in the Korean War, which contradicted President Truman's on prosecution of the war, on the morning of 6 April 1951, Truman held a meeting with Marshall, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Omar Bradley, Secretary of State Dean Acheson, and advisor W. Averell Harriman to discuss whether MacArthur should be removed from command.\nHarriman was emphatically in favor of MacArthur's relief, but Bradley opposed it. Marshall asked for more time to consider the matter. Acheson was in favor but did not disclose this, instead warning Truman that if he did it, MacArthur's relief would cause \"the biggest fight of your administration.\" At another meeting the following day, Marshall and Bradley continued to oppose MacArthur's relief. On 8 April, the Joint Chiefs of Staff met with Marshall, and each expressed the view that MacArthur's relief was desirable from a \"military point of view,\" suggesting that \"if MacArthur were not relieved, a large segment of our people would charge that civil authorities no longer controlled the military.\"\nMarshall, Bradley, Acheson, and Harriman met with Truman again on 9 April. Bradley informed the President of the views of the Joint Chiefs, and Marshall added that he agreed with them. Truman wrote in his diary that \"it is of unanimous opinion of all that MacArthur be relieved. All four so advise.\" (The Joint Chiefs would later insist that they had only \"concurred\" with the relief, not \"recommended\" it.)\nOn 11 April 1951, Truman directed transmittal of an order to MacArthur, issued over Bradley's signature, relieving MacArthur of his assignment in Korea and directing him to turn over command to Matthew Ridgway. In line with Marshall's view, and those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, MacArthur's relief was looked upon by proponents as being necessary to reassert the tenet of civilian control of the military.\nLater life.\nRetirement.\nIn September 1951, after 49 years of continuous public service, Marshall retired to his home, Dodona Manor, in Leesburg, Virginia. Purchased by the Marshalls in 1941, Dodona had previously served as a quiet weekend retreat for the busy couple. The home was restored beginning in the 1990s and the house and its gardens are open to the public as a museum.\nIt was at Dodona Manor that Marshall enjoyed his favorite food, roast leg of lamb, and his favorite beverage, an old fashioned. Gardening was one of Marshall's favorite pastimes, and in retirement he grew vegetables throughout the year, including tomatoes and pumpkins, while Katherine Marshall enjoyed tending to her rose garden. In a 1942 letter to David Burpee, president of the W. Atlee Burpee &amp; Company, Marshall wrote, \"The business of seeds and flowers tantalizes me because I have been an amateur gardener, both flower and vegetable, since a boy of ten. There is nothing I would so much prefer to do this spring as to turn my mind to the wholesome business of gardening rather than the terrible problems and tragedies of war.\"\nKatherine's love of roses was well known, leading inventor Eugene S. Boerner to create the Katherine Tupper Marshall Rose, a pink hybrid tea rose. It was patented by Jackson and Perkins in 1943.\nAmerican Battle Monuments Commission.\nThroughout his retirement, Marshall served as chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission. He oversaw the construction of fourteen cemeteries in eight countries following World War II to memorialize those killed or missing in battle. In the early 1950s, Marshall argued for the speedy construction and funding of cemeteries despite budget and staff cuts for the Korean War. Marshall wrote to General Joseph McNarney in March 1951 saying, \"I am naturally hesitant to become personally involved in individual personnel problems, but in this case, am deeply concerned about the overall morale factor if our foreign national cemeteries are not adequately maintained...\" Marshall's efforts to secure building and maintenance staff for the cemeteries were successful, doubling the number of military officers assigned to the work. On 13 September 1952, Marshall attended the dedication ceremony of Suresnes American Cemetery in France.\nCoronation of Queen Elizabeth II.\nAfter retiring, Marshall largely withdrew from public life. A notable exception was in June 1953, when he accepted President Eisenhower's appointment to head the American delegation to the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. The delegation included Earl Warren and Omar Bradley, and according to Bradley, as Marshall walked up the aisle of Westminster Abbey to take his seat before the ceremony, the congregation rose to its feet as a gesture of respect. Marshall looked behind him to see who the arriving dignitary was, then realized the congregation had stood for him. Marshall was also invited to the post-ceremony banquet at Buckingham Palace, and was the only non-royal seated at Queen Elizabeth's table.\nFamily life.\nGeorge Marshall was the youngest of three siblings. His older brother Stuart Bradford Marshall (1875\u20131956) was a graduate of the Virginia Military Institute and became a manager and executive in several metal production corporations, including the American Manganese Manufacturing Company. He later worked as a metallurgist and consulting engineer specializing in the production and operation of blast furnaces, coke ovens, and foundries. George and Stuart Marshall were long estranged because George married Lily Coles, who a few years before had rejected Stuart's proposal. When Stuart found out George was engaged to Lily, Stuart made unkind remarks about her, and George \"cut him off my list.\" Marshall's sister, Marie Louise (1876\u20131962) was the wife of John Johnston Singer (1879\u20131934), an Army physician.\nOn 11 February 1902, Marshall married Elizabeth Carter \"Lily\" Coles at her mother's home in Lexington, Virginia. Marshall met Lily after listening to her play the piano across the street from VMI. Marshall, being immediately smitten, would \"run the block\", or leave barracks after hours, to be with her. After traveling abroad to Japan, Korea, and China with Marshall, Lily returned to the U.S. to have a goiter removed. She died on 15 September 1927, after thyroid surgery that strained her weak heart. They did not have children.\nOn 15 October 1930, Marshall married Katherine Boyce Tupper (8 October 1882 \u2013 18 December 1978); They had no children, but she was the mother of three children with Baltimore lawyer Clifton Stevenson Brown. He had been murdered by a disgruntled client in 1928. The second Mrs. Marshall was a graduate of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts; she later studied at the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise and toured with Frank Benson's English Shakespearean Company. She authored a memoir in 1946, \"Together: Annals of an Army Wife\".\nOne of Marshall's stepsons, Allen Tupper Brown (1916\u20131944), was an Army lieutenant who was killed in Italy on 29 May 1944. Another stepson was Major Clifton Stevenson Brown Jr. (1914\u20131952). Stepdaughter Molly Brown Winn (1912\u20131997), the mother of actress Kitty Winn, was married to Colonel James Julius Winn (1907\u20131990), who had been an aide to Marshall. Molly Winn was active in preserving Marshall's legacy, including preserving Dodona Manor and publishing Marshall's World War I memoirs.\nDeath and burial.\nAfter a series of strokes, Marshall died at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington, D.C., on 16 October 1959, two months shy of his 79th birthday. Although he was entitled to official proceedings, Marshall preferred simplicity, so he received a special military funeral that dispensed with many of the usual activities. The ceremonies included lying in state at Washington National Cathedral for 24 hours, guarded by representatives from each U.S. armed service and a VMI cadet.\nPresident Eisenhower ordered flags flown at half-staff and was among the 200 guests invited for the funeral service held at Fort Myer. Other dignitaries included former President Truman, Secretary of State Christian A. Herter, former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, former Governor W. Averell Harriman and Generals Omar N. Bradley, Alfred M. Gruenther, and Matthew B. Ridgway. His parish priest, Franklin Moss Jr., from St. James Episcopal Church in Leesburg conducted the chapel and graveside services, assisted by former chief chaplain and National Cathedral Canon the Reverend Luther Miller. In accordance with Marshall's wishes, there was no eulogy. Following the burial service, an artillery battery fired a 19-gun salute and a bugler played taps. The flag that draped Marshall's casket was folded and given to Mrs. Marshall by a VMI cadet.\nMarshall was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, Section 7, Grave 8198, beside his first wife and her mother, Elizabeth Pendleton Coles (1849\u20131929). His second wife was also buried with him after she died on 18 December 1978. On its reverse side, the marble headstone lists General Marshall's positions held: \"Chief of Staff U.S. Army, Secretary of State, President of American Red Cross, Secretary of Defense.\" The five-star rank adorns both sides of the stone.\nReputation and legacy.\nAs William Taylor and other historians have recently emphasized, George Marshall was the best-known and most active \u2013 and most selfless \u2013 American leader in the early Cold War. His leadership had a distinct, signature style which contained \"Disdain for false speaking and dissembling\", \"Aura of Authority\" and \"Immensity of Integrity\". He viewed his world in definitive black and white with no vagueness in arguments or gray areas in decision-making. Marshall is best known for giving his name and prestige to the Marshall Plan to rebuild the European economy. However, he suffered several defeats \u2013 he failed in the year-long effort to resolve the Chinese Civil War; he was defeated in his proposal to impose universal military service on all American men; and he was overruled by President Truman when he opposed the recognition of Israel. Historians agree that Truman depended heavily upon Marshall's prestige at a time of intensely bitter partisanship. Wilson Miscamble points to Marshall's delayed recognition of the threat posed by the Soviet Union \u2013 not until April 1947 did he realize the dangers. Miscamble concludes that recent studies show that Marshall was:An important contributor but hardly a dominant figure in the making of postwar American foreign policy. He had a special gift for delegation and he drew forth impressive contributions from various capable subordinates.\nMarshall's reputation for excellence as a military organizer and planner was recognized early in his career and became known throughout the Army. In a performance appraisal prepared while Marshall was a lieutenant in the Philippines, his superior, Captain E. J. Williams responded to the routine question of whether he would want the evaluated officer to serve under his command again by writing of Marshall \"Should the exigencies of active service place him in exalted command I would be glad to serve \"under him\".\" (Emphasis added)\nAfter Marshall participated in large-scale maneuvers and exercises in 1913 while serving as J. Franklin Bell's aide, Bell commended his performance by writing that Marshall was \"the greatest potential wartime leader in the army.\"\nIn 1916, Lieutenant Colonel Johnson Hagood completed a written evaluation of Marshall's performance in which he called Marshall a military genius. Responding to the question of whether he would want his subordinate Marshall to serve under him again, Hagood wrote \"Yes, but I would prefer to serve \"under his command\".\" (Emphasis added) Hagood went on to recommend Marshall's immediate promotion to brigadier general, despite the fact that there were more than 1,800 officers, including Hagood, who were senior to him.\nAfter the surrender of the Nazi German government in May 1945, Henry L. Stimson, the Secretary of War, paid tribute to Marshall in front of a gathering of members of the Army staff, concluding with: \"I have seen a great many soldiers in my lifetime and you, Sir, are the finest soldier I have ever known.\"\nHistorians credit the high regard others had for Marshall's personal integrity as another reason for his positive legacy. In addition to his willingness to confront Pershing over Pershing's berating of the 1st Division chief of staff during World War I, Marshall cited other instances where he provided persistent advice that kept Pershing from creating needless controversy. In one, Marshall recalled a time when Pershing and James Harbord intended to change a War Department policy implemented by Peyton March, the chief of staff of the Army and Pershing's nominal superior, with whom Pershing had a long-running feud. Marshall counseled against it several times, and Pershing angrily indicated that his chief of staff Harbord and he intended to submit their proposal despite Marshall's advice. Rather than concede, Marshall replied that Pershing was letting his personal feud with March cloud his judgment and that Harbord, who also disliked March, was doing the same. Instead of continuing to \"pull rank\", Pershing yielded to Marshall's judgment and said \"Well, have it your own way.\"\nIn another incident that highlighted Marshall's reputation for integrity, when President Franklin Roosevelt, a former Assistant Secretary of the Navy, favored the Navy during World War II planning, Marshall suggested that Roosevelt stop referring to the Navy as \"us\" and the Army as \"them.\" Roosevelt laughed, but Marshall's humorous protest had made its point.\nIn addition to his military success, Marshall is primarily remembered as the driving force behind the Marshall Plan, which provided billions of dollars in aid to post war Europe to restart the economies of the destroyed countries. In recent years, the cooperation required between former European adversaries as part of the Marshall Plan has been recognized as one of the earliest factors that led to European integration beginning with the formation of the European Coal and Steel Community, and eventually the formation of the European Union.\nIn a television interview after leaving office, Truman was asked which American he thought had made the greatest contribution of the preceding thirty years. Without hesitation, Truman picked Marshall, adding \"I don't think in this age in which I have lived, that there has been a man who has been a greater administrator; a man with a knowledge of military affairs equal to General Marshall.\"\nOrson Welles said in a 1970 interview with Dick Cavett that \"Marshall is the greatest man I ever met ... I think he was the greatest human being who was also a great man ... He was a tremendous gentleman: an old fashioned institution which isn't with us anymore.\" The story Welles related to Cavett to illustrate his point was about a time he saw Marshall take the time to speak with a young American soldier who had accidentally entered the same room. The young man was starstruck to have accidentally stumbled upon Marshall, yet Marshall still patiently and politely engaged the soldier in conversation.\nTributes and memorials.\nTwo non-profit organizations, the George C. Marshall Foundation and the George C. Marshall International Center, actively propagate General Marshall's legacy. The Marshall Foundation oversees Marshall's official papers and over two million other documents relating to the 20th century. The International Center preserves Marshall's home, Dodona Manor, as a museum and hosts educational programs focusing on Marshall's life, leadership, and role in American history.\nNumerous streets are named for General Marshall, including George-Marshall-Stra\u00dfe in Wiesbaden, Germany and George-C.-Marshall-Ring in Oberursel, Germany.\nOn 30 April 1998, the George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies unveiled the first public statue of General Marshall in Europe in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. The slightly larger-than-life statue was sponsored by the Marshall Center, the Friends of the Marshall Center and the City of Garmisch-Partenkirchen. It shows Marshall in uniform walking across a bronze bridge, facing east, to greet new friends and allies and was designed by artist Christiane Horn of Wartenberg, Bavaria. Vernon A. Walters, former U.S. ambassador to Germany, was a keynote speaker during the dedication ceremony.\nIn film and fiction.\nMarshall has been played in film and television by:\nDates of rank.\nMarshall's dates of rank were:\nNote \u2013 Marshall served as Secretary of State from 21 January 1947 to 20 January 1949. He retired from the Army on 28 February 1947 and returned to active duty on 1 March 1949.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36624", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36624", "title": "Embryo", "text": "Multicellular diploid eukaryote in its earliest stage of development\nAn embryo ( ) is the initial stage of development for a multicellular organism. In organisms that reproduce sexually, embryonic development is the part of the life cycle that begins just after fertilization of the female egg cell by the male sperm cell. The resulting fusion of these two cells produces a single-celled zygote that undergoes many cell divisions that produce cells known as blastomeres. The blastomeres are arranged as a solid ball that when reaching a certain size, called a morula, takes in fluid to create a cavity called a blastocoel. The structure is then termed a blastula, or a blastocyst in mammals.\nThe mammalian blastocyst hatches before implantating into the endometrial lining of the womb. Once implanted the embryo will continue its development through the next stages of gastrulation, neurulation, and organogenesis. Gastrulation is the formation of the three germ layers that will form all of the different parts of the body. Neurulation forms the nervous system, and organogenesis is the development of all the various tissues and organs of the body.\nA newly developing human is typically referred to as an embryo until the ninth week after conception, when it is then referred to as a fetus. In other multicellular organisms, the word \"embryo\" can be used more broadly to any early developmental or life cycle stage prior to birth or hatching.\nEtymology.\nFirst attested in English in the mid-14th century, the word derives from Medieval Latin , itself from Greek () 'young one', which is the neuter form of () 'growing in'. Morphologically it is derived from () 'in' and () 'to swell, to be full'. The proper Latinized form of the Greek term would be \"embryum\".\nDevelopment.\nAnimal embryos.\nIn animals, fertilization begins the process of embryonic development with the creation of a zygote, a single cell resulting from the fusion of gametes (e.g. egg and sperm). The development of a zygote into a multicellular embryo proceeds through a series of recognizable stages, often divided into cleavage, blastula, gastrulation, and organogenesis.\nCleavage is the period of rapid mitotic cell divisions that occur after fertilization. During cleavage, the overall size of the embryo does not change, but the size of individual cells decrease rapidly as they divide to increase the total number of cells. Cleavage results in a blastula.\nDepending on the species, a blastula or blastocyst stage embryo can appear as a ball of cells on top of yolk, or as a hollow sphere of cells surrounding a middle cavity. The embryo's cells continue to divide and increase in number, while molecules within the cells such as RNAs and proteins actively promote key developmental processes such as gene expression, cell fate specification, and polarity. Before implanting into the uterine wall the embryo is sometimes known as the \"pre-implantation embryo\" or \"pre-implantation conceptus\". Sometimes this is called the pre-embryo, a term employed to differentiate from an embryo proper in relation to embryonic stem cell discourses.\nGastrulation is the next phase of embryonic development, and involves the development of two or more layers of cells (germinal layers). Animals that form two layers (such as Cnidaria) are called diploblastic, and those that form three (most other animals, from flatworms to humans) are called triploblastic. During gastrulation of triploblastic animals, the three germinal layers that form are called the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. All tissues and organs of a mature animal can trace their origin back to one of these layers. For example, the ectoderm will give rise to the skin epidermis and the nervous system, the mesoderm will give rise to the vascular system, muscles, bone, and connective tissues, and the endoderm will give rise to organs of the digestive system and epithelium of the digestive system and respiratory system. Many visible changes in embryonic structure happen throughout gastrulation as the cells that make up the different germ layers migrate and cause the previously round embryo to fold or invaginate into a cup-like appearance.\nPast gastrulation, an embryo continues to develop into a mature multicellular organism by forming structures necessary for life outside of the womb or egg. As the name suggests, organogenesis is the stage of embryonic development when organs form. During organogenesis, molecular and cellular interactions prompt certain populations of cells from the different germ layers to differentiate into organ-specific cell types. For example, in neurogenesis, a subpopulation of cells from the ectoderm segregate from other cells and further specialize to become the brain, spinal cord, or peripheral nerves.\nThe embryonic period varies from species to species. In human development, the term fetus is used instead of embryo after the ninth week after conception, whereas in zebrafish, embryonic development is considered finished when a bone called the cleithrum becomes visible. In animals that hatch from an egg, such as birds, a young animal is typically no longer referred to as an embryo once it has hatched. In viviparous animals (animals whose offspring spend at least some time developing within a parent's body), the offspring is typically referred to as an embryo while inside of the parent, and is no longer considered an embryo after birth or exit from the parent. However, the extent of development and growth accomplished while inside of an egg or parent varies significantly from species to species, so much so that the processes that take place after hatching or birth in one species may take place well before those events in another. Therefore, according to one textbook, it is common for scientists to interpret the scope of embryology broadly as the study of the development of animals.\nPlant embryos.\nFlowering plants (angiosperms) create embryos after the fertilization of a haploid ovule by pollen. The DNA from the ovule and pollen combine to form a diploid, single-cell zygote that will develop into an embryo. The zygote, which will divide multiple times as it progresses throughout embryonic development, is one part of a seed. Other seed components include the endosperm, which is tissue rich in nutrients that will help support the growing plant embryo, and the seed coat, which is a protective outer covering. The first cell division of a zygote is asymmetric, resulting in an embryo with one small cell (the apical cell) and one large cell (the basal cell). The small, apical cell will eventually give rise to most of the structures of the mature plant, such as the stem, leaves, and roots. The larger basal cell will give rise to the suspensor, which connects the embryo to the endosperm so that nutrients can pass between them. The plant embryo cells continue to divide and progress through developmental stages named for their general appearance: globular, heart, and torpedo. In the globular stage, three basic tissue types (dermal, ground, and vascular) can be recognized. The dermal tissue will give rise to the epidermis or outer covering of a plant, ground tissue will give rise to inner plant material that functions in photosynthesis, resource storage, and physical support, and vascular tissue will give rise to connective tissue like the xylem and phloem that transport fluid, nutrients, and minerals throughout the plant. In heart stage, one or two cotyledons (embryonic leaves) will form. Meristems (centers of stem cell activity) develop during the torpedo stage, and will eventually produce many of the mature tissues of the adult plant throughout its life. At the end of embryonic growth, the seed will usually go dormant until germination. Once the embryo begins to germinate (grow out from the seed) and forms its first true leaf, it is called a seedling or plantlet.\nPlants that produce spores instead of seeds, like bryophytes and ferns, also produce embryos. In these plants, the embryo begins its existence attached to the inside of the archegonium on a parental gametophyte from which the egg cell was generated. The inner wall of the archegonium lies in close contact with the \"foot\" of the developing embryo; this \"foot\" consists of a bulbous mass of cells at the base of the embryo which may receive nutrition from its parent gametophyte. The structure and development of the rest of the embryo varies by group of plants.\nSince all land plants create embryos, they are collectively referred to as embryophytes (or by their scientific name, Embryophyta). This, along with other characteristics, distinguishes land plants from other types of plants, such as algae, which do not produce embryos.\nResearch and technology.\nBiological processes.\nEmbryos from numerous plant and animal species are studied in biological research laboratories across the world to learn about topics such as stem cells, evolution and development, cell division, and gene expression. Examples of scientific discoveries made while studying embryos that were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine include the Spemann-Mangold organizer, a group of cells originally discovered in amphibian embryos that give rise to neural tissues, and genes that give rise to body segments discovered in \"Drosophila\" fly embryos by Christiane N\u00fcsslein-Volhard and Eric Wieschaus.\nAssisted reproductive technology.\nCreating and/or manipulating embryos via assisted reproductive technology (ART) is used for addressing fertility concerns in humans and other animals, and for selective breeding in agricultural species. Between the years 1987 and 2015, ART techniques including in vitro fertilization (IVF) were responsible for an estimated one million human births in the United States alone. Other clinical technologies include preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), which can identify certain serious genetic abnormalities, such as aneuploidy, prior to selecting embryos for use in IVF. Some have proposed (or even attempted\u2014see He Jiankui affair) genetic editing of human embryos via CRISPR-Cas9 as a potential avenue for preventing disease; however, this has been met with widespread condemnation from the scientific community.\nART techniques are also used to improve the profitability of agricultural animal species such as cows and pigs by enabling selective breeding for desired traits and/or to increase numbers of offspring. For example, when allowed to breed naturally, cows typically produce one calf per year, whereas IVF increases offspring yield to 9\u201312 calves per year. IVF and other ART techniques, including cloning via interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT), are also used in attempts to increase the numbers of endangered or vulnerable species, such as Northern white rhinos, cheetahs, and sturgeons.\nCryoconservation of plant and animal biodiversity.\nCryoconservation of genetic resources involves collecting and storing the reproductive materials, such as embryos, seeds, or gametes, from animal or plant species at low temperatures in order to preserve them for future use. Some large-scale animal species cryoconservation efforts include \"frozen zoos\" in various places around the world, including in the UK's Frozen Ark, the Breeding Centre for Endangered Arabian Wildlife (BCEAW) in the United Arab Emirates, and the San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation in the United States. As of 2018, there were approximately 1,700 seed banks used to store and protect plant biodiversity, particularly in the event of mass extinction or other global emergencies. The Svalbard Global Seed Vault in Norway maintains the largest collection of plant reproductive tissue, with more than a million samples stored at .\nFossilized embryos.\nFossilized animal embryos are known from the Precambrian, and are found in great numbers during the Cambrian period. Even fossilized dinosaur embryos have been discovered.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36631", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36631", "title": "210s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 210s decade ran from January 1, 210, to December 31, 219.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36633", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36633", "title": "220s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 220s decade ran from January 1, 220, to December 31, 229.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36634", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36634", "title": "230s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 230s decade ran from January 1, 230, to December 31, 239.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36635", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36635", "title": "240s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 240s decade ran from January 1, 240, to December 31, 249.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36636", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36636", "title": "Medina", "text": "Second-holiest city in Islam and Capital of Medina Province, Saudi Arabia\nMedina, officially al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, also known as Taybah and known in pre-Islamic times as Yathrib, is the capital and administrative centre of Medina Province in the Hejaz region of western Saudi Arabia. It is one of the oldest and most important places in Islamic history. The second holiest city in Islam, the population as of 2022 is 1,477,023, making it the fourth-most populous city in the country. Around 58.5% of the population are Saudi citizens and 41.5% are foreigners. Located at the core of the Medina Province in the western reaches of the country, the city is distributed over , of which constitutes the city's urban area, while the rest is occupied by the Hejaz Mountains, empty valleys, agricultural spaces and older dormant volcanoes.\nMedina is generally considered to be the \"cradle of Islamic culture and civilization\". The city is considered to be the second-holiest of three key cities in Islamic tradition, with Makkah and Jerusalem serving as the holiest and third-holiest cities respectively. \"Al-Masjid al-Nabawi\" (lit.\u2009'The Prophet's Mosque') is of exceptional importance in Islam and serves as burial site of the prophet Muhammad, by whom the mosque was built in 622 CE (first year of the Hijrah). Observant Muslims usually visit his tomb, or \"rawdhah\", at least once in their lifetime during a pilgrimage known as Ziyarat, although this is not obligatory. The original name of the city before the advent of Islam was Yathrib (), and it is referred to by this name in Chapter 33 (\"Al-A\u1e25z\u0101b\", lit.\u2009'The Confederates') of the Quran. It was renamed to ' (lit.\u2009'City of the Prophet' or 'The Prophet's City') after and later to ' (lit.\u2009'The Enlightened City') before being simplified and shortened to its modern name, ' (lit.\u2009'The City'), from which the English-language spelling of \"Medina\" is derived. Saudi road signage uses ' and \"\" interchangeably.\nThe city existed for over 1,500 years before Muhammad's migration from Mecca, known as the Hijrah. Medina was the capital of a rapidly increasing Muslim caliphate under Muhammad's leadership, serving as its base of operations and as the cradle of Islam, where Muhammad's \"ummah\" (lit.\u2009'nation')\u2014composed of Medinan citizens (\"Ansar\") as well as those who immigrated with Muhammad (\"Muhajirun\"), who were collectively known as the \"Sahabah\"\u2014gained huge influence. Medina is home to three prominent mosques, namely al-Masjid an-Nabawi, Quba Mosque, and Masjid al-Qiblatayn, with the Quba Mosque being the oldest in Islam. A larger portion of the Qur'an was revealed in Medina in contrast to the earlier Meccan surahs.\nMuch like most of the Hejaz, Medina has seen numerous exchanges of power within its comparatively short existence. The region has been controlled by Jewish-Arabian tribes (up until the fifth century CE), the \u02bdAws and Khazraj (up until Muhammad's arrival), Muhammad and the Rashidun (622\u2013660), the Umayyads (660\u2013749), the Abbasids (749\u20131254), the Mamluks of Egypt (1254\u20131517), the Ottomans (1517\u20131805), the First Saudi State (1805\u20131811), Muhammad Ali of Egypt (1811\u20131840), the Ottomans for a second time (1840\u20131918), the Sharifate of Mecca under the Hashemites (1918\u20131925) and finally is in the hands of the present-day Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (1925\u2013present).\nIn addition to visiting for Ziyarah, tourists come to visit the other prominent mosques and landmarks in the city that hold religious significance such as Mount Uhud, Al-Baqi' cemetery and the Seven Mosques among others. The Saudi government has also carried out the destruction of several historical structures and archaeological sites, both in Medina and Mecca.\nNames.\nYathrib.\nBefore the advent of Islam, the city was known as Yathrib (; ). The word \"Yathrib\" appears in an inscription found in Harran, belongs to the Babylonian king Nabonidus (6th century BCE) and is well attested in several texts in the subsequent centuries. The name has also been recorded in \u0100yah (verse) 13 of Surah (chapter) 33 of the Qur'an.[Quran https://] and is thus known to have been the name of the city up to the Battle of the Trench. According to Islamic tradition, Muhammad later forbade calling the city by this name.\nTaybah and Tabah.\nSometime after the battle, Muhammad renamed the city \"Taybah\" (the Kind or the Good) (; ) and \"Tabah\" () which is of similar meaning. This name is also used to refer to the city in the popular folk song, \"Ya Taybah!\" (O Taybah!). The two names are combined in another name the city is known by, \"Taybat at-Tabah\" (the Kindest of the Kind).\nMadinah.\nThe city has also simply been called Al-Madinah (i.e. 'The City') in some \"ahadith\"\".\" The names \"\" () and \"Mad\u012bnat un-Nab\u012b\" (both meaning \"City of the Prophet\" or \"The Prophet's City\") and \"al-Mad\u012bnat ul-Munawwarah\" (\"The Enlightened City\") are all derivatives of this word. This is also the most commonly accepted modern name of the city, used in official documents and road signage, along with Madinah.\nHistory.\nMedina is home to several distinguished sites and landmarks, most of which are mosques and hold historic significance. These include the three aforementioned mosques, Masjid al-Fath (also known as Masjid al-Khandaq), the Seven Mosques, the Baqi' Cemetery where the graves of many famous Islamic figures are presumed to be located; directly to the southeast of the Prophet's Mosque, the Uhud mountain, site of the eponymous Battle of Uhud and the King Fahd Glorious Qur'an Printing Complex where most modern Qur'anic Mus'hafs are printed.\nEarly history.\nMedina has been inhabited at least 1500 years before the Hijra, or approximately the 9th century BCE. By the fourth century, Arab tribes began to encroach from Yemen, and there were three prominent Jewish tribes that inhabited the city around the time of Muhammad: the Banu Qaynuqa, the Banu Qurayza, and Banu Nadir. Ibn Khordadbeh later reported that during the Persian Empire's domination in Hejaz, the Banu Qurayza served as tax collectors for the Persian Shah.\nThe situation changed after the arrival of two new Arab tribes, the 'Aws or Banu 'Aws and the Khazraj, also known as the Banu Khazraj. At first, these tribes were allied with the Jewish tribes who ruled the region, but they later revolted and became independent.\nUnder the 'Aws and Khazraj.\nToward the end of the 5th century, the Jewish rulers lost control of the city to the two Arab tribes. \nMost modern historians accept the claim of the Muslim sources that after the revolt, the Jewish tribes became clients of the 'Aws and the Khazraj. However, according to Scottish scholar, William Montgomery Watt, the clientship of the Jewish tribes is not borne out by the historical accounts of the period prior to 627, and he maintained that the Jewish populace retained a measure of political independence.\nEarly Muslim chronicler Ibn Ishaq tells of an ancient conflict between the last Yemenite king of the Himyarite Kingdom and the residents of Yathrib. When the king was passing by the oasis, the residents killed his son, and the Yemenite ruler threatened to exterminate the people and cut down the palms. According to Ibn Ishaq, he was stopped from doing so by two rabbis from the Banu Qurayza tribe, who implored the king to spare the oasis because it was the place \"to which a prophet of the Quraysh would migrate in time to come, and it would be his home and resting-place.\" The Yemenite king thus did not destroy the town and converted to Judaism. He took the rabbis with him, and in Mecca, they reportedly recognised the Ka'bah as a structure built by Abraham and advised the king \"to do what the people of Mecca did: to circumambulate the structure, to venerate and honor it, to shave his head and to behave with all humility until he had left its precincts.\" On approaching Yemen, tells Ibn Ishaq, the rabbis demonstrated to the local people a miracle by coming out of a fire unscathed and the Yemenites accepted Judaism.\nEventually the Banu 'Aws and the Banu Khazraj became hostile to each other and by the time of Muhammad's Hijrah (emigration) to Medina in 622, they had been fighting for 120 years and were sworn enemies The Banu Nadir and the Banu Qurayza were allied with the 'Aws, while the Banu Qaynuqa sided with the Khazraj. They fought a total of four wars.\nTheir last and bloodiest known battle was the Battle of Bu'ath, fought a few years prior to the arrival of Muhammad. The outcome of the battle was inconclusive, and the feud continued. 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy, one Khazraj chief, had refused to take part in the battle, which earned him a reputation for equity and peacefulness. He was the most respected inhabitant of the city prior to Muhammad's arrival. To solve the ongoing feud, concerned residents of Yathrib met secretly with Muhammad in 'Aqaba, a place outside Mecca, inviting him and his small group of believers to come to the city, where Muhammad could serve a mediator between the factions and his community could practice its faith freely.\nUnder Muhammad and the Rashidun.\nIn 622, Muhammad and an estimated 70 Meccan Muhajirun left Mecca over a period of a few months for sanctuary in Yathrib, an event that transformed the religious and political landscape of the city completely; the longstanding enmity between the Aus and Khazraj tribes was dampened as many of the two Arab tribes and some local Jews embraced the new religion of Islam. Muhammad, linked to the Khazraj through his great-grandmother, was agreed on as the leader of the city. \nAccording to Ibn Ishaq, all parties in the area agreed to the Constitution of Medina, which committed all parties to mutual cooperation under the leadership of Muhammad. The nature of this document as recorded by Ibn Ishaq and transmitted by Ibn Hisham is the subject of dispute among modern Western historians, many of whom maintain that this \"treaty\" is possibly a collage of different agreements, oral rather than written, of different dates, and that it is not clear exactly when they were made. Other scholars, however, both Western and Muslim, argue that the text of the agreement\u2014whether a single document originally or several\u2014is possibly one of the oldest Islamic texts we possess. In Yemenite Jewish sources, another treaty was drafted between Muhammad and his Jewish subjects, known as \"Kit\u0101b Dimmat al-Nabi\", written in the 3rd year of the Hijra (625), and which gave express liberty to Jews living in Arabia to observe the Sabbath and to grow-out their side-locks. In return, they were to pay the jizya annually for protection by their patrons, while the Muslims would pay the Zakat tax.\nBattle of Uhud.\nIn the year 625, Abu Sufyan ibn Harb, a senior chieftain of Mecca who later converted to Islam, led a Meccan force against Medina. Muhammad marched out to meet the Qurayshi army with an estimated 1,000 troops, but just as the army approached the battlefield, 300 men under 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy withdrew, dealing a severe blow to the Muslim army's morale. Muhammad continued marching with his now 700-strong force and ordered a group of 50 archers to climb a small hill, now called \"Jabal ar-Rummaah\" (The Archers' Hill) to keep an eye on the Meccan's cavalry and to provide protection to the rear of the Muslim's army. As the battle heated up, the Meccans were forced to retreat. The frontline was pushed further and further away from the archers and foreseeing the battle to be a victory for the Muslims, the archers decided to leave their posts to pursue the retreating Meccans. A small party, however, stayed behind; pleading the rest to not disobey Muhammad's orders.\nSeeing that the archers were starting to descend from the hill, Khalid ibn al-Walid commanded his unit to ambush the hill and his cavalry unit pursued the descending archers were systematically slain by being caught in the plain ahead of the hill and the frontline, watched upon by their desperate comrades who stayed behind up in the hill who were shooting arrows to thwart the raiders, but with little to no effect. However, the Meccans did not capitalise on their advantage by invading Medina and returned to Mecca. The Madanis (people of Medina) suffered heavy losses, and Muhammad was injured.\nBattle of the Trench.\nIn 627, Abu Sufyan led another force toward Medina. Knowing of his intentions, Muhammad asked for proposals for defending the northern flank of the city, as the east and west were protected by volcanic rocks and the south was covered with palm trees. Salman al-Farsi, a Persian Sahabi who was familiar with Sasanian war tactics recommended digging a trench to protect the city and Muhammad accepted it. The subsequent siege came to be known as the Battle of the Trench and the Battle of the Confederates. After a month-long siege and various skirmishes, the Meccans withdrew again due to the harsh winter.\nDuring the siege, Abu Sufyan contacted the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza and formed an agreement with them, to attack the Muslim defenders and effectively encircle the defenders. It was however discovered by the Muslims and thwarted. This was in breach of the Constitution of Medina and after the Meccan withdrawal, Muhammad immediately marched against the Qurayza and laid siege to their strongholds. The Jewish forces eventually surrendered. Some members of the Aws negotiated on behalf of their old allies and Muhammad agreed to appoint one of their chiefs who had converted to Islam, Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, as judge. Sa'ad judged that all male members of the tribe should be killed and the women and children enslaved. This action was conceived of as a defensive measure to ensure that the Muslim community could be confident of its continued survival in Medina. The French historian Robert Mantran proposes that from this point of view it was successful\u2014from this point on, the Muslims were no longer primarily concerned with survival but with expansion and conquest.\nIn the ten years following the hijra, Medina formed the base from which Muhammad and the Muslim army attacked and were attacked, and it was from here that he marched on Mecca, entering it without battle in 630. Despite Muhammad's tribal connection to Mecca, the growing importance of Mecca in Islam, the significance of the Ka'bah as the centre of the Islamic world, as the direction of prayer (Qibla), and in the Islamic pilgrimage (Hajj), Muhammad returned to Medina, which remained for some years the most important city of Islam and the base of operations of the early Rashidun Caliphate.\nThe city is presumed to have been renamed \"Madinat al-Nabi\" (\"City of the Prophet\" in Arabic) in honour of Muhammad's prophethood and the city being the site of his burial. Alternatively, Lucien Gubbay suggests the name Medina could also have been a derivative from the Aramaic word \"Medinta\", which the Jewish inhabitants could have used for the city.\nUnder the first three caliphs Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, Medina was the capital of a rapidly increasing Muslim Empire. During the reign of 'Uthman ibn al-Affan, the third caliph, a party of Arabs from Egypt, disgruntled at some of his political decisions, attacked Medina in 656 and assassinated him in his own home. Ali, the fourth caliph, changed the capital of the caliphate from Medina to Kufa in Iraq for being in a more strategic location. Since then, Medina's importance dwindled, becoming more a place of religious importance than of political power. Medina witnessed little to no economic growth during and after Ali's reign. \nUnder subsequent Islamic regimes.\nUmayyad Caliphate.\nAfter al-Hasan, the son of 'Ali, ceded power to Mu'awiyah I, son of Abu Sufyan, Mu'awiyah marched into Kufa, Ali's capital, and received the allegiance of the local 'Iraqis. This is considered to be the beginning of the Umayyad caliphate. Mu'awiyah's governors took special care of Medina and dug the 'Ayn az-Zarqa'a (\"Blue Spring\") spring along with a project that included the creation of underground ducts for the purposes of irrigation. Dams were built in some of the wadis and the subsequent agricultural boom led to the strengthening of the economy.\nFollowing a period of unrest during the Second Fitna in 679, Husayn ibn 'Ali was martyred at Karbala and Yazid assumed unchecked control for the next three years. In 682, Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr declared himself Caliph of Mecca and the people of Medina swore allegiance to him. This led to an eight-year-long period of economic distress for the city. In 692, the Umayyads regained power and Medina experienced its second period of huge economic growth. Trade improved and more people moved into the city. The banks of Wadi al-'Aqiq were now lush with greenery. This period of peace and prosperity coincided with the rule of 'Umar ibn Abdulaziz, who many consider to be the fifth of the Rashidun.\nAbbasid Caliphate.\nAbdulbasit A. Badr, in his book, \"Madinah, The Enlightened City: History and Landmarks\", divides this period into three distinct phases:\nBadr describes the period between 749 and 974 as a push-and-pull between peace and political turmoil, while Medina continued to pay allegiance to the Abbasids. From 974 to 1151, the Sharifate of Medina was in a liaison with the Fatimids, even though the political stand between the two remained turbulent and did not exceed the normal allegiance. From 1151 onwards, Medina paid allegiance to the Zengids, and the Emir Nuruddin Zengi took care of the roads used by pilgrims and funded the fixing of the water sources and streets. When he visited Medina in 1162, he ordered the construction of a new wall that encompassed the new urban areas outside the old city wall. Zengi was succeeded by Saladin, founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, who supported Qasim ibn Muhanna, the Sharif of Medina, and greatly funded the growth of the city while slashing taxes paid by the pilgrims. He also funded the Bedouins who lived on the routes used by pilgrims to protect them on their journeys. The later Abbasids also continued to fund the expenses of the city. While Medina was formally allied with the Abbasids during this period, they maintained closer relations with the Zengids and Ayyubids. The historic city formed an oval, surrounded by a strong wall, high, dating from this period, and was flanked with towers. Of its four gates, the \"Bab al-Salam\" (\"The Gate of Peace\"), was remarked for its beauty. Beyond the walls of the city, the west and south were suburbs consisting of low houses, yards, gardens and plantations.\nMamluk Sultanate of Cairo.\nAfter the fall of Baghdad, the capital of the Abbasid Empire, to the Mongols, the Mamluk Sultanate of Cairo took over the Egyptian governorate and effectively gained control of Medina. In 1258, Medina was threatened by lava from the Harrat Rahat volcanic region but was narrowly saved from being burnt after the lava turned northward. During Mamluk reign, the Masjid an-Nabawi caught fire twice. Once in 1256, when the storage caught fire, burning the entire mosque, and the other time in 1481, when the masjid was struck by lightning. This period also coincided with an increase in scholarly activity in Medina, with scholars such as Ibn Farhun, Al-Hafiz Zain al-Din al-'Iraqi, Al Sakhawi and others settling in the city. The striking iconic Green Dome also found its beginnings as a cupola built under Mamluk Sultan al-Mansur Qalawun as-Salihi in 1297.\nAl-Baqi in the Ottoman Empire.\nFirst Ottoman period.\nIn 1517, the first Ottoman period began with Selim I's conquest of Mamluk Egypt. This added Medina to their territory and they continued the tradition of showering Medina with money and aid. In 1532, Suleiman the Magnificent built a secure fortress around the city and constructed a strong castle armed by an Ottoman battalion to protect the city. This is also the period in which many of the Prophet's Mosque's modern features were built even though it was not painted green yet. These suburbs also had walls and gates. The Ottoman sultans took a keen interest in the Prophet's Mosque and redesigned it over and over to suit their preferences.\nFirst Saudi insurgency.\nAs the Ottomans' hold over their domains broke loose, the Madanis pledged alliance to Saud bin Abdulaziz, founder of the First Saudi state in 1805, who quickly took over the city. In 1811, Muhammad Ali of Egypt, Ottoman commander and Wali of Egypt, commanded two armies under each of his two sons to seize Medina, the first one, under the elder Towson Pasha, failed to take Medina. But the second one, a larger army under the command of Ibrahim Pasha, succeeded after battling a fierce resistance movement.\nMuhammad Ali's era.\nAfter defeating his Saudi foes, Muhammad Ali took over governance of Medina and although he did not formally declare independence, his governance took on more of a semi-autonomous style. Muhammad's sons, Towson and Ibrahim, alternated in the governance of the city. Ibrahim renovated the city's walls and the Prophet's Mosque. He established a grand provision distribution centre (taqiyya) to distribute food and alms to the needy and Medina lived a period of security and peace. In 1840, Muhammad moved his troops out of the city and officially handed the city to the central Ottoman command.\nSecond Ottoman period.\nFour years in 1844, after Muhammad Ali's departure, Davud Pasha was given the position of governor of Medina under the Ottoman sultan. Davud was responsible for renovating the Prophet's Mosque on Sultan Abdulmejid I's orders. When Abdul Hamid II assumed power, he made Medina stand out of the desert with a number of modern marvels, including a radio communication station, a power plant for the Prophet's Mosque and its immediate vicinity, a telegraph line between Medina and Constantinople, and the Hejaz railway which ran from Damascus to Medina with a planned extension to Mecca. Built between 1904 and 1908, the railway aimed to facilitate the pilgrimage journey and strengthen Ottoman control over the region. Within one decade, the population of the city multiplied by leaps and bounds and reached 80,000. Around this time, Medina started falling prey to a new threat, the Hashemite Sharifate of Mecca in the south. Medina witnessed the longest siege in its history during and after World War I.\nModern history.\nSharifate of Mecca and Saudi conquest.\nThe Sharif of Mecca, Husayn ibn Ali, first attacked Medina on 6 June 1916, in the middle of World War I. Four days later, Husayn held Medina in a bitter 3-year siege, during which the people faced food shortages, widespread disease and mass emigration. Fakhri Pasha, governor of Medina, tenaciously held on during the Siege of Medina from 10 June 1916 and refused to surrender and held on another 72 days after the Armistice of Moudros, until he was arrested by his own men and the city was taken over by the Sharifate on 10 January 1919. Husayn largely won the war due to his alliance with the British. In anticipation of the plunder and destruction to follow, Fakhri Pasha secretly dispatched the Sacred Relics of Muhammad to the Ottoman capital, Istanbul. As of 1920, the British described Medina as \"much more self-supporting than Mecca.\" After the Great War, the Sharif of Mecca, Sayyid Hussein bin Ali was proclaimed King of an independent Hejaz. Soon after, the people of Medina secretly entered an agreement with Ibn Saud in 1924, and his son, Prince Mohammed bin Abdulaziz conquered Medina as part of the Saudi conquest of Hejaz on 5 December 1925 which gave way to the whole of the Hejaz being incorporated into the modern Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.\nUnder the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.\nThe Kingdom of Saudi Arabia focused more on the expansion of the city and the demolition of former sites that according to them violated Islamic principles and Islamic law such as the tombs at al-Baqi. Nowadays, the city mostly only holds religious significance and as such, just like Mecca, has given rise to a number of hotels surrounding the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi, which unlike the Masjid Al-\u1e24ar\u0101m, is equipped with an underground parking. The old city's walls have been destroyed and replaced with the three ring roads that encircle Medina today, named in order of length, King Faisal Road, King Abdullah Road and King Khalid Road. Medina's ring roads generally see less traffic overall compared to the four ring roads of Mecca.\nAn international airport, named the Prince Mohammed Bin Abdulaziz International Airport, now serves the city and is located on Highway 340, known locally as the Old Qassim Road. The city now sits at the crossroads of two major Saudi Arabian highways, Highway 60, known as the Qassim\u2013Medina Highway, and Highway 15 which connects the city to Mecca in the south and onward and Tabuk in the north and onward, known as the Al Hijrah Highway or Al Hijrah Road, after Muhammad's journey. The old Ottoman railway system was shut down after their departure from the region and the old railway station has now been converted into a museum. The city has recently seen another connection and mode of transport between it and Mecca, the Haramain high-speed railway line connects the two cities via King Abdullah Economic City near Rabigh, King Abdulaziz International Airport and the city of Jeddah in under 3 hours.\nThough the city's sacred core of the old city is off limits to non-Muslims, the Haram area of Medina itself is much smaller than that of Mecca and Medina has recently seen an increase in the number of Muslim and Non-Muslim expatriate workers of other nationalities, most commonly South Asian peoples and people from other countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council. Almost all of the historic city has been demolished in the Saudi era. The rebuilt city is centred on the vastly expanded \"al-Masjid an-Nabawi\".\nDestruction of heritage in Medina.\nSaudi Arabia upholds Wahhabism as its religious ideology, which is hostile to any reverence given to historical or religious places of significance for fear that it may give rise to \"shirk\" (idolatry). As a consequence, under Saudi rule, Medina has suffered from considerable destruction of its physical heritage including the loss of many buildings over a thousand years old. Critics have described this as \"Saudi vandalism\" and claim that 300 historic sites linked to Muhammad, his family or companions have been lost in Medina and Mecca over the last 50 years. The most famous example of this is the demolition of al-Baqi. \nGeography.\nMedina is located in the Hejaz region which is a wide strip between the Nafud desert and the Red Sea. Located approximately northwest of Riyadh which is at the centre of the Saudi desert, the city is away from the west coast of Saudi Arabia and at an elevation of approximately above sea level. It lies at 39\u00ba36' longitude east and 24\u00ba28' latitude north. It covers an area of about . The city has been divided into twelve districts, 7 of which have been categorised as urban districts, while the other 5 have been categorised as suburban.\nElevation.\nLike most cities in the Hejaz region, Medina is situated at a relatively high elevation. Almost two times as high as Mecca, the city is situated at above sea level. Mount Uhud is the highest peak in Medina and is tall.\nTopography.\nMedina is a desert oasis surrounded by the Hejaz Mountains and volcanic hills. The soil surrounding Medina consists of mostly basalt, while the hills, especially noticeable to the south of the city, are volcanic ash which dates to the first geological period of the Paleozoic Era. It is surrounded by a number of famous mountains, most notably \"Jabal Al-Hujjaj\" (The Pilgrims' Mountain) to the west, Sal'aa Mountain to the north-west, \"Jabal al-'Ir\" or Caravan Mountain to the south and Mount Uhud to the north. The city is situated on a flat mountain plateau at the tripoint of the three valleys (wadis) of \"Wadi al 'Aql\", \"Wadi al 'Aqiq\", and \"Wadi al Himdh\", for this reason, there are large green areas amidst a dry deserted mountainous region.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Medina falls in a hot desert climate region (BWh). Summers are extremely hot and dry with daytime temperatures averaging about with nights about . Temperatures above are not unusual between June and September. Winters are milder, with temperatures from at night to in the day. There is very little rainfall, which falls almost entirely between November and May. In summer, the wind is north-western, while in the spring and winters, is south-western.\nSignificance in Islam.\nMedina's importance as a religious site derives from the presence of two mosques, \"Masjid Quba'a\" and \"al-Masjid an-Nabawi\". Both of these mosques were built by Muhammad himself. Islamic scriptures emphasise the sacredness of Medina. Medina is mentioned several times in the Quran; two examples are Surah At-Tawbah (verse 101) and Al-Hashr (verse 8). Medinan suras are typically longer than their Meccan counterparts and they are also larger in number. Muhammad al-Bukhari recorded in Sahih Bukhari that Anas ibn Malik quoted Muhammad as saying: \"Medina is a sanctuary from that place to that. Its trees should not be cut and no heresy should be innovated nor any sin should be committed in it, and whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits sins (bad deeds), then he will incur the curse of God, the angels, and all the people.\"\nThe Prophet's Mosque (al-Masjid an-Nabawi).\nAccording to Islamic tradition, a prayer in The Prophet's Mosque equates to 1,000 prayers in any other mosque except the \"Masjid al-Haram\" where one prayer equates to 100,000 prayers in any other mosque. The mosque was initially just an open space for prayer with a raised and covered \"minbar\" (pulpit) built within seven months and was located beside Muhammad's \"rawdhah\" (residence, although the word literally means garden) to its side along with the houses of his wives. The mosque was expanded several times throughout history, with many of its internal features developed over time to suit contemporary standards.\nThe modern Prophet's Mosque is famed for the Green Dome situated directly above Muhammad's \"rawdhah,\" which currently serves as the burial site for Muhammad, Abu Bakr al-Siddiq and Umar ibn al-Khattab and is used in road signage along with its signature minaret as an icon for Medina itself. The entire piazza of the mosque is shaded from the sun by 250 membrane umbrellas. \nQuba'a Mosque.\nIt is Sunnah to perform prayer at the Quba'a Mosque. According to a \"hadith\", Sahl ibn Hunayf reported that Muhammad said, \"Whoever purifies himself in his house, then comes to the mosque of Quba' and prays in it, he will have a reward like the Umrah pilgrimage.\" and in another narration,\"Whoever goes out until he comes to this mosque \u2013 meaning the Mosque of Quba' \u2013 and prays there, that will be equivalent to 'Umrah.\"It has been recorded by al-Bukhari and Muslim that Muhammad used to go to Quba'a every Saturday to offer two rak'ahs of Sunnah prayer. The mosque at Quba'a was built by Muhammad himself upon his arrival to the old city of Medina. Quba'a and the mosque has been referred in the Qur'an indirectly in Surah At-Tawbah, verse 108.\nOther sites.\nMasjid al-Qiblatayn.\n\"Masjid al-Qiblatayn\" (Mosque of the Two Qiblas) is another mosque historically important to Muslims. Muslims believe that Muhammad was commanded to change his direction of prayer (qibla) from praying toward Jerusalem to praying toward the Ka'bah at Mecca, as he was commanded in Surah Al-Baqarah, verses 143 and 144. The mosque is currently being expanded to be able to hold more than 4,000 worshippers.\nMasjid al-Fath and the Seven Mosques.\nThree of these historic six mosques were combined recently into the larger Masjid al-Fath with an open courtyard. Sunni sources contend that there is no \"hadith\" or any other evidence to prove that Muhammad may have said something about the virtue of these mosques.\nAl-Baqi' Cemetery.\nAl-Baqi' is a significant cemetery in Medina where several family members of Muhammad, caliphs and scholars are known to have been buried.\nIn Islamic eschatology.\nEnd of civilisation.\nConcerning the end of civilisation in Medina, Abu Hurairah is recorded to have said that Muhammad said:\"The people will leave Medina in spite of the best state it will have, and none except the wild birds and the beasts of prey will live in it, and the last persons who will die will be two shepherds from the tribe of Muzaina, who will be driving their sheep towards Medina, but will find nobody in it, and when they reach the valley of Thaniyat-al-Wada'h, they will fall down on their faces dead.\" (al-Bukhari, Vol. 3, Book 30, Hadith 98)Sufyan ibn Abu Zuhair said Muhammad said:\"Yemen will be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families, and those who will obey them to migrate (to Yemen) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew. Sham will also be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families and those who will obey them, to migrate (to Sham) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew. 'Iraq will be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families and those who will obey them to migrate (to 'Iraq) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew.\" (al-Bukhari, Vol. 3, Book 30, Hadith 99)\nProtection from plague and ad-Dajjal (the False Messiah).\nWith regards to Medina's protection from plague and ad-Dajjal, the following \"ahadith\" were recorded:\nby Abu Bakra:\"The terror caused by \"Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal\" will not enter Medina and at that time Medina will have seven gates and there will be two angels at each gate guarding them.\" (al-Bukhari, Vol. 3, Book 30, Hadith 103)by Abu Hurairah:\"There are angels guarding the entrances (or roads) of Medina, neither plague nor Ad-Dajjal will be able to enter it.\" (al-Bukhari, Vol. 3, Book 30, Hadith 104)\nDemographics.\nAs of 2018, the recorded population of Medina province was 2,188,138, with a growth rate of 2.32%. Being a destination of Muslims from around the world, Medina witnesses illegal immigration after performing Hajj or Umrah, despite the strict rules the government has enforced. However, the Central Hajj Commissioner Prince Khalid bin Faisal stated that the numbers of illegal staying visitors dropped by 29% in 2018.\nReligion.\nAs with most cities in Saudi Arabia, Islam is the religion followed by the majority of the population of Medina.\nSunnis of different schools (Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i and Hanbali) constitute the majority, while there is a significant Shia minority in and around Medina, such as the Nakhawila. Outside the haram, there are significant numbers of Non-Muslim migrant workers and expats.\nCulture.\nSimilar to that of Mecca, Medina exhibits a cross-cultural environment, a city where people of many nationalities and cultures live together and interact with each other on a daily basis. This only helps the King Fahd Complex for the Printing of the Holy Quran. Established in 1985, the biggest publisher of Quran in the world, it employs around 1100 people and publishes 361 different publications in many languages. It is reported that more than 400,000 people from around the world visit the complex every year. Every visitor is gifted a free copy of the Qur'an at the end of a tour of the facility.\nMuseums and arts.\nThe Al Madinah Museum has several exhibits concerning the cultural and historical heritage of the city featuring different archeological collections, visual galleries and rare images of the old city. It also includes the Hejaz Railway Museum. The Dar Al Madinah Museum opened in 2011 and it uncovers the history of Medina specialising in the architectural and urban heritage of the city. There is no archeology or architecture from the time of Mohammed, except what remains of a few stone defensive towers The Holy Qur'an Exhibition houses rare manuscripts of the Quran, along with other exhibitions that encircle the Masjid an-Nabawi. \nThe Madinah Arts Center, founded in 2018 and operated by the MMDA's Cultural Wing, focuses on modern and contemporary arts. The centre aims to enhance arts and enrich the artistic and cultural movement of society, empowering artists of all groups and ages. As of February 2020, before the implementation of social distancing measures and curfews, it held more than 13 group and solo art galleries, along with weekly workshops and discussions. The centre is located in King Fahd Park, close to Quba Mosque on an area of \nIn 2018, the MMDA launched Madinah Forum of Arabic Calligraphy, an annual forum to celebrate Arabic calligraphy and renowned Arabic calligraphers. The event includes discussions about Arabic calligraphy, and a gallery to show the work of 50 Arabic calligraphers from 10 countries. The Dar al-Qalam Center for Arabic Calligraphy is located to the northwest of the Masjid an-Nabawi, just across the Hejaz Railway Museum. In April 2020, it was announced that the centre was renamed the Prince Mohammed bin Salman Center for Arabic Calligraphy, and upgraded to an international hub for Arabic Calligraphers, in conjunction with the \"Year of Arabic Calligraphy\" event organised by the Ministry of Culture during the years 2020 and 2021.\nOther projects launched by the MMDA Cultural Wing include the Madinah Forum of Live Sculpture held at Quba Square, with 16 sculptors from 11 countries. The forum aimed to celebrate sculpture as it is an ancient art, and to attract young artists to this form of art.\nEconomy.\nHistorically, Medina's economy was dependent on the sale of dates and other agricultural activities. As of 1920, 139 varieties of dates were being grown in the area, along with other vegetables. Religious tourism plays a major part in Medina's economy, being the second holiest city in Islam, and holding many historical Islamic locations, it attracts more than 7\u00a0million annual visitors who come to perform Hajj during the Hajj season, and Umrah throughout the year.\nMedina has two industrial areas, the larger one was established in 2003 with a total area of 10,000,000 m2, and managed by the Saudi Authority for Industrial Cities and Technology Zones (MODON). It is located from Prince Mohammed bin Abdulaziz International Airport, and from Yanbu Commercial Port, and has 236 factories, which produce petroleum products, building materials, food products, and many other products. The Knowledge Economic City (KEC) is a Saudi Arabian joint stock company founded in 2010. It focuses on real estate development and knowledge-based industries. The project is under development and is expected to highly increase the number of jobs in Medina by its completion.\nHuman resources.\nEducation and scholarly activity.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe Ministry of Education is the governing body of education in the al-Madinah Province and it operates 724 and 773 public schools for boys and girls respectively throughout the province. Taibah High School is one of the most notable schools in Saudi Arabia. Established in 1942, it was the second-largest school in the country at that time. Saudi ministers and government officials have graduated from this high school.\nHigher education and research.\nTaibah University is a public university providing higher education for the residents of the province, it has 28 colleges, of which 16 are in Medina. It offers 89 academic programs and has a strength of 69210 students as of 2020. The Islamic University, established in 1961, is the oldest higher education institution in the region, with around 22000 students enrolled. It offers majors in Sharia, Qur'an, Usul ad-Din, Hadith, and the Arabic language. The university offers Bachelor of Arts degrees and also Master's and Doctorate degrees. The admission is open to Muslims based on scholarships programs that provide accommodation and living expenses. In 2012, the university expanded its programs by establishing the College of Science, which offers Engineering and Computer science majors. Al Madinah College of Technology, which is governed by TVTC, offers a variety of degree programs including electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, computer sciences and electronic sciences. Private universities at Medina include University of Prince Muqrin, the Arab Open University, and Al Rayyan Colleges.\nTransport.\nAir.\nMedina is served by the Prince Mohammad bin Abdulaziz International Airport located off Highway 340. It handles domestic flights, while it has scheduled international services to regional destinations in the Middle East. It is the fourth-busiest airport in Saudi Arabia, handling 8,144,790 passengers in 2018. The airport project was announced as the world's best by \"Engineering News-Record\"'s 3rd Annual Global Best Projects Competition held on 10 September 2015. The airport also received the first Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Gold certificate in the MENA region. The airport receives higher numbers of passengers during the Hajj. \nRoads.\nIn 2015, the MMDA announced Darb as-Sunnah (Sunnah Path) Project, which aims to develop and transform the Quba'a Road connecting the Quba'a Mosque to the al-Masjid an-Nabawi to an avenue, paving the whole road for pedestrians and providing service facilities to the visitors. The project also aims to revive the Sunnah where Muhammed used to walk from his house (al-Masjid an-Nabawi) to Quba'a every Saturday afternoon.\nThe city of Medina lies at the junction of two of the most important Saudi highways, Highway 60 and Highway 15. Highway 15 connects Medina to Mecca in the south and onward and Tabuk and Jordan in the north. Highway 60 connects the city with Yanbu, a port city on the Red Sea in the west and Al Qassim in the east. The city is served by three ring roads: King Faisal Road, a 5\u00a0km ring road that surrounds Al-Masjid an-Nabawi and the downtown area, King Abdullah Road, a 27\u00a0km road that surrounds most of urban Medina and King Khalid Road is the biggest ring road that surrounds the whole city and some rural areas with 60\u00a0km of roads.\nBus and rapid transit.\nThe bus transport system in Medina was established in 2012 by the MMDA and is operated by SAPTCO. The newly established bus system includes 10 lines connecting different regions of the city to Masjid an-Nabawi and the downtown area, and serves around 20,000 passengers on a daily basis. In 2017, the MMDA launched the Madinah Sightseeing Bus service. Open top buses take passengers on sightseeing trips throughout the day with two lines and 11 destinations, including Masjid an-Nabawi, Quba'a Mosque and Masjid al-Qiblatayn and offers audio tour guidance with eight different languages. By the end of 2019, the MMDA announced its plan to expand the bus network with 15 BRT lines. The project was set to be done in 2023. In 2015, the MMDA announced a three-line metro project in extension to the public transportation master plan in Medina.\nRail.\nThe historic Ottoman Hejaz railway was abandoned following World War One and the Medina railway station was converted into a museum by the Saudi government. The Haramain High Speed Railway (HHR) came into operation in 2018, linking Medina and Mecca, and passes through three stations: Jeddah, King Abdul Aziz International Airport, and King Abdullah Economic City. It runs along with a speed of 300\u00a0km/h, and has an annual capacity of 60\u00a0million passengers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36637", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36637", "title": "Yorkshire", "text": "Historic county of England\nYorkshire ( ) is an area of Northern England which was historically a county. Despite no longer being used for administration, Yorkshire retains a strong regional identity. The county was named after the city of York.\nThe south-west of Yorkshire includes the cities of Leeds, Sheffield, Bradford, Doncaster and Wakefield. The north and east of the county includes the southern part of the Teesside conurbation; the port city of Hull is located in the south-east. York is positioned near the centre of the county. Yorkshire has a coastline on the North Sea. The North York Moors occupy the north-east of the county, and the centre contains the Vale of Mowbray and the Vale of York. The west contains part of the Pennines, which includes the Yorkshire Dales.\nThe county was historically bordered by County Durham to the north, the North Sea to the east, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Cheshire to the south, and Lancashire and Westmorland to the west. It was the largest by area in the United Kingdom. From the Middle Ages the county was subdivided into smaller administrative areas; the city of York was a self-governing county corporate from 1396, and the rest of the county was divided into three ridings \u2013 North, East, and West. From 1660 onwards each riding had its own lord-lieutenant, and between 1889 and 1974 the ridings were administrative counties. There was a Sheriff of Yorkshire until 1974. Yorkshire gives its name to four modern ceremonial counties: East Riding of Yorkshire, North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, and West Yorkshire, which together cover most of the historic county.\nYorkshire Day is observed annually on 1 August and is a celebration of the general culture of Yorkshire, including its history and dialect. Its name is used by several institutions, for example the Royal Yorkshire Regiment of the British Army, in sport, and in the media. The emblem of Yorkshire is a white rose, which was originally the heraldic badge of the Plantagenet royal House of York. The county is sometimes referred to as \"God's own country\". Yorkshire is represented in sport by Yorkshire County Cricket Club and Yorkshire Rugby Football Union.\nDefinitions.\nThere are several ways of defining Yorkshire, including the historic county and the group of four modern ceremonial counties. The county boundaries were reasonably stable between 1182, when it ceded western areas to the new county of Lancashire, and 1889 when administrative counties were created, which saw some adjustments to the boundaries with County Durham, Lancashire and Lincolnshire. After 1889 there were occasional adjustments to accommodate urban areas which were developing across county boundaries, such as in 1934 when Dore and Totley were transferred from Derbyshire to Yorkshire on being absorbed into the borough of Sheffield.\nMore significant changes in 1974 saw the historic county divided between several counties. The majority of the area was split between North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire, which all kept the Yorkshire name. A large part of the east of the county went to the new county of Humberside, and an area in the north-east went to the new county of Cleveland. Some more rural areas at the edges of the historic county were transferred to County Durham, Cumbria, Lancashire and Greater Manchester, whilst South Yorkshire also included areas which had been in Nottinghamshire.\nCleveland and Humberside were both abolished in 1996, since when there have been four ceremonial counties with Yorkshire in their names: East Riding of Yorkshire, North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire, which together cover most of the historic county.\nThere is a region called Yorkshire and the Humber which covers a similar area to the combined area of the four Yorkshire ceremonial counties, the exceptions being that the region excludes the parts of North Yorkshire which had been in Cleveland, but includes North East Lincolnshire and North Lincolnshire (which had been in Humberside). Until 2009, some government powers in the region were devolved to the Yorkshire and Humber Assembly; since 2009 the region has been used primarily for presentation of statistics.\nEtymology.\nYorkshire is so named as it is the shire (administrative area or county) of the city of York, or York's Shire. The word \"York\" is believed to have originated from the Brittonic word , which means 'place of yew trees'. This theory is supported by the fact that yew trees were once abundant in the area around York, and that the city was known for its skilled bowyers who used yew wood to make their bows. This became to the Romans, to the Angles and then, most famously, to the Vikings.\nHistory.\nAncient\u2013500: Hen Ogledd.\nEarly: Celtic Brigantes and Parisi.\nBy the late Iron Age, the inhabitants of what became Yorkshire were Hen Ogledd Brythonic Celts (old north British Celts), who formed separate tribes, the Brigantes (known to be in the north and western areas of historic Yorkshire) and the Parisi (present-day East Riding). The Brigantes controlled territory that later became all of Northern England and more territory than most Celtic tribes on the island of Great Britain. Six of the nine Brigantian described by Claudius Ptolemaeus in the \"Geographia\" fall within the historic county.\nThe Parisi, who controlled the area that would become the East Riding, might have been related to the Parisii of , Gaul (known today as Paris in France). Under Roman rule, their capital was at Petuaria (modern Brough), close to the Humber Estuary.\n43\u2013400s: Britannia Inferior.\nAlthough the Roman conquest of Britain began in AD\u00a043, the Brigantes remained in control of their kingdom as a client state of Rome for an extended period, reigned over by the Brigantian monarch Cartimandua and her husband Venutius. Initially, this situation suited both the Romans and the Brigantes, who were known as the most militant tribe in Britain.\nDisputes between the two rulers, however, culminated in Cartimandua delivering the defeated British warlord Caratacus to Roman authority and her leaving Venutius for his armour bearer, Vellocatus. Cartimandua's positive relationship with the Romans allowed her to maintain control of the kingdom evan as Venutius staged a rebellion against her and her Roman allies. On his second attempt, however, during the AD\u00a069 Year of the Four Emperors, Venutius managed to seize control of the Brigantes, leading to the Roman conquest of Yorkshire, under general Petillius Cerialis, in AD\u00a071.\nUnder Roman rule, the Brigantian tribal centre moved from the large hillfort at Stanwick to a newly built capital, or \"civitas\", at \"Isurium Brigantum\" (modern Aldborough), on the river Ure.\nThe fortified city of Eboracum (now York) was named as capital of \"Britannia Inferior\" and joint capital of all Roman Britain. The emperor Septimius Severus ruled the Roman Empire from Eboracum for the two years before his death.\nAnother emperor, Constantius Chlorus, died in Eboracum during a visit in 306\u00a0AD. Thereafter his son Constantine the Great, who became renowned for his acceptance of Christianity, was proclaimed emperor in the city. In the early 5th century, Roman rule ceased with the withdrawal of the last active Roman troops. By this stage, the Western Empire was in intermittent decline.\n500s\u20131000s: Germanic landings.\n500s\u2013800s: Celtic-Anglo kingdoms of Ebrauc, Elmet, Deira and Northumbria.\nAfter the Romans left, small Celtic kingdoms arose in the region, including the kingdoms of Deira to the east (domain of settlements near Malton on Derwent), Ebrauc (domain of York) around the north and Elmet to the west. The latter two were successors of land south-west and north-east of the former Brigantia capital.\nAngles (hailing from southern Denmark and northern Germany, probably along with Swedish Geats) consolidated (merging Ebrauc) under Deira, with York as capital. This in turn was grouped with Bernicia, another former Celtic-Brigantes kingdom that was north of the River Tees and had come to be headed by Bamburgh, to form Northumbria. Elmet had remained independent from the Germanic Angles until some time in the early 7th century, when King Edwin of Northumbria expelled its last king, Certic, and annexed the region to his Deira region. The Celts never went away, but were assimilated. This explains the existence of many Celtic placenames in Yorkshire today, such as Kingston upon Hull and Pen-y-ghent.\nAs well as the Angles and Geats, other settlers included Frisians (thought to have founded Fryston and Frizinghall), Danes, Franks and Huns.\nAt its greatest extent, Northumbria stretched from the Irish Sea to the North Sea and from Edinburgh down to Hallamshire in the south.\n800s\u2013900s: J\u00f3rv\u00edk.\nScandinavian York (also referred to as ) or Danish/Norwegian York is a term used by historians for the south of Northumbria (modern-day Yorkshire) during the late 9th century and first half of the 10th century, when it was dominated by Norse warrior-kings; in particular, used to refer to York, the city controlled by these kings.\nNorse monarchy controlled varying amounts of Northumbria from 875 to 954, however the area was invaded and conquered for short periods by England between 927 and 954 before eventually being annexed into England in 954. It was closely associated with the much longer-lived Kingdom of Dublin throughout this period.\nAn army of Danish Vikings, the Great Heathen Army as its enemies often referred to it, invaded Northumbrian territory in 866\u00a0AD. The Danes conquered and assumed what is now York and renamed it J\u00f3rv\u00edk, making it the capital city of a new Danish kingdom under the same name. The area which this kingdom covered included most of Southern Northumbria, roughly equivalent to the borders of Yorkshire extending further West.\nThe Danes went on to conquer an even larger area of England that afterwards became known as the Danelaw; but whereas most of the Danelaw was still English land, albeit in submission to Viking overlords, it was in the Kingdom of J\u00f3rv\u00edk that the only truly Viking territory on mainland Britain was ever established. The Kingdom prospered, taking advantage of the vast trading network of the Viking nations, and established commercial ties with the British Isles, North-West Europe, the Mediterranean and the Middle East.\nFounded by the Dane Halfdan Ragnarsson in 875, ruled for the great part by Danish kings, and populated by the families and subsequent descendants of Danish Vikings, the leadership of the kingdom nonetheless passed into Norwegian hands during its twilight years. Eric Bloodaxe, an ex-king of Norway who was the last independent Viking king of J\u00f3rv\u00edk, is a particularly noted figure in history, and his bloodthirsty approach towards leadership may have been at least partly responsible for convincing the Danish inhabitants of the region to accept English sovereignty so readily in the years that followed.\n800s\u20131000s: Yorkshire.\nAfter around 100 years of its volatile existence, the Kingdom of Jorvik finally came to an end. The Kingdom of Wessex was now in its ascendancy and established its dominance over the North in general, placing Yorkshire again within Northumbria, which retained a certain amount of autonomy as an almost-independent earldom rather than a separate kingdom. The Wessex Kings of England were reputed to have respected the Norse customs in Yorkshire and left law-making in the hands of the local aristocracy.\n1000s\u20131400s: Normans.\n1000s\u20131100s: Harrying of the north.\nIn the weeks leading up to the Battle of Hastings in 1066\u00a0AD, Harold II of England was distracted by pushing back efforts to reinstate the kingdom of Jorvik and Danelaw. His brother Tostig and Harald Hardrada, King of Norway, having won the Battle of Fulford. The King of England marched north where the two armies met at the Battle of Stamford Bridge. Tostig and Hardrada were both killed and their army was defeated decisively.\nHarold Godwinson was forced immediately to march his army south, where William the Conqueror was landing. The King was defeated in what is now known as the Battle of Hastings, which led to the Norman Conquest of England.\nThe people of the North rebelled against the Normans in September 1069\u00a0AD, enlisting Sweyn II of Denmark. They tried to take back York, but the Normans burnt it before they could. What followed was the Harrying of the North ordered by William. From York to Durham, crops, domestic animals, and farming tools were scorched. Many villages between the towns were burnt and local northerners were indiscriminately murdered. During the winter that followed, families starved to death and thousands of peasants died of cold and hunger. Orderic Vitalis estimated that \"more than 100,000\" people from the North died from hunger.\nIn the centuries following, many abbeys and priories were built in Yorkshire. Norman landowners increased their revenues and established new towns such as Barnsley, Doncaster, Hull, Leeds, Scarborough and Sheffield, among others. Of towns founded before the conquest, only Bridlington, Pocklington, and York continued at a prominent level.\nIn the early 12th century, people of Yorkshire had to contend with the Battle of the Standard at Northallerton with the Scots. Representing the Kingdom of England led by Archbishop Thurstan of York, soldiers from Yorkshire defeated the more numerous Scots.\n1300s: Scottish War of Independence and Mass Deaths.\nThe population of Yorkshire boomed until it was hit by the Great Famine of 1315. It did not help that after the English defeat in the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, the Scottish army rampaged throughout northern England, and Yorkshire was no exception. During The Great Raid of 1322, they raided and pillaged from the suburbs of York, even as far as East Riding and the Humber. Some, like Richmond, had to bribe the Scots to spare the town. The Black Death then reached Yorkshire by 1349, killing around a third of the population.\n1400s\u20131600s: Royal revolts.\n1400s: Wars of the Roses.\nWhen King Richard II was overthrown in 1399, antagonism between the House of York and the House of Lancaster, both branches of the royal House of Plantagenet, began to emerge. Eventually the two houses fought for the throne of England in a series of civil wars, commonly known as the Wars of the Roses. Some of the battles took place in Yorkshire, such as those at Wakefield and Towton, the latter of which is known as the bloodiest battle ever fought on English soil. Richard III was the last Yorkist king.\nHenry Tudor, sympathiser to the House of Lancaster, defeated and killed Richard at the Battle of Bosworth Field. He then became King Henry VII and married Elizabeth of York, daughter of Yorkist Edward IV, ending the wars. The two roses of white and red, emblems of the Houses of York and Lancaster respectively, were combined to form the Tudor Rose of England. This rivalry between the royal houses of York and Lancaster has passed into popular culture as a rivalry between the counties of Yorkshire and Lancashire, particularly in sport (for example the Roses Match played in County Cricket), although the House of Lancaster was based in York and the House of York in London.\n1500: Catholic\u2013Protestant dissolution.\nThe English Reformation began under Henry VIII and the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 led to a popular uprising known as Pilgrimage of Grace, started in Yorkshire as a protest. Some Catholics in Yorkshire continued to practise their religion and those caught were executed during the reign of Elizabeth I. One such person was a York woman named Margaret Clitherow who was later canonised.\n1600s: Civil war.\nDuring the English Civil War, which started in 1642, Yorkshire had divided loyalties; Hull (full name Kingston upon Hull) famously shut the gates of the city on the king when he came to enter a few months before fighting began, while the North Riding of Yorkshire in particular was strongly royalist. York was the base for Royalists, and from there they captured Leeds and Wakefield only to have them recaptured a few months later. The royalists won the Battle of Adwalton Moor meaning they controlled Yorkshire (with the exception of Hull). From their base in Hull the Parliamentarians (\"Roundheads\") fought back, re-taking Yorkshire town by town, until they won the Battle of Marston Moor and with it control of all of the North of England.\n1500s\u20131900s: Industry.\n1500-1600s: Explorative growth.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries Leeds and other wool-industry-centred towns continued to grow, along with Huddersfield, Hull and Sheffield, while coal mining first came into prominence in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The wool textile industry, which had previously been a cottage industry, centred on the old market towns moved to the West Riding where entrepreneurs were building mills that took advantage of water power gained by harnessing the rivers and streams flowing from the Pennines. The developing textile industry helped Wakefield and Halifax grow.\n1800s: Victorian revolution.\nThe 19th century saw Yorkshire's continued growth, with the population growing and the Industrial Revolution continuing with prominent industries in coal, textile and steel (especially in Sheffield, Rotherham and Middlesbrough). However, despite the booming industry, living conditions declined in the industrial towns due to overcrowding. This saw bouts of cholera in both 1832 and 1848. However, advances were made by the end of the century with the introduction of modern sewers and water supplies. Several Yorkshire railway networks were introduced as railways spread across the country to reach remote areas.\nCanals and turnpike roads were introduced in the late 18th century. In the following century the spa towns of Harrogate and Scarborough flourished, due to people believing mineral water had curative properties.\nWhen elected county councils were established in 1889, rather than have a single Yorkshire County Council, each of the three ridings was made an administrative county with its own county council, and the eight larger towns and cities of Bradford, Halifax, Huddersfield, Hull, Leeds, Middlesbrough, Sheffield and York were made county boroughs, independent from the county councils.\nTwentieth century to present.\nDuring the Second World War, Yorkshire became an important base for RAF Bomber Command and brought the county and its productive industries into the cutting edge of the war, and thus in the targets of Luftwaffe bombers during the Battle of Britain.\nFrom the late 20th century onwards there have been a number of significant reforms of the local government structures covering Yorkshire, notably in 1968, 1974, 1986, 1996 and 2023, discussed in the governance section below. For most administrative purposes the county had been divided since the Middle Ages; the last county-wide administrative role was the Sheriff of Yorkshire. The sheriff had been a powerful position in the Middle Ages but gradually lost most of its functions, and by the twentieth century was a largely ceremonial role. It was abolished as part of the 1974 reforms to local government, which established instead high sheriffs for each modern county.\nGeography.\nHistorically, the northern boundary of Yorkshire was the River Tees, the eastern boundary was the North Sea coast and the southern boundary was the Humber Estuary and Rivers Don and Sheaf. The western boundary meandered along the western slopes of the Pennine Hills to again meet the River Tees.\nGeology.\nIn Yorkshire there is a very close relationship between the major topographical areas and the geological period in which they were formed. The Pennine chain of hills in the west is of Carboniferous origin. The central vale is Permo-Triassic. The North York Moors in the north-east of the county are Jurassic in age while the Yorkshire Wolds to the south east are Cretaceous chalk uplands.\nRivers.\nYorkshire is drained by several rivers. In western and central Yorkshire the many rivers flow into the River Ouse which reaches the North Sea via the Humber Estuary. The most northerly of the rivers in the Ouse system is the River Swale, which drains Swaledale before passing through Richmond and meandering across the Vale of Mowbray. Next, draining Wensleydale, is the River Ure, which the Swale joins east of Boroughbridge. Near Great Ouseburn the Ure is joined by the small Ouse Gill Beck, and below the confluence the river is known as the Ouse. The River Nidd rises on the edge of the Yorkshire Dales National Park and flows along Nidderdale before reaching the Vale of York and the Ouse. The River Wharfe, which drains Wharfedale, joins the Ouse upstream of Cawood. The Rivers Aire and Calder are more southerly contributors to the River Ouse and the most southerly Yorkshire tributary is the River Don, which flows northwards to join the main river at Goole. Further north and east the River Derwent rises on the North York Moors, flows south then westwards through the Vale of Pickering then turns south again to drain the eastern part of the Vale of York. It empties into the River Ouse at Barmby on the Marsh.\nIn the far north of the county the River Tees flows eastwards through Teesdale and empties its waters into the North Sea downstream of Middlesbrough. The smaller River Esk flows from west to east at the northern foot of the North York Moors to reach the sea at Whitby. To the east of the Yorkshire Wolds the River Hull flows southwards to join the Humber Estuary at Kingston upon Hull.\nThe western Pennines are drained by the River Ribble which flows westwards, eventually reaching the Irish Sea close to Lytham St Annes.\nLandscape.\nThe countryside of Yorkshire has been called \"God's Own County\" by its inhabitants. Yorkshire includes the North York Moors and Yorkshire Dales National Parks, and part of the Peak District National Park. Nidderdale and the Howardian Hills are designated Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, as is the North Pennines (a part of which lies within the county). Spurn Point, Flamborough Head and the coastal North York Moors are designated Heritage Coast areas, and are noted for their scenic views with rugged cliffs such as the jet cliffs at Whitby, the limestone cliffs at Filey and the chalk cliffs at Flamborough Head. Moor House \u2013 Upper Teesdale, most of which is part of the former North Riding of Yorkshire, is one of England's largest national nature reserves. At High Force on the border with County Durham, the River Tees plunges over the Whin Sill (an intrusion of igneous rock). High Force is not, as is sometimes claimed, the highest waterfall in England (Hardraw Force in Wensleydale, also in Yorkshire, has a drop for example). However, High Force is unusual in being on a major river and carries a greater volume of water than any higher waterfall in England.\nThe highest mountains in Yorkshire all lie in the Pennines on the western side of the county, with millstone grit and limestone forming the underlying geology and producing distinctive layered hills. The county top is the remote Mickle Fell (height above sea level) in the North Pennines southwest of Teesdale, which is also the highest point in the North Riding. The highest point in the West Riding is Whernside (height ) near to Ingleton in the Yorkshire Dales. Together with nearby Ingleborough (height ) and Pen-y-Ghent (height ), Whernside forms a trio of very prominent and popular summits (the Yorkshire Three Peaks) which can be climbed in a challenging single day's walk. The highest point in the Yorkshire part of the Peak District is Black Hill (height ) on the border with historic Cheshire (which also forms the historic county top of that county). The hill ranges along the eastern side of Yorkshire are lower than those of the west. The highest point of the North York Moors is Urra Moor (height ). The highest point of the Yorkshire Wolds, a range of low chalk downlands east of York, is Bishop Wilton Wold (height ), which is also the highest point of the East Riding. The view from Sutton Bank at the southeastern edge of the North York Moors near Thirsk encompasses a vast expanse of the Yorkshire lowlands with the Pennines forming a backdrop. It was called the \"finest view in England\" by local author and veterinary surgeon James Herriot in his 1979 guidebook \"James Herriot's Yorkshire\".\nThe Royal Society for the Protection of Birds runs nature reserves such as the one at Bempton Cliffs with coastal wildlife such as the northern gannet, Atlantic puffin and razorbill. Spurn Point is a narrow long sand spit. It is a national nature reserve owned by the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust and is noted for its cyclical nature whereby the spit is destroyed and re-created approximately once every 250 years. There are seaside resorts in Yorkshire with sandy beaches; Scarborough is Britain's oldest seaside resort dating back to the spa town-era in the 17th century, while Whitby has been voted as the United Kingdom's best beach, with a \"postcard-perfect harbour\".\nTowns and cities.\nThere are eight officially designated cities in Yorkshire: Bradford, Doncaster, Kingston upon Hull, Leeds, Ripon, Sheffield, Wakefield, and York. City status is formally held by the administrative territory rather than the urban area.\nYork is considered to have been a city since time immemorial. The other cities were formally awarded city status by the monarch; in the cases of Ripon and Wakefield following the creation of new Church of England dioceses, and in the other cases following significant urban growth. Middlesbrough is the largest built-up area in Yorkshire not to be a city. The largest built-up areas at the 2021 census were as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGovernance.\nThere is no single Yorkshire-wide administrative body today. The area of the four ceremonial counties is administered by sixteen different local authorities, being nine metropolitan boroughs covering South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire and seven unitary authorities covering East Riding and North Yorkshire (one of which, Stockton-on-Tees, straddles the ceremonial boundary between North Yorkshire and County Durham). Most of the authorities are grouped into combined authorities, each led by a directly elected mayor. The combined authorities for West Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and Tees Valley are already operating. A new York and North Yorkshire Combined Authority was established in February 2024 with its first mayor due to be elected in May 2024, and proposals for establishing a combined authority covering Hull and East Riding are being considered.\nAdministrative hierarchy covering the four ceremonial counties as at March 2024:\nThe areas from the historic county that are not covered by the four ceremonial counties are now administered as parts of County Durham, Westmorland and Furness, Lancashire and Greater Manchester.\nAdministrative history.\nHistorically, Yorkshire was divided into three ridings. The term 'riding' is of Viking origin and derives from \"Threthingr\" (equivalent to third-ing). The three ridings in Yorkshire were named the East Riding, West Riding, and North Riding. Each riding was divided into smaller areas called wapentakes with more local functions. York was made a county corporate in 1396, as was Hull in 1440, making them independent from the ridings. York's corporate territory was enlarged in 1449 to also include an adjoining rural area known as the Ainsty. Hull's corporate territory covered both the town and adjoining areas, which were sometimes together known as Hullshire.\nThe Sheriff of Yorkshire was the most senior official position within the county in the Middle Ages. In 1547 a separate post of Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire was created, taking some of the functions previously held by the sheriff. The single lieutenancy was split in 1660 into separate posts for the East Riding, North Riding and West Riding. For the purposes of lieutenancy, York was deemed part of the West Riding, and Hull was deemed part of the East Riding.\nElected county councils were established in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888, taking over administrative functions previously performed by magistrates at the quarter sessions. The quarter sessions for Yorkshire were held separately for each riding. As such, three county councils were established rather than one for the whole county: East Riding County Council based in Beverley, North Riding County Council based in Northallerton, and West Riding County Council based in Wakefield. Each riding was classed as an administrative county, but provision was made that the entire county of Yorkshire should continue to be one county for the purposes of shrievalty, allowing the Sheriff of Yorkshire to continue to serve the whole county. Certain towns and cities were deemed large enough to provide their own county-level services and so they were made county boroughs, independent from the county councils. There were initially eight county boroughs in Yorkshire, being Bradford, Halifax, Huddersfield, Hull, Leeds, Middlesbrough, Sheffield, and York. Other county boroughs were subsequently created at Rotherham (1902), Barnsley (1913), Dewsbury (1913), Wakefield (1915) and Doncaster (1927).\nMore significant reviews of local government began to be considered following the Local Government Act 1958. The North Eastern General Review was held from 1962 to 1963, and led to the creation of the County Borough of Teesside in 1968, which covered the abolished county borough of Middlesbrough and several neighbours, including Stockton-on-Tees and Billingham, which had been in County Durham. Teesside was deemed part of the North Riding for ceremonial purposes, although as a county borough it was independent from North Riding County Council.\nAlmost as soon as Teesside had been created work began on a far more significant overhaul of local government, culminating in the Local Government Act 1972, which took effect on 1 April 1974. The county boroughs and the administrative counties of the ridings were abolished, as were the lower tier municipal boroughs, urban districts and rural districts. A new set of counties and districts was put in place instead. Most of Yorkshire was split between North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, Humberside and Cleveland. Some peripheral rural areas were transferred to other counties, notably the Startforth area which went to County Durham, the Sedbergh area which went to Cumbria, the Forest of Bowland area which went to Lancashire, and Saddleworth which went to Greater Manchester. Some of the changes were unpopular, particularly in Humberside.\nIn 1986 the county councils for the metropolitan counties of South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire were abolished, with the metropolitan boroughs in those counties taking over county-level functions. Humberside and Cleveland were both abolished in 1996 with new unitary authorities established to cover those areas. At the same time York was enlarged and also made a unitary authority, independent from North Yorkshire County Council. The current ceremonial county boundaries were adopted at the time of the 1996 reforms, with a new ceremonial county called East Riding of Yorkshire created covering the parts of the abolished Humberside north of the Humber, whilst the parts of Cleveland south of the River Tees were added to North Yorkshire for ceremonial purposes.\nFrom the 1990s there were attempts to establish a regional tier of local government; a Yorkshire and the Humber region was designated in 1994, covering North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire and Humberside. Between 1998 and 2009 there was a Yorkshire and Humber Assembly comprising members of the region's local authorities and other stakeholders. Since 2009 the region has been primarily used for presentation of statistics rather than administration.\nIn 2014 the first combined authorities were established in Yorkshire, with South Yorkshire (which initially branded itself the \"Sheffield City Region\") and West Yorkshire having Yorkshire's first combined authorities. In 2018, eighteen of the twenty-two local councils in the Yorkshire and Humber region voted to create instead a much larger combined authority, which they proposed calling \"One Yorkshire\" which would have covered the region except North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire. The plan included provision for a directly elected mayor for the area, and the scheme's supporters estimated that it could create up to 200,000 jobs. The One Yorkshire proposal was ultimately rejected by the government in 2019, which preferred to continue with rolling out smaller combined authorities for parts of Yorkshire instead.\nThe districts of North Yorkshire were abolished in 2023, with North Yorkshire County Council taking over their functions to become a unitary authority, and rebranding itself North Yorkshire Council.\nEconomy.\nSouth and West.\nThe City of Leeds is Yorkshire's largest city and the leading centre of trade and commerce. Leeds is also one of the UK's larger financial centres. Leeds's traditional industries were mixed, service-based industries, textile manufacturing and coal mining being examples. Tourism is also significant and a growing sector in the city. In 2015, the value of tourism was in excess of \u00a37\u00a0billion.\nBradford, Halifax, Keighley and Huddersfield once were centres of wool milling. Areas such as Bradford, Dewsbury and Keighley have suffered a decline in their economy since.\nSheffield once had heavy industries, such as coal mining and the steel industry. Since the decline of such industries Sheffield has attracted tertiary and administrative businesses including more retail trade, Meadowhall being an example.\nCoal mining was extremely active in the south of the county during the 19th century and for most of the 20th century, particularly around Barnsley and Wakefield. As late as the 1970s, the number of miners working in the area was still in six figures. The industry was placed under threat on 6 March 1984 when the National Coal Board announced the closure of 20 pits nationwide (some of them in South Yorkshire). By March 2004, a mere three coalpits remained open in the area. Three years later, the only remaining coal pit in the region was Maltby Colliery near Rotherham. Maltby Colliery closed in 2013.\nEast Riding and North.\nNorth Yorkshire has an established tourist industry, supported by the presence of two national parks (Yorkshire Dales and North York Moors), Harrogate, York and Scarborough.\nTourism is a huge part of the economy of York with a value of over \u00a3765 million to the city and supporting 24,000 jobs in 2019. Harrogate draws numerous visitors because of its conference facilities. In 2016 such events alone attracted 300,000 visitors to Harrogate.\nKingston upon Hull is Yorkshire's largest port and has a large manufacturing base, its fishing industry has, however, declined somewhat in recent years. Businesses in Hull are Aunt Bessie's, Birds Eye, Seven Seas, Fenner, Rank Organisation, William Jackson Food Group, Reckitt and Sons, KCOM Group and SGS Europe.\nHarrogate and Knaresborough both have small legal and financial sectors. Harrogate is a European conference and exhibition destination with both the Great Yorkshire Showground and Harrogate International Centre in the town. Bettys and Taylors of Harrogate is a notable company from Harrogate.\nPD Ports owns and operates Teesport, between Middlesbrough and Redcar. The company also operates the Hull Container Terminal at the Port of Hull and owns a short river port in Howdendyke (near Howden).\nOther businesses in the two counties are Plaxton (Scarborough), McCains (Scarborough), Ebuyer (Howden) and Skipton Building Society (Skipton).\nEducation.\nYorkshire has a large base of primary and secondary schools operated by both local authorities and private bodies, and a dozen universities, along with a wide range of colleges and further education facilities. Five universities are based in Leeds, two in Sheffield, two in York, and one each in Bradford, Hull, Middlesbrough and Huddersfield. The largest universities by enrolment are Sheffield Hallam University and the University of Leeds, each with over 31,000 students, followed by Leeds Beckett University, and the most recent to attain university status is the Leeds Arts University. There are also branches of institutions headquartered in other parts of England, such as the Open University and Britain's first for-profit university (since 2012), the University of Law. The tertiary sector is in active cooperation with industry, and a number of spin-off companies have been launched.\nTransport.\nThe oldest road in Yorkshire, called the Great North Road, is now known as the A1. This trunk road passes through the centre of the county and connects London to Edinburgh. Another important road is the more easterly A19 road which starts in Doncaster and ends just north of Newcastle upon Tyne at Seaton Burn. The M62 motorway crosses the county from east to west from Hull towards Greater Manchester and Merseyside. The M1 carries traffic from London and the south of England to Yorkshire. In 1999, about was added to make it swing east of Leeds and connect to the A1. The East Coast Main Line rail link between London and Scotland runs roughly parallel with the A1 through Yorkshire and the Trans Pennine rail link runs east to west from Hull to Liverpool via Leeds.\nBefore the advent of rail transport, the seaports of Hull and Whitby played an important role in transporting goods. Historically canals were used, including the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, which is the longest canal in England. Mainland Europe (the Netherlands and Belgium) can be reached from Hull via regular ferry services from P&amp;O Ferries. Yorkshire also has air transport services from Leeds Bradford Airport. This airport has experienced significant and rapid growth in both terminal size and passenger facilities since 1996, when improvements began, until the present day. From 2005 until 2022, South Yorkshire was served by Doncaster Sheffield Airport in Finningley. Sheffield City Airport opened in 1997 after years of Sheffield having no airport, due to a council decision in the 1960s not to develop one because of the city's good rail links with London and the development of airports in other nearby areas. The newly opened airport never managed to compete with larger airports such as Leeds Bradford Airport and East Midlands Airport and attracted only a few scheduled flights, while the runway was too short to support low cost carriers. The opening of Doncaster Sheffield Airport effectively made the airport redundant and it officially closed in April 2008. The Doncaster Sheffield Airport has since closed and left South Yorkshire without an airport.\nPublic transport statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend on public transport in Yorkshire on a weekday is 77 minutes. 26.6% of public transport users travel for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transport is 16 minutes, while 24.9% of passengers wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transport is 7\u00a0km, while 10% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nArchitecture.\nFortifications.\nThroughout Yorkshire many castles were built during the Norman-Breton period, particularly after the Harrying of the North. These included Bowes Castle, Pickering Castle, Richmond Castle, Skipton Castle, York Castle and others. Later medieval castles at Helmsley, Middleham and Scarborough were built as a means of defence against the invading Scots. Middleham is notable because Richard III of England spent his childhood there. The remains of these castles, some being English Heritage sites, are popular tourist destinations.\nStately.\nThere are stately homes in Yorkshire that carry the name \"castle\" in a similar way to the non-distinctive use of chateau in French. The most notable examples are Allerton Castle and Castle Howard, both linked to the Howard family. Castle Howard and the Earl of Harewood's residence, Harewood House, are included amongst the nine Treasure Houses of England.\nLarge estates with significant buildings were constructed at Brodsworth Hall, Temple Newsam, Wentworth Woodhouse (the largest fronted private home in Europe), and Wentworth Castle. There are properties which are conserved and managed by the National Trust, such as Nunnington Hall, Ormesby Hall, the Rievaulx Terrace &amp; Temples and Studley Royal Park.\nIndustrial.\nBuildings built for industry during the Victorian era are found throughout the region; West Yorkshire has various cotton mills, the Leeds Corn Exchange and the Halifax Piece Hall.\nMunicipal.\nThere are various buildings built for local authorities:\nReligious.\nReligious architecture includes extant cathedrals as well as the ruins of monasteries and abbeys. Many of these prominent buildings suffered from the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII; these include Bolton Abbey, Fountains Abbey, Gisborough Priory, Rievaulx Abbey, St Mary's Abbey and Whitby Abbey among others. Notable religious buildings of historic origin still in use include York Minster, the largest Gothic cathedral in northern Europe, Beverley Minster, Bradford Cathedral, Rotherham Minster and Ripon Cathedral.\nCulture.\nThe culture of the people of Yorkshire is an accumulated product of a number of different civilisations who have influenced its history, including; the Celts (Brigantes and Parisii), Romans, Angles, Norse Vikings, and Normans amongst others. The western part of the historic North Riding had an additional infusion of Breton culture due to the Honour of Richmond being occupied by Alain Le Roux, grandson of Geoffrey I, Duke of Brittany. The people of Yorkshire are immensely proud of their county and local culture, and it is sometimes suggested they identify more strongly with their county than they do with their country. Yorkshire people have their own Yorkshire dialects and accents and are, or rather were, known as Broad Yorkshire or \"Tykes\", with its roots in Old English and Old Norse.\nThe British Library provides a four minute long voice recording made in 1955, by a \"female housekeeper\", Miss Madge Dibnahon, on its web site and an example of the Yorkshire dialect used at that time, in an unstated location. \"Much of her speech remains part of the local dialect to this day\", according to the Library. Due to the large size of Yorkshire, spoken dialects vary between areas. In fact, the dialect in North Yorkshire and Humberside/East Yorkshire is \"quite different [than in West Yorkshire and South Yorkshire] and has a much stronger Scandinavian influence\".\nOne report explains the geographic difference in detail:This distinction was first recognised formally at the turn of the 19th / 20th centuries, when linguists drew an isophone diagonally across the county from the northwest to the southeast, separating these two broadly distinguishable ways of speaking. It can be extended westwards through Lancashire to the estuary of the River Lune, and is sometimes called the Humber-Lune Line. Strictly speaking, the dialects spoken south and west of this isophone are Midland dialects, whereas the dialects spoken north and east of it are truly Northern. It is possible that the Midland form moved up into the region with people gravitating towards the manufacturing districts of the West Riding during the Industrial Revolution.\nThough distinct accents remain, dialect has declined heavily in everyday use. Some have argued the dialect was a fully fledged language in its own right. The county has also produced a set of Yorkshire colloquialisms, which are in use in the county. Among Yorkshire's traditions is the Long Sword dance. The most famous traditional song of Yorkshire is \"On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at\" (\"On Ilkley Moor without a hat\"), it is considered the unofficial anthem of the county.\nLiterature and art.\nAlthough the first Professor of English Literature at Leeds University, F. W. Moorman, claimed the first extant work of English literature, \"Beowulf\", was written in Yorkshire, this view does not have common acceptance today. However, when Yorkshire formed the southern part of the kingdom of Northumbria there were several notable poets, scholars and ecclesiastics, including Alcuin, C\u00e6dmon and Wilfrid. The most esteemed literary family from the county are the three Bront\u00eb sisters, with part of the county around Haworth being nicknamed Bront\u00eb Country in their honour. Their novels, written in the mid-19th century, caused a sensation when they were first published, yet were subsequently accepted into the canon of great English literature. Among the most celebrated novels written by the sisters are Anne Bront\u00eb's \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Jane Eyre\" and Emily Bront\u00eb's \"Wuthering Heights\". \"Wuthering Heights\" was almost a source used to depict life in Yorkshire, illustrating the type of people that reside there in its characters, and emphasising the use of the stormy Yorkshire moors. Nowadays, the parsonage which was their former home is now a museum in their honour. Bram Stoker authored \"Dracula\" while living in Whitby and it includes several elements of local folklore including the beaching of the Russian ship \"Dmitri\", which became the basis of Demeter in the book.\nThe novelist tradition in Yorkshire continued into the 20th and 21st centuries, with authors such as J. B. Priestley, Alan Bennett, Stan Barstow, Dame Margaret Drabble, Winifred Holtby (\"South Riding, The Crowded Street\"), A. S. Byatt, Joanne Harris, Barbara Taylor Bradford, Marina Lewycka and Sunjeev Sahota being prominent examples. Taylor Bradford is noted for \"A Woman of Substance\" which was one of the top-ten best selling novels in history. Another well-known author was children's writer Arthur Ransome, who penned the \"Swallows and Amazons\" series. James Herriot, the best selling author of over 60 million copies of books about his experiences of some 50 years as a veterinarian in Thirsk, North Yorkshire, the town which he refers to as Darrowby in his books (although born in Sunderland), has been admired for his easy reading style and interesting characters.\nPoets include Ted Hughes, W. H. Auden, William Empson, Simon Armitage, David Miedzianik and Andrew Marvell.\nThree well known sculptors emerged in the 20th century; contemporaries Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth, and Leeds-raised land artist Andy Goldsworthy. Some of their works are available for public viewing at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park. There are several art galleries in Yorkshire featuring extensive collections, such as Ferens Art Gallery, Leeds Art Gallery, Millennium Galleries and York Art Gallery. Some of the better known local painters are William Etty and David Hockney; many works by the latter are housed at Salts Mill 1853 Gallery in Saltaire.\nCuisine.\nThe traditional cuisine of Yorkshire, in common with the North of England in general, is known for using rich-tasting ingredients, especially with regard to sweet dishes, which were affordable for the majority of people. There are several dishes which originated in Yorkshire or are heavily associated with it. Yorkshire pudding, a savoury batter dish, is by far the best known of Yorkshire foods, and is eaten throughout England. It is commonly served with roast beef and vegetables to form part of the Sunday roast but is traditionally served as a starter dish filled with onion gravy within Yorkshire. Yorkshire pudding is the base for toad in the hole, a dish containing sausage.\nOther foods associated with the county include Yorkshire curd tart, a curd tart recipe with rosewater; parkin, a sweet ginger cake which is different from standard ginger cakes in that it includes oatmeal and treacle; and Wensleydale cheese, a cheese made with milk from Wensleydale and often eaten as an accompaniment to sweet foods. The beverage ginger beer, flavoured with ginger, came from Yorkshire and has existed since the mid-18th century. Liquorice sweet was first created by George Dunhill from Pontefract, who in the 1760s thought to mix the liquorice plant with sugar. Yorkshire and in particular the city of York played a prominent role in the confectionery industry, with chocolate factories owned by companies such as Rowntree's, Terry's and Thorntons inventing many of Britain's most popular sweets. Another traditional Yorkshire food is pikelets, which are similar to crumpets but much thinner. The Rhubarb Triangle is a location within Yorkshire which supplies most of the rhubarb to locals.\nIn recent years curries have become popular in the county, largely due to the immigration and successful integration of Asian families. There are many famous curry empires with their origins in Yorkshire, including the 850-seater Aakash restaurant in Cleckheaton, which has been described as \"the world's largest curry house\".\nBeer and brewing.\nYorkshire has a number of breweries including Black Sheep, Copper Dragon, Cropton Brewery, John Smith's, Samuel Smith Old Brewery, Kelham Island Brewery, Theakstons, Timothy Taylor, Wharfedale Brewery, Harrogate Brewery and Leeds Brewery.\nThe beer style most associated with the county is bitter. As elsewhere in the North of England, when served through a handpump, a sparkler is used giving a tighter, more solid head.\nBrewing has taken place on a large scale since at least the 12th century, for example at the now derelict Fountains Abbey which at its height produced 60 barrels of strong ale every ten days. Most current Yorkshire breweries date from the Industrial Revolution of the late 18th and early 19th century.\nMusic.\nYorkshire has a heritage of folk music and folk dance including the Long Sword dance. Yorkshire folk song was distinguished by the use of dialect, particularly in the West Riding and exemplified by the song 'On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at', probably written in the late 19th century, using a Kent folk tune (almost certainly borrowed via a Methodist hymnal), seen as an unofficial Yorkshire anthem. Famous folk performers from the county include the Watersons from Hull, who began recording Yorkshire versions of folk songs from 1965; Heather Wood (born 1945) of the Young Tradition; the short-lived electric folk group Mr Fox (1970\u201372), the Deighton Family; Julie Matthews; Kathryn Roberts; and Kate Rusby. Yorkshire has a flourishing folk music culture, with over forty folk clubs and thirty annual folk music festivals. The 1982 Eurovision Song Contest was held in the Harrogate International Centre. In 2007 the Yorkshire Garland Group was formed to make Yorkshire folk songs accessible online and in schools.\nIn the field of classical music, Yorkshire has produced some major and minor composers, including Frederick Delius, George Dyson, Philip Wilby, Edward Bairstow, William Baines, Kenneth Leighton, Bernadette Farrell, Eric Fenby, Anne Quigley, Haydn Wood, Arthur Wood, Arnold Cooke, Gavin Bryars, John Casken, and in the area of TV, film and radio music, John Barry and Wally Stott. Opera North is based at the Grand Theatre, Leeds. Leeds is also home to the Leeds International Piano Competition. The Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival takes place annually in November. Huddersfield Choral Society is one of the UK's most celebrated amateur choirs. The National Centre for Early Music is located in York.\nThe county is home to successful brass bands such as Black Dyke, Brighouse &amp; Rastrick, Carlton Main Frickley, Hammonds Saltaire, and Yorkshire Imperial.\nDuring the 1970s David Bowie, himself of a father from Doncaster in the West Riding of Yorkshire, hired three musicians from Hull: Mick Ronson, Trevor Bolder and Mick Woodmansey; together they recorded \"Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\", an album considered by a magazine article as one of a 100 greatest and most influential of all time. In the following decade, Def Leppard, from Sheffield, achieved worldwide fame, particularly in America. Their 1983 album \"Pyromania\" and 1987 album \"Hysteria\" sold 12 and 25 million copies respectively. Yorkshire had a very strong post-punk scene which went on to achieve widespread acclaim and success, including: the Sisters of Mercy, the Cult, Vardis, Gang of Four, ABC, the Human League, New Model Army, Soft Cell, Chumbawamba, the Wedding Present and the Mission. Pulp from Sheffield had a massive hit in \"Common People\" during 1995; the song focuses on working-class northern life. In the 21st century, indie rock and post-punk revival bands from the area gained popularity, including the Kaiser Chiefs, the Cribs and the Arctic Monkeys, the last-named holding the record for the fastest-selling debut album in British music history with \"Whatever People Say I Am, That's What I'm Not\".\nInfluenced by the local post punk scene, but also by national and international extreme metal acts such as Celtic Frost, Candlemass, and Morbid Angel, Yorkshire-based bands Paradise Lost and My Dying Bride laid the foundations of what would become the Gothic Metal genre in the early to mid-1990s.\nTelevision productions.\nAmong prominent British television shows filmed in (and based on) Yorkshire are the soap opera \"Emmerdale\" and the sitcom \"Last of the Summer Wine\"; the latter in particular is noted for holding the record of longest-running comedy series in the world, from 1973 until 2010. Other notable television series set in Yorkshire include \"Downton Abbey\", \"All Creatures Great and Small\", \"The Beiderbecke Trilogy\", \"Rising Damp\", \"Open All Hours\", \"Band Of Gold\", \"Dalziel and Pascoe\", \"Fat Friends\", \"Heartbeat\", \"The Syndicate\", \"No Angels\", \"Drifters\" and \"The Royal\". During the first three series of the sitcom \"The New Statesman\", Alan B'Stard represented as MP the fictional constituency of Haltenprice in North Yorkshire.\nYorkshire has remained a popular location for filming in more recent times. For example, much of ITV's highly acclaimed \"Victoria\" was filmed in the region, at locations such as Harewood House in Leeds and Beverley Minster (the latter being used to depict Westminster Abbey and St James' Palace), whilst Channel 5 has programmed numerous Yorkshire-themed documentary series such as \"Our Yorkshire Farm\" and \"The Yorkshire Steam Railway: All Aboard\" across its schedule.\nWest Yorkshire has particularly benefited from a great deal of production activity. For example, portions of the BBC television series \"Happy Valley\" and \"Last Tango in Halifax\" were filmed in the area, in Huddersfield and other cities; in addition to exteriors, some of the studio filming for \"Happy Valley\" was done at North Light Film Studios at Brookes Mill, Huddersfield. Although set in the fictional town of Denton, popular ITV detective series \"A Touch Of Frost\" was filmed in Yorkshire, mainly in and around Leeds. The BBC's \"Jamaica Inn\" and \"Remember Me\" and the ITV series \"Black Work\" were also filmed at the studios and in nearby West Yorkshire locations. More recently, many of the exteriors of the BBC series \"Jericho\" were filmed at the nearby Rockingstone Quarry, and some interior work was done at North Light Film Studios.\nFilm productions.\nSeveral noted films are set in Yorkshire, including \"Kes\", \"This Sporting Life\", \"Room at the Top\", \"Brassed Off\", \"Mischief Night\", \"Rita, Sue and Bob Too\", \"The Damned United\", \"Four Lions\", \"God's Own Country\" and \"Calendar Girls\". \"The Full Monty\", a comedy film set in Sheffield, won an Academy Award and was voted the second-best British film of all time by Asian News International.\nSport.\nYorkshire has a long tradition in the field of sports, with participation in cricket, football, rugby league and horse racing being the most established sporting ventures.\nCricket.\nYorkshire County Cricket Club represents the historic county in the domestic first class cricket County Championship; with a total of 33 championship titles (including one shared), 13 more than any other county, Yorkshire is the most decorated county cricket club. Some of the most highly regarded figures in the game were born in the county, amongst them:\nThe four ECB Premier Leagues in the county are: Bradford, North-Yorkshire-&amp;-South-Durham, Yorkshire North and Yorkshire South. The league winners qualify to take part in a yearly Yorkshire Championship, the highest NYSD club based in Yorkshire qualifies if a Durham side wins.\nFootball.\nAssociation.\nFootball clubs founded in Yorkshire include, four of which have been league champions:\nYorkshire is officially recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, as Sheffield FC founded in 1857 are certified as the oldest association football club in the world. The world's first inter-club match and local derby was competed in the county, at the world's oldest ground Sandygate Road. The Laws of the Game, used worldwide, were drafted by Ebenezer Cobb Morley from Hull.\nHuddersfield were the first club to win three consecutive league titles. Leeds United reached the 2001 UEFA Champions League semi-finals and had a dominance period in the 1970s. Sheffield Wednesday who have had similar spells of dominance, such as the early 1990s. Middlesbrough won the 2004 League Cup and reach the 2006 UEFA Cup Final.\nNoted players from Yorkshire who have influenced the game include World Cup-winning goalkeeper Gordon Banks and two-time European Footballer of the Year award winner Kevin Keegan. Prominent managers include Herbert Chapman, Brian Clough, Bill Nicholson, George Raynor and Don Revie.\nThe Yorkshire football team, controlled by the Yorkshire International Football Association (YIFA), represents Yorkshire in CONIFA matches. The team was founded in 2017, joined CONIFA on 6 January 2018 and plays at various venues throughout Yorkshire.\nRugby Union.\nYorkshire has a long history of rugby union in the county with Leeds Tykes (formerly Yorkshire Carnegie) featuring in the Aviva Premiership for eight seasons between 2001 and 2011 when they were relegated to the Championship. From 2020 the teams has reverted to its amateur status and plays in National League 1. Rotherham Titans also played in the top tier of English rugby in 2000\u201301 and 2003\u201304.\nMany England international players have emerged from Yorkshire including World Cup winners Jason Robinson and Mike Tindall. Other successful players from the region include Rob Andrew, Tim Rodber, Brian Moore, Danny Care, Rory Underwood and Sir Ian McGeechan.\nRugby League.\nThe Rugby Football League and with it the sport of rugby league was founded in 1895 at the George Hotel, Huddersfield, after a North-South schism within the Rugby Football Union. The top league is the Super League and the most decorated Yorkshire clubs are Huddersfield Giants, Hull FC, Bradford Bulls, Hull Kingston Rovers, Wakefield Trinity, Castleford Tigers and Leeds Rhinos. In total six Yorkshiremen have been inducted into the Rugby Football League Hall of Fame amongst them is Roger Millward, Jonty Parkin and Harold Wagstaff.\nMulti-sport events.\nIn the area of boxing \"Prince\" Naseem Hamed from Sheffield achieved title success and widespread fame, in what the BBC describes as \"one of British boxing's most illustrious careers\". Along with Leeds-born Nicola Adams who in 2012 became the first female athlete to win a boxing gold medal at the Olympics.\nA number of athletes from or associated with Yorkshire took part in the 2012 Summer Olympics as members of Team GB; the \"Yorkshire Post\" stated that Yorkshire's athletes alone secured more gold medals than those of Spain.\nNotable Yorkshire athletes include Jessica Ennis-Hill and the Brownlee brothers, Jonathan and Alistair. Jessica Ennis-Hill is from Sheffield and won gold at the 2012 Olympics in London and silver at the 2016 Olympics in Rio. Triathletes Alastair and Jonny Brownlee have won two golds and a silver and bronze respectively.\nAnimal related.\nYorkshire has nine horseracing courses: in North Yorkshire there are Catterick, Redcar, Ripon, Thirsk and York; in the East Riding of Yorkshire there is Beverley; in West Yorkshire there are Pontefract and Wetherby; while in South Yorkshire there is Doncaster.\nEngland's oldest horse race, which began in 1519, is run each year at Kiplingcotes near Market Weighton. Britain's oldest organised fox hunt is the Bilsdale, founded in 1668.\nKnurr and Spell.\nThe sport of Knurr and Spell was unique to the region, being one of the most popular sports in the area during the 18th and 19th centuries, before a decline in the 20th century to virtual obscurity.\nCycling.\nYorkshire is considered to be particularly fond of cycling. In 2014 Yorkshire hosted the Grand D\u00e9part of the Tour de France. Spectator crowds over the two days were estimated to be of the order of 2.5\u00a0million people, making it the highest attended event in the UK. The inaugural Tour de Yorkshire was held from 1\u20133 May 2015, with start and finishes in Bridlington, Leeds, Scarborough, Selby, Wakefield and York, watched by 1.2\u00a0million. Yorkshire hosted the 2019 UCI Road World Championships between 22 and 29 September, which were held in Harrogate. Notable racing cyclists from Yorkshire include Brian Robinson, Lizzie Deignan and Beryl Burton.\nHockey.\nField.\nField Hockey is a popular game in Yorkshire with 58 clubs running 271 organised teams. The largest clubs include City of York HC (16 teams), Doncaster HC, Leeds HC and Sheffield Hallam HC (all 14 teams). The most recent team from Yorkshire to have played in the EH Premier League was Sheffield Hallam who finished in 9th place in 2013\u201314. England and Great Britain's most capped player of all time Barry Middleton hails from the town of Doncaster. Hockey was formerly organised by the Yorkshire Hockey Association but is now run by Yorkshire &amp; North East Hockey who have run leagues and organised representative teams since September 2021.\nOther professional sports franchise teams.\nSheffield is home to the Sheffield Sharks who play in the British Basketball League and, from 2021, Leeds Rhinos have featured in the Netball Superleague.\nPolitics and identity.\nConstituencies.\nFrom 1290, Yorkshire was represented by two members of parliament of the House of Commons of the Parliament of England. After the union with Scotland, two members represented the county in the Parliament of Great Britain from 1707 to 1800 and of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1801 to 1832. In 1832 the county benefited from the disfranchisement of Grampound by taking an additional two members. Yorkshire was represented at this time as one single, large, county constituency. Like other counties, there were also some parliamentary boroughs within Yorkshire, the oldest of which was the City of York, which had existed since the ancient Montfort's Parliament of 1265. After the Reform Act 1832, Yorkshire's political representation in parliament was drawn from its subdivisions, with members of parliament representing each of the three historic Ridings of Yorkshire; East Riding, North Riding, and West Riding constituencies.\nFor the 1865 general elections and onwards, the West Riding was further divided into Northern, Eastern and Southern parliamentary constituencies, though these only lasted until the major Redistribution of Seats Act 1885. This act saw more localisation of government in the United Kingdom, with the introduction of 26 new parliamentary constituencies within Yorkshire.\nWith the Representation of the People Act 1918 there was some reshuffling on a local level for the 1918 general election, revised again during the 1950s.\nDistinctive identity.\nA number of claims have been made for the distinctiveness of Yorkshire, as a geographical, cultural and political entity, and these have been used to demand increased political autonomy. In the early twentieth century, F. W. Moorman, the first professor of English language at Leeds University, claimed Yorkshire was not settled by Angles or Saxons following the end of Roman rule in Britain, but by a different Germanic tribe, the Geats. As a consequence, he claimed, it is possible the first work of English literature, \"Beowulf\", believed to have been composed by Geats, was written in Yorkshire, and this distinctive ethnic and cultural origin is the root of the unique status of Yorkshire today. One of Moorman's students at Leeds University, Herbert Read, was greatly influenced by Moorman's ideas on Yorkshire identity, and claimed that until recent times Yorkshire was effectively an island, cut off from the rest of England by rivers, fens, moors and mountains. This distancing of Yorkshire from England led Read to question whether Yorkshire people were really English at all. Combined with the suggested ethnic difference from the rest of England, Read quoted Frederic Pearson, who wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring the premiership of William Pitt the Younger the hypothetical idea of Yorkshire becoming independent was raised in the British parliament in relation to the question whether Ireland should become part of the United Kingdom. This resulted in the publication of an anonymous pamphlet in London in 1799 arguing at length that Yorkshire could never be an independent state as it would always be reliant on the rest of the United Kingdom to provide it with essential resources.\nAlthough in the devolution debates in the House of Commons of the late 1960s, which paved the way for the 1979 referendums on the creation of a Scottish parliament and Welsh assembly, parallel devolution for Yorkshire was suggested, this was opposed by the Scottish National Party Member of Parliament for Hamilton, Winifred Ewing. Ewing argued that it was offensive to Scots to argue that an English region had the same status as an 'ancient nation' such as Scotland.\nThe relationship between Yorkshire and Scottish devolution was again made in 1975 by Richard Wainwright, MP for Colne Valley, who claimed in a speech in the House of Commons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The nationalist movement in Scotland is associated with flags, strange costumes, weird music and extravagant ceremonial. When... people go to Yorkshire and find that we have no time for dressing up, waving flags and playing strange instruments\u2014in other words, we are not a lot of Presbyterians in Yorkshire\u2014they should not assume that we do not have the same feelings underneath the skin. Independence in Yorkshire expresses itself in a markedly increasing determination to establish self-reliance.\nFollowing the local government reforms of 1974, Yorkshire lost its overall sheriff and the ridings lost their lieutenants and administrative counties. Although some government officials and King Charles have asserted such reform is not meant to alter the ancient boundaries or cultural loyalties, there are pressure groups such as the Yorkshire Ridings Society who want greater recognition for the historic boundaries.\nIn 1998 the Campaign for Yorkshire was established to push for the creation of a Yorkshire regional assembly, sometimes dubbed the Yorkshire Parliament. In its defining statement, the Campaign for Yorkshire made reference to the historical notions that Yorkshire had a distinctive identity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yorkshire and the Humber has distinctive characteristics which make it an ideal test bed for further reform. It has a strong popular identity. The region follows closely the historic boundaries of the three Ridings, and there is no serious debate about boundaries. It possesses strong existing regional partnerships including universities, voluntary and church associations. All this makes it realistic to regard Yorkshire and the Humber as the standard bearer for representative regional government.\nThe Campaign for Yorkshire was led by Jane Thomas as Director and Paul Jagger as chairman. Jagger claimed in 1999 that Yorkshire had as much right to a regional parliament or assembly as Scotland and Wales because Yorkshire 'has as clear a sense of identity as Scotland or Wales.' One of those brought into the Campaign for Yorkshire by Jane Thomas was Herbert Read scholar Michael Paraskos, who organised a series of events in 2000 to highlight the distinctiveness of Yorkshire culture. This included a major exhibition of Yorkshire artists. Paraskos also founded a Yorkshire Studies degree course at Hull University. Interviewed by \"The Guardian\" newspaper, Paraskos linked the start of this course to the contemporary devolution debates in Yorkshire, Scotland and Wales, claiming:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If Yorkshire is arguing for a parliament, there needs to be a cultural argument as well, otherwise why not have a parliament of the north? There is a rediscovery of political and social culture going on in a very similar way to the early assertions of a Scottish identity.\nIn March 2013, the Yorkshire Devolution Movement was founded as an active campaign group by Nigel Sollitt, who had administered the social media group by that name since 2011, Gareth Shanks, a member of the social media group, and Stewart Arnold, former Chair of the Campaign for Yorkshire. In September 2013, the executive committee was joined by Richard Honnoraty and Richard Carter (as an advisor), who had also been involved in the Campaign for Yorkshire. The Movement campaigns for a directly elected parliament for the whole of the traditional county of Yorkshire with powers second to no other devolved administration in the UK.\nIn 2014, Richard Carter, Stewart Arnold and Richard Honnoraty, founded Yorkshire First, a political party campaigning for the creation of a Yorkshire parliament by 2050 based on the Scottish Parliament. It was later renamed the Yorkshire Party. A Social democratic party, it has parish, town, district and county councillors, and stood in 28 constituencies in the 2019 general election. Yorkshire Party candidates have also run for the position of directly elected mayors in Doncaster in 2017 (receiving 3,235 votes, 5.04%) and the Sheffield City Region in 2018 (receiving 22,318 votes, 8.6).\nMonarchy and peerage.\nWhen the territory of Yorkshire began to take shape as a result of the invasion of the Danish Vikings, they instituted a monarchy based at the settlement of J\u00f3rv\u00edk, York. The reign of the Viking kings came to an end with the last king Eric Bloodaxe dying in battle in 954 after the invasion and conquest by the Kingdom of England from the south. J\u00f3rv\u00edk was the last of the independent kingdoms to be taken to form part of the Kingdom of England and thus the local monarchal title became defunct.\nThough the monarchal title became defunct, it was succeeded by the creation of the Earl of York title of nobility by king of England Edgar the Peaceful in 960. (The earldom covered the general area of Yorkshire and is sometimes referred to as the \"Earl of Yorkshire\".) The title passed through the hands of various nobles, decided upon by the king of England. The last man to hold the title was William le Gros, however the earldom was abolished by Henry II as a result of a troubled period known as \"The Anarchy\".\nThe peerage was recreated by Edward III in 1385, this time in the form of the prestigious title of Duke of York which he gave to his son Edmund of Langley. Edmund founded the House of York; later the title was merged with that of the King of England. Much of the modern-day symbolism of Yorkshire, such as the White Rose of York, is derived from the Yorkists, giving the house a special affinity within the culture of Yorkshire. Especially celebrated is the Yorkist king Richard III who spent much of his life at Middleham Castle in Yorkshire. Since that time the title has passed through the hands of many, being merged with the crown and then recreated several times. The title of Duke of York is given to the second son of the British monarch.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36645", "revid": "612392672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36645", "title": "Bob Welch", "text": "Bob Welch may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "36646", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36646", "title": "Lindsey Buckingham", "text": "American musician (born 1949)\nLindsey Adams Buckingham (born October 3, 1949) is an American musician, record producer, and the lead guitarist and co-lead vocalist of the rock band Fleetwood Mac from 1975 to 1987 and 1997 to 2018. In addition to his tenure with Fleetwood Mac, Buckingham has released seven solo studio albums and three live albums. As a member of Fleetwood Mac, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1998. Buckingham was ranked 100th in \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2011 list of \"The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\". Buckingham is known for his fingerpicking guitar style.\nBuckingham joined Fleetwood Mac in 1975, replacing guitarist Bob Welch, and convinced the group to recruit his musical (and, at the time, romantic) partner Stevie Nicks as well. Buckingham and Nicks became prominent members of Fleetwood Mac during its most commercially successful period, highlighted by the multi-platinum studio album \"Rumours\" (1977), which sold over 40 million copies worldwide. Though highly successful, the group experienced almost constant creative and personal conflict, and Buckingham left the band in 1987 to focus on his solo career. Hit songs Buckingham wrote and sang with Fleetwood Mac include \"Go Your Own Way\", \"Never Going Back Again\", \"Tusk\", and \"Big Love\".\nA one-off reunion at the 1993 inauguration ball for President Bill Clinton initiated some rapprochement between the former band members, with Buckingham performing some vocals on one track of their 1995 studio album \"Time\", and rejoining the band full-time in 1997 for the live tour and album \"The Dance\". In 2018, Buckingham was dismissed from Fleetwood Mac and replaced by Mike Campbell and Neil Finn.\nEarly life.\nLindsey Adams Buckingham was born on October 3, 1949, in Palo Alto, California, to Morris H. Buckingham and Rutheda, n\u00e9e Elliott. Morris H. Buckingham, who was a football star at San Jose State College, by 1963 served as President of Alexander-Ballert Company of San Francisco, a producer of roasted coffee beans, and ran a coffee plant in Daly City near Palo Alto. California's popular Alta Organic Coffee remains one of their brands. Buckingham had two older brothers, Jeffrey and Gregory. Growing up in the San Francisco Bay Area community of Atherton, he attended Menlo-Atherton High School where Buckingham and his brothers were encouraged to swim competitively. Though Buckingham dropped out of athletics to pursue music, his brother Gregory went on to win a silver medal at the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City. Though he did not graduate, Lindsey attended San Jos\u00e9 State University, like his brother Greg and father Morris.\nBuckingham's first forays into guitar playing took place on a toy Mickey Mouse guitar, playing along to his brother Jeff's extensive collection of 45s. Noticing his talent, Buckingham's parents bought their son a $35 Harmony guitar.\nBuckingham never took guitar lessons and does not read music. By age 13, he became interested in folk music and, influenced by banjo methods, practiced the energetic style of the Kingston Trio.\nMusic career.\nFrom 1966 to 1971, Buckingham performed psychedelic and folk rock with the high school rock band originally named the Fritz Rabyne Memorial Band as a bassist and vocalist. The band regrouped in 1967 due to band member changes and shortened their name to Fritz. Buckingham invited friend Stevie Nicks to join Fritz as a backing vocalist. Their romantic relationship began after both left Fritz five years later.\n1973\u20131974: Buckingham Nicks.\nBuckingham and his then-girlfriend Stevie Nicks recorded seven demos in 1972 on a half-inch 4-track Ampex recorder kept at his father's coffee-roasting plant in Daly City, then drove to Los Angeles to pursue a recording contract. In 1973, Polydor Records signed the pair. Their studio album, produced by Keith Olsen and second engineer Richard Dashut, \"Buckingham Nicks\", was released in September 1973; however, soon after its release Polydor dropped the duo because of poor sales. To help make ends meet, Buckingham toured with Don Everly's backing band, singing Phil Everly's parts.\n1975\u20131980: Fleetwood Mac and mainstream success.\nWhile investigating Sound City recording studio in California, Mick Fleetwood heard the song \"Frozen Love\" from the \"Buckingham Nicks\" studio album. Impressed, he asked who the guitarist was. By chance, Buckingham and Nicks were also in Sound City recording demos, and Buckingham and Fleetwood were introduced. When Bob Welch left Fleetwood Mac in December 1974, Fleetwood immediately contacted Buckingham and offered him the vacant guitar slot in his band. Buckingham told Fleetwood that he and Nicks were a team and that he didn't want to work without her. Fleetwood agreed to hire both of them, without an audition. Buckingham and Nicks then began a short tour to promote the \"Buckingham Nicks\" album. The touring band included drummers Bob Aguirre and Gary Hodges (playing simultaneously) and bassist Tom Moncrieff, who later played bass on Nicks' debut solo studio album \"Bella Donna\" (1981). When they played in Alabama, the one area where they saw appreciable sales, they told their fans they had joined Fleetwood Mac.\nFleetwood Mac released their eponymously titled studio album in 1975, which reached number one on the American charts. Buckingham contributed two songs to the album, \"Monday Morning\" and \"I'm So Afraid\", while also singing lead on \"Blue Letter\" and Nicks' song \"Crystal\". \"I'm So Afraid\" and \"Monday Morning\" were intended for the planned follow-up Buckingham Nicks studio album, but they were instead used with Fleetwood Mac.\nBuckingham's second studio album with Fleetwood Mac, \"Rumours\" (1977), became one of the best-selling studio albums of all time and featured Buckingham's \"Go Your Own Way\" as the lead single, which reached number ten on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100; also on the album were Buckingham's \"Second Hand News\" and \"Never Going Back Again\". Buckingham also sang co-lead vocal on two of the band's biggest live staples: \"The Chain\", written by the entire band, and \"Don't Stop\", a Christine McVie number.\nAfter the commercial success of \"Rumours\" (during the making of which Buckingham and Nicks broke up), Buckingham was determined to avoid falling into repeating the same musical pattern. Buckingham convinced Fleetwood to let his work on their next studio album be more experimental and to be allowed to work on tracks at home before bringing them to the rest of the band in the studio. The result was \"Tusk\" (1979), a double studio album that Buckingham primarily directed. Once again, Buckingham wrote the lead single, the title track, which peaked at No. 8 in the US and No. 6 on the UK singles chart. It also featured the 112-member USC Trojan Marching Band, who recorded their parts at Dodger Stadium.\n1981: Going solo and \"Law and Order\".\nDuring the time he worked on \"Tusk\", Buckingham also produced studio albums for Walter Egan and John Stewart in the late 1970s as well as beginning work on his own solo studio album.\nIn 1981, Buckingham released his debut solo studio album, \"Law and Order\", playing nearly every instrument and featuring guest appearances by bandmates Mick Fleetwood and Christine McVie. The album pursued the quirky, eclectic, often lo-fi and new wave influences of \"Tusk\" and spawned the single \"Trouble\" (inspired by Fleetwood Mac producer Richard Dashut), which reached No. 9 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and No. 1 in Australia (for three weeks).\n1982: \"Mirage\".\nAfter a large world tour that ended in 1980, Fleetwood Mac took a year-long break before reconvening to record their next studio album \"Mirage\" (1982), a more pop-friendly work that returned the band to the top of the US album chart. However, by this time various members of the band were enjoying success as solo artists (particularly Nicks) and the next Fleetwood Mac album was not released until five years later.\n1983\u20131986: \"Go Insane\" and other solo projects.\nIn 1983, he wrote and performed the songs \"Holiday Road\" and \"Dancin' Across the USA\" for the film \"National Lampoon's Vacation\". \"Holiday Road\" was released as a single and reached No. 82 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot 100.\"\nIn 1984, after ending his 7-year relationship with Carol Ann Harris, he released his second solo studio album, \"Go Insane\". The title track was a modest hit, reaching No. 23 on the Hot 100. In 2008, he revealed the title track was about his post-breakup relationship with Stevie Nicks; however, Harris claimed in her memoir \"Storms\" that the song was written about her breakup with Buckingham. The last track of the album, \"D.W. Suite\", was a tribute to the late Beach Boys drummer Dennis Wilson, a close friend of Fleetwood Mac who was in a romantic relationship with Christine McVie. Also that year, Buckingham played guitars and sang harmony vocals on the track \"You Can't Make Love\" from Don Henley's second solo studio album \"Building the Perfect Beast\".\nThe next year, Buckingham performed on USA for Africa's fundraising single, \"We Are the World\". In 1986, he co-wrote \"Since You've Gone\" for Belinda Carlisle's debut solo studio album, \"Belinda\". He did other soundtrack work, including the song \"Time Bomb Town\" from \"Back to the Future\" (1985). Buckingham played all of the instruments on the track except drums, which were played by Michael Huey.\n1987: \"Tango In the Night\" and departure from Fleetwood Mac.\nBuckingham's fifth studio album with Fleetwood Mac, \"Tango in the Night\", was released in 1987. Buckingham had already released two solo studio albums and had given up much of the material for what would have been his third solo studio album for the project, including \"Big Love\", \"Tango in the Night \", \"Family Man\", \"You and I\" and \"Caroline\". \"Big Love\", released as the first single from the album, became a top ten hit in the US and the UK.\nPropelled by a string of hit singles, \"Tango in the Night\" became the band's biggest studio album since \"Rumours\" a decade earlier. However, following its release, Buckingham left Fleetwood Mac largely because of his desire not to tour and the strain he was feeling within the band. \"I needed to get some separation from Stevie especially because I don't think I'd ever quite gotten closure on our relationship,\" he said. \"I needed to get on with the next phase of my creative growth and my emotional growth. When you break up with someone and then for the next 10 years you have to be around them and do for them and watch them move away from you, it's not easy.\" Fleetwood Mac continued without him, and Buckingham was replaced by two guitarists, Rick Vito and Billy Burnette.\n1988\u20131992: \"Out of the Cradle\".\nFollowing his departure from Fleetwood Mac in 1987, Buckingham spent much of the next five years in the studio, working on his third solo studio album, \"Out of the Cradle\", which was released in 1992. Many of the songs deal with his relationship with Nicks and his decision to leave the band. \"There were things lingering for years having to do with relationships and the band, hurtful things, that were impossible to deal with until I left. If you were in a relationship and split up, then had to see that person every day for the next 15 years, it might keep you from dealing with some of those things. While we made \"Rumours\" (in 1977) there were two couples breaking up in the band (Buckingham and Nicks, and John and Christine McVie), and we had to say, 'This is an important thing we're doing, so we've got to put this set of feelings on this side of the room and get on with it.' And when you do that long enough you forget that those feelings are even there. On this album, I'm putting all these feelings in the healthiest possible perspective and that, looking at it broadly, is a lot of what the album is dealing with. It's a catharsis, absolutely.\" \n\"Wrong\" was a gentle rebuke of former bandmate Mick Fleetwood's tell-all biography, published in 1990. \"Out of the Cradle\" received some favorable reviews but did not achieve the sales levels associated with Fleetwood Mac. However, Buckingham toured throughout 1992\u201393 for the first time as a solo artist with four guitarists, a bassist, keyboardist, and three percussionists.\n1993\u20132004: Return to Fleetwood Mac.\nIn 1993, newly elected president Bill Clinton asked Fleetwood Mac to come together to perform the song he had chosen for his campaign, the Christine McVie-penned \"Don't Stop\", at his inauguration on January 20, 1993. Buckingham agreed to be part of the performance, but the experience was something of a one-off for the band, who were still very much at odds with one another and had no plans to reunite officially.\nWhile assembling material for a planned fourth solo studio album in the mid-1990s, Buckingham contacted Mick Fleetwood for assistance on a song. Their collaboration lasted much longer than anticipated, and the two eventually decided to call upon Stevie Nicks, John and Christine McVie. In 1997, Buckingham and all four of his bandmates from the \"Rumours\"-era line-up of Fleetwood Mac went on the road for the first time together since 1982 in a reunion tour titled \"The Dance\". The tour was hugely successful and did much to heal the damage that had been done between Buckingham and his bandmates. However, Christine McVie left the band in 1998 because of her fear of flying and to be with her family in the UK, thus making Fleetwood Mac a four-piece band.\nA subsequent fourth solo studio album, titled \"Gift of Screws\", was recorded between 1995 and 2001 and presented to Warner Bros. and Reprise for release. Executives at the label managed to persuade Buckingham to hold the album back and instead take several tracks from \"Gift of Screws\" and use them with Fleetwood Mac. In 2003, the reformed band released the first studio album involving Buckingham and Nicks in 15 years, \"Say You Will\". Buckingham's song \"Peacekeeper\" was the first single from the album, and the band went on a world concert tour that lasted almost a year and a half. Seven songs from \"Gift of Screws\" appear on the Fleetwood Mac studio album \"Say You Will\", in substantially the same form as Buckingham had recorded them for his solo release. Bootleg copies of \"Gift of Screws\"\u2014taken from an original CD-R presented to Warner Bros and Reprise\u2014are known to exist and have been widely distributed among fans through the use of torrent sites and other peer-to-peer networks.\n2006\u20132008: Continuing solo.\nOn his 57th birthday, October 3, 2006, Buckingham's fourth solo studio album, an acoustic album now titled \"Under the Skin\", was released. \"Under the Skin\" features Buckingham on almost all instruments, with the exception of two tracks that feature Fleetwood Mac's rhythm section of John McVie and Mick Fleetwood. The album includes a cover of the Rolling Stones classic \"I Am Waiting\". Three days after the album's release, Buckingham embarked on a tour in support of the album that lasted until the end of June 2007. A live album and DVD, \"Live at the Bass Performance Hall\", was released documenting the Fort Worth, Texas show from this tour.\nIn 2008, the \"Gift of Screws\" album was finally released, containing three tracks from the originally planned studio album, as well as seven new recordings. Buckingham then commenced a short tour to promote \"Gift of Screws\" in September and October, opening in Saratoga, California and closing in New York City.\n2009: Unleashed Tour.\nFleetwood Mac toured in 2009, with the first date of the \"UNLEASHED\" Tour as March 1, 2009, in Mellon Arena (Pittsburgh). Christine McVie was not involved with this project.\n2010\u20132012: \"Seeds We Sow\" and One Man Show.\nOn November 3, 2010, Buckingham's website announced that he was working on an untitled studio album with release planned in early 2011. Buckingham had finished recording the studio album, titled \"Seeds We Sow\" in April, and on April 22, 2011, he filmed a concert for DVD release to support the album. \"Seeds We Sow\" was released on September 6, 2011. On September 10, Buckingham started the \"Seeds We Sow\" Tour in Reno, Nevada; the tour ended in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on November 14. Buckingham had planned to conduct his first solo tour of the United Kingdom and Ireland in December. However, in early December, Buckingham postponed all UK dates due to his guitarist suffering a back injury. The UK dates were subsequently cancelled.\nBuckingham began a \"solo\" (no backing band) tour of the United States on May 3, 2012, in Solana Beach, California and in November 2012 released a completely solo live album \"One Man Show\" via digital download at iTunes that was recorded from a single night in Des Moines, Iowa. \"One Man Show\" was released on Buckingham's own label Buckingham Records LLC.\n2013\u20132015: Fleetwood Mac EP, world tour and Christine McVie reunion.\nThe \"Live World\" tour commenced on April 4, 2013, in Columbus, Ohio. On April 30, the band released their first new studio material since 2003's \"Say You Will\" via digital download on iTunes with the four-track EP containing three new songs from Buckingham and one new song from the \"Buckingham Nicks\" sessions (\"Without You\").\nBuckingham is credited for three songs on the 2013 release \"Hesitation Marks,\" the eighth studio album of the band Nine Inch Nails.\nOn January 11, 2014, Mick Fleetwood announced that Christine McVie was rejoining Fleetwood Mac, and the news was confirmed on January 13 by the band's primary publicist, Liz Rosenberg. Rosenberg also stated that an official announcement regarding a new album and tour was forthcoming.\nOn with the Show, a 33-city North American Tour opened in Minneapolis, Minnesota on September 30, 2014. A series of May\u2013June 2015 arena dates in the United Kingdom went on sale on November 14, selling out in minutes. Additional dates for the tour were added, extending into November.\nIn January 2015, Buckingham suggested that the new studio album and the new tour might be Fleetwood Mac's last act and that the band would cease to operate in 2015 or soon afterward. He concluded: \"We're going to continue working on the new album, and the solo stuff will take a back seat for a year or two. A beautiful way to wrap up this last act\". On the other hand, Mick Fleetwood stated that the new studio album could take a few years to complete and that they were waiting for contributions from Stevie Nicks, who had been ambivalent about committing to a new record.\n2016\u20132017: \"Lindsey Buckingham Christine McVie\" and Classic Concerts.\nIn August 2016, Fleetwood said that while the band has \"a huge amount of recorded music\", virtually none of it featured Stevie Nicks. Buckingham and Christine McVie, however, had contributed multiple songs to the new project. Fleetwood told Ultimate Classic Rock, \"She [McVie] ... wrote up a storm ... She and Lindsey could probably have a mighty strong duet album if they want. In truth, I hope it will come to more than that. There really are dozens of songs. And they're really good. So we'll see.\"\nBuckingham and Christine McVie announced a collaborative studio album titled \"Lindsey Buckingham Christine McVie\", which also features Mick Fleetwood and John McVie. The album was originally planned as a Fleetwood Mac album. Stevie Nicks did not participate due to her preference for a solo tour with the Pretenders. \"Lindsey Buckingham/Christine McVie\" was released on June 9, 2017, and was preceded by the single, \"In My World\". A 38-date tour began on June 21, 2017, and ended on November 16.\n2018\u2013present: Dismissal from Fleetwood Mac, \"Solo Anthology,\" and \"Lindsey Buckingham\".\nFollowing Fleetwood Mac's performance at the MusiCares Person of the Year in January 2018, Buckingham was dismissed from the band. The reason was said to have been a disagreement about the nature of the tour, and in particular the question of whether newer or less well-known material would be included, as Buckingham wanted.\nMick Fleetwood and the band appeared on \"CBS This Morning\" on April 25, 2018, and said that Buckingham would not sign off on a tour that the group had been planning for a year and that they had reached a \"huge impasse\" and \"hit a brick wall\". When asked if Buckingham had been fired, he said, \"Well, we don't use that word because I think it's ugly.\" He also said that \"Lindsey has huge amounts of respect and kudos to what he's done within the ranks of Fleetwood Mac and always will.\" In October 2018, Buckingham filed a lawsuit against Fleetwood Mac for breach of fiduciary duty, breach of oral contract, and intentional interference with prospective economic advantage, among other charges; the lawsuit was settled in December of the same year.\nBuckingham stated he learned about the firing after receiving a call from Fleetwood Mac manager Irving Azoff with a message for Buckingham from Stevie Nicks. Buckingham stated that Azoff told him: \"Stevie never wants to be on a stage with you again.\" According to Azoff, on the evening of MusicCares, just before the band's set, Nicks had taken issue with Buckingham\u2019s outburst over the intro music\u2014the studio recording of Nicks' song \"Rhiannon\"\u2014and the way he had \"smirked\" during Nicks' thank-you speech. Buckingham conceded that \"It wasn't about it being 'Rhiannon'. It just undermined the impact of our entrance. That's me being very specific about the right and wrong way to do something.\" Days later, Buckingham called Azoff and asked, \"Is Stevie leaving the band, or am I getting kicked out?\" Azoff told him that he was \"getting ousted\" from the band after Nicks gave the other band members \"an ultimatum: Either [Buckingham] go[es] or she's going to go,\" to which they decided to fire him. Former Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers guitarist Mike Campbell and Neil Finn of Split Enz and Crowded House were named to replace Buckingham. Buckingham has stated since that he would be open to rejoining Fleetwood Mac but does not foresee it in the future.\nIn August 2018, Reprise issued a press release for a new solo anthology \"\" that focused on Buckingham's solo career since 1981. The anthology was released on October 5, 2018, followed two days later by a solo tour throughout North America. In 2020, Buckingham collaborated with The Killers on their studio album \"Imploding the Mirage\", playing guitar on the first single \"Caution\". In 2021, Buckingham played on a new version of \"The Past Is the Past\" by Brandy Clark, issued as a bonus track on the deluxe edition of her album \"Your Life Is a Record\".\nOn June 8, 2021, Buckingham announced his seventh solo studio album, \"Lindsey Buckingham\", with the single \"I Don't Mind\". The second single from the album, \"On the Wrong Side\", was released on July 23, 2021. The record was released on September 17, 2021, and his tour to support it started the same month.\nBuckingham also guested on Halsey's 2021 studio album \"If I Can't Have Love, I Want Power\". In 2022, Buckingham would again join with The Killers on August 27, 2022, to perform his guitar solo from \"Caution\" live on stage in Los Angeles with the band, along with a cover of Fleetwood Mac's \"Go Your Own Way\". Buckingham along with the Killers were joined with Johnny Marr of The Smiths to perform \"Mr. Brightside\" together to close out the concert.\nPersonal life.\nBuckingham was in the same high school as Stevie Nicks but a year behind her. He started a relationship with Nicks after the breakup of their band Fritz. He then suffered from a bout of mononucleosis, which delayed their move to Los Angeles in 1971. They recorded a studio album together before joining Fleetwood Mac in 1975, while their relationship had broken down by 1977. The breakup was chronicled in a number of songs written by the two, such as \"Silver Springs\" and \"Dreams\" by Nicks and \"Go Your Own Way\" and \"Second Hand News\" by Buckingham.\nBuckingham had his first child with Kristen Messner on July 8, 1998. Buckingham and Messner were married in 2000 and later had two daughters. Buckingham and Messner, who is a photographer and interior designer, have developed homes in the Brentwood area of Los Angeles, California. Buckingham and Messner had filed for divorce in 2021, but ultimately decided to mend their relationship.\nBuckingham underwent emergency open heart surgery in February 2019. His wife said that \"the life-saving procedure caused vocal cord damage, the permanency of which is unclear\", though he ultimately recovered.\nMusical style.\nUnlike most rock guitarists, Buckingham does not play with a pick; instead, he almost exclusively plays fingerstyle and tends to strum with his middle and ring fingers. Initially after joining Fleetwood Mac, Buckingham used a Gibson Les Paul Custom. Before the band, a Fender Telecaster was his main guitar, and was used on his first Fleetwood Mac studio album alongside Fender Stratocasters fitted with an Alembic Blaster. In 1978, he worked with Rick Turner, future owner and founder of The Renaissance Guitar Company, to create the Model One guitar. He has used it extensively since, both with Fleetwood Mac and for his solo efforts. He uses a Taylor Guitar 814ce or a Rick Turner Renaissance RS6 for most of his acoustic performances but uses a custom-made Gibson Chet Atkins guitar for his live performances of \"Big Love\". He has also used an in the past from the early 1970s to the late 1980s. In the 1980s, he also extensively used the Fairlight CMI sampling synthesizer.\nHis influences include Brian Wilson and Phil Spector. Buckingham has also worked extensively as a producer both for Fleetwood Mac and for his solo work. \"I think of myself as a stylist, and the process of writing a song is part and parcel with putting it together in the studio.\"\nIn an interview with \"Guitar World Acoustic Magazine\", Buckingham said:\nI've always believed that you play to highlight the song, not to highlight the player. The song is all that matters. There are two ways you can choose to go. You can try to be someone like Eddie Van Halen, who is a great guitarist, a virtuoso. Yet he doesn't make good records because what he plays is totally lost in the context of this band's music. Then there are guitar players like Chet Atkins, who weren't out there trying to show themselves off as guitarists per se, but were using the guitar as a tool to make good records. I remember loving Chet's work when I was a kid, but it was only later, when I really listened to his guitar parts, that I realized how much they were a part of the song's fabric, and how much you'd be going 'Oh, that song just isn't working' if they weren't there.\nIn another interview to \"Guitar World\", he said about using his fingers rather than a plectrum:\nI started playing very young and from early on, the people I was listening to had some element of finger style. Probably the first guitarist I was emulating was Scotty Moore, when I was maybe 6 or 7. And he played with a pick, but he also used fingers. And a lot of the session players, like Chet Atkins, they played with fingers or a pick. Then I listened to a certain amount of light classical guitar playing. And of course later on, when the first wave of rock 'n' roll kind of fell away, folk music was very popular and very influential in my style. So it was really less of a choice than what I fell into. I use a pick occasionally. I certainly use it more in the studio when you want to get a certain tone. But it's just the way I came up. I wasn't taught. I just sort of figured things out on my own terms. I guess that was one of the ways that I became comfortable and it just kind of set in.\nDiscography.\nSingles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36647", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36647", "title": "Christine McVie", "text": "British musician (1943\u20132022)\nChristine Anne McVie (; n\u00e9e Perfect; 12 July 1943 \u2013 30 November 2022) was an English musician. She was the keyboardist and one of the vocalists and songwriters of the rock band Fleetwood Mac. \nMcVie was a member of several bands, notably Chicken Shack, in the mid-1960s British blues scene. She initially began working with Fleetwood Mac as a session player in 1968, before officially joining the band two years later. Her first compositions with Fleetwood Mac appeared on their fifth album, \"Future Games\". She remained with the band through many changes of line-up, writing songs and performing lead vocals before partially retiring in 1998.\nMcVie was described as \"the prime mover behind some of Fleetwood Mac's biggest hits\" and eight songs she wrote or co-wrote, including \"Say You Love Me\", \"Don't Stop\", \"Everywhere\" and \"Little Lies\", appeared on Fleetwood Mac's 1988 \"Greatest Hits\" album. She appeared as a session musician on the band's last studio album, \"Say You Will\". McVie also released three solo studio albums and recorded a duet album with Lindsey Buckingham. McVie was noted for her soulful contralto voice.\nAs a member of Fleetwood Mac, McVie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and in 1998 received the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In the same year, after almost 30 years with Fleetwood Mac, she left the band and lived in semi-retirement, releasing a solo album in 2004. She appeared on stage with Fleetwood Mac at the O2 Arena in London in September 2013 and rejoined the band in 2014 prior to their On with the Show tour.\nMcVie received a Gold Badge of Merit Award from BASCA, now The Ivors Academy, in 2006. She received the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors in 2014 and was honoured with the Trailblazer Award at the UK Americana Awards in 2021. She was also the recipient of two Grammy Awards.\nEarly life.\nMcVie was born on 12 July 1943 in the village of Greenodd, in the Furness area of Lancashire (now present day Cumbria). She grew up in the Bearwood area of Smethwick near Birmingham. Her father, Cyril Percy Absell Perfect, was a concert violinist and music lecturer at St Peter's College of Education, Saltley, Birmingham, and taught violin at St Philip's Grammar School, Birmingham. Her mother, Beatrice Edith Maud (n\u00e9e Reece), was a medium, psychic, and faith healer. McVie's grandfather was an organist who had performed at Westminster Abbey.\nMcVie was introduced to the piano when she was four, but did not study music seriously until the age of 11 when she was reintroduced to it by a local musician who was a friend of her brother John. She continued classical training to the age of 15, but shifted her musical focus to rock and roll when her brother acquired a Fats Domino songbook. Other early influences included the Everly Brothers.\nCareer.\nEarly music.\nMcVie studied sculpture at Moseley School of Art in Birmingham for five years with the aim of becoming an art teacher. While there she met budding musicians in Britain's blues scene. Her introduction to performing music came when she met Stan Webb and Andy Silvester, who were in a band called Sounds of Blue. Knowing that McVie had musical talent, they invited her to join them as the band's bassist. She also sang with Spencer Davis, who at the time was studying at the same art school as McVie. By the time McVie graduated from art college, Sounds of Blue had split up. She did not have enough money to launch herself into the art world and moved to London where she worked briefly as a department-store window dresser at Dickins &amp; Jones.\nChicken Shack.\nIn 1967, McVie heard that Silvester and Webb were forming a blues band, to be called Chicken Shack, and were looking for a pianist. She contacted them and was invited to join the band as pianist, keyboard player and backing vocalist. Chicken Shack's debut release was \"It's Okay with Me Baby\", which was written by and featured McVie. She stayed with the band for two studio albums, and her genuine feel for the blues became evident in her Sonny Thompson-style piano playing and her authentic \"bluesy\" voice. \nChicken Shack had a hit with a cover of Ellington Jordan's \"I'd Rather Go Blind\", which featured McVie on lead vocals. McVie received a \"Melody Maker\" award for UK's best female vocalist in 1969 and again in 1970. She left Chicken Shack in 1969, having married Fleetwood Mac bassist John McVie a year earlier, feeling that she would not see her husband if they were in different bands.\nFleetwood Mac.\nMcVie was a fan of Fleetwood Mac and while she was touring with Chicken Shack the two bands would often meet. Both bands were signed to the Blue Horizon label, and McVie played piano as a session musician on Peter Green's songs on Fleetwood Mac's second studio album, \"Mr. Wonderful\". Encouraged to continue her career, she recorded a debut solo studio album, \"Christine Perfect\", which was later reissued as \"The Legendary Christine Perfect Album\". She was invited to join Fleetwood Mac as a keyboard player in 1970 after the departure of founding member Peter Green, having already contributed piano and backing vocals, uncredited, to their next album, \"Kiln House\" and provided the artwork for the sleeve. The band had been struggling to manage without Green and had needed another musician to fill in their sound. McVie had been a huge fan of the Peter Green-era Fleetwood Mac and learned the songs for \"Kiln House\" during rehearsals.\nMcVie became an integral member of Fleetwood Mac as keyboard player, songwriter and female lead vocalist. Before she joined there had been talk of the band splitting up, but Fleetwood said later that \"Christine became the glue [that held the band together]. She filled out our sound beautifully.\" The first studio album on which McVie played as a full band member was \"Future Games\" in 1971. This was also the first album on which she worked with American guitarist and songwriter Bob Welch, who had replaced founding member Jeremy Spencer.\nMcVie moved with the rest of Fleetwood Mac to California in 1974, where Welch left after a final album, \"Heroes are Hard to Find\", and Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham of Buckingham Nicks joined the band. The line-up now contained two female lead vocalists who also wrote songs. McVie bonded instantly with Nicks and the two women found their voices blended perfectly. McVie wrote and sang lead on four tracks on the first studio album of the new line-up, \"Fleetwood Mac\" (1975): \"Warm Ways\", \"Over My Head\", \"Say You Love Me\" and \"Sugar Daddy\", and had a joint songwriting credit with Buckingham for \"World Turning\". The album produced several hit songs, with McVie's \"Over My Head\" and \"Say You Love Me\" both reaching the \"Billboard\" top-20 singles chart. \"Over My Head\" put Fleetwood Mac on American radio and into the national top 20. \nIn 1976, McVie began an on-the-road affair with the band's lighting director, Curry Grant, which inspired her to write \"You Make Loving Fun\", a top-10 hit from their next album, \"Rumours\" (1977). Her biggest hit from the album was \"Don't Stop\", which reached the top five. \"Rumours\" also included McVie's \"Songbird\", a slow ballad which featured McVie playing piano and Buckingham accompanying on acoustic guitar.\nBy the end of the \"Rumours\" tour, the McVies were divorced. Christine had a US top-20 hit with \"Think About Me\" from the 1979 double studio album \"Tusk\", which did not match the success of the \"Rumours\" album. After the \"Tusk\" tour the band took time apart, reuniting in 1981 to record the studio album \"Mirage\" at the Ch\u00e2teau d'H\u00e9rouville's studio in France. \"Mirage\", released in 1982, returned the band to the top of the US charts and contained the top-five hit \"Hold Me\", co-written by McVie. McVie's inspiration for the song was her tortured relationship with Beach Boys drummer Dennis Wilson. Her song \"Love in Store\" became the third single from the album in the United States, peaking at number 22 in early 1983.\nMcVie's second solo studio album, \"Christine McVie\", released in 1984, included the hits \"Got a Hold on Me\" (number 10 US pop, number one adult contemporary and number one Mainstream Rock Tracks) and \"Love Will Show Us How\" (number 30 US pop). A third single, \"I'm the One\", was released but did not chart. McVie said of the album, \"Maybe it isn't the most adventurous album in the world, but I wanted to be honest and please my own ears with it.\"\nMcVie married keyboardist on 18 October 1986 and they co-wrote songs which featured on subsequent Fleetwood Mac albums. She rejoined Fleetwood Mac in 1987 to record the \"Tango in the Night\" studio album, which became the band's biggest success since \"Rumours\" and reached the top five in the UK and US. McVie's \"Little Lies\", co-written with Quintela, was the biggest hit from the album. Another McVie single from the album, \"Everywhere\", reached number four in the UK, the band's third-highest UK chart peak. The single peaked at number 14 in the U.S. In 1990, the band (now without Buckingham) recorded \"Behind the Mask\", which reached Gold status in the US and McVie's song \"Save Me\" made the US top 40. The album entered the UK album chart at number one and reached Platinum status. McVie's \"Skies the Limit\", the second US single from the album, was a hit on the adult contemporary chart.\nMcVie's father, Cyril Perfect, died in 1990 while she was on the \"Behind the Mask\" tour and she decided to retire from touring. She remained with the band and wrote and recorded a new track, \"Love Shines\", for the 1992 box set \"25 Years \u2013 The Chain\", and five songs for the 1995 studio album \"Time\". Nicks had by now departed. In the mid-90s, Fleetwood and John McVie worked with Buckingham on one of his solo projects and Christine McVie provided vocals and keyboards on some of the tracks. A reunion was proposed, Nicks rejoined the band, and Fleetwood Mac recorded the 1997 live album, \"The Dance\", which reached number one on the US album charts. \nMcVie returned to touring and performed for the group's 1998 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, as well as the Grammy Awards show and the Brit Awards in the UK. She decided not to continue with Fleetwood Mac after 1998 and said this was because she had developed a phobia about flying.\n1999\u20132014: Hiatus from Fleetwood Mac and semi-retirement.\nAfter \"The Dance\", McVie returned to England to be near her family and stayed out of public view until 2000, when she accepted an honorary doctorate in music from the University of Greenwich. Five years after McVie left Fleetwood Mac, she and Quintela were divorced.\nIn a 2004 interview, McVie admitted to not listening much to pop music anymore and stated instead a preference for Classic FM. She appeared as a session musician on the band's last studio album, \"Say You Will\". In December 2003 she went to see Fleetwood Mac's last UK performance on the Say You Will tour in London, but did not join her former bandmates on stage. She released her third solo studio album, \"In the Meantime\", that year.\nMcVie was awarded the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors' Gold Badge of Merit at a ceremony held at London's Savoy Hotel in 2006. That same year, \"Paste\" named McVie, together with bandmates Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks, as the 83rd-greatest living songwriter or songwriting team. McVie did not join her former bandmates on the band's last performance in the UK of the \"Unleashed\" tour in November 2009. When Fleetwood Mac's 2012 world tour was announced, Stevie Nicks downplayed the likelihood of McVie ever rejoining the group. Nicks said, \"She went to England and she has never been back since 1998 [...] as much as we would all like to think that she'll just change her mind one day, I don't think it'll happen [...] We love her, so we had to let her go.\"\nIn October 2013, it was announced that McVie was recording a solo studio album for the first time in nine years. The album was never released.\n2014\u20132022: Return to Fleetwood Mac and album with Lindsey Buckingham.\nIn 2013, McVie appeared on stage in Maui, Hawaii, performing with the Mick Fleetwood Blues Band, which included Mick Fleetwood and ex-Fleetwood Mac guitarist Rick Vito. This was her first appearance on stage in 15 years. Later in September, Christine McVie joined Fleetwood Mac on stage for the first time in 15 years to play \"Don't Stop\" at the O2 Arena in London. She played on two dates, and her appearance on stage was received with rapturous applause.\nOn 11 January 2014, Mick Fleetwood announced during a concert in Maui that McVie would be rejoining the band, and it was officially announced two days later that she had rejoined.\nIn August 2016, Mick Fleetwood said that while the band had \"a huge amount of recorded music,\" virtually none of it featured Stevie Nicks. Buckingham and McVie, however, have contributed numerous songs to the new project. Fleetwood told Ultimate Classic Rock, \"She [McVie] ... wrote up a storm ... She and Lindsey could probably have a mighty strong duet album if they want. In truth, I hope it will come to more than that. There really are dozens of songs. And they're really good. So we'll see.\"\nThe collaborative studio album \"Lindsey Buckingham Christine McVie\" was released on 9 June 2017, and was preceded by the single, \"In My World\". A 38-date tour began on 21 June 2017 and ended on 16 November. Eight of the album's ten tracks were played live, with the rest of the set list consisting of Fleetwood Mac songs and Buckingham solo cuts. The Wallflowers opened for the band on select nights. In June, the band appeared on \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\" to perform the album's first single, \"In My World\". Some extra North American shows were later added in August, including one in Los Angeles and another in New York City. Another North American leg began in October, which saw the addition of 22 more shows.\nFleetwood Mac headlined the second night of the Classic West concert, on 16 July 2017 at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, and the second night of the Classic East concert at New York City's Citi Field on 30 July 2017. On 9 April 2018, Fleetwood Mac announced that Mike Campbell would be joining the band along with Neil Finn to replace lead guitarist Lindsey Buckingham. In 2019, McVie was featured in the 90-minute BBC documentary \"Fleetwood Mac's Songbird \u2013 Christine McVie\", directed by Matt O'Casey. In 2022, a compilation album titled \"Songbird (A Solo Collection)\" was released.\nOther collaborations.\nMcVie sang with Christopher Cross on the song \"Never Stop Believing\" on his 1988 studio album \"Back of My Mind\" as well as with Bob Welch on his solo version of \"Sentimental Lady\".\nPersonal life.\nMcVie married John McVie in 1968, with Peter Green as best man. Instead of a honeymoon, they celebrated at a hotel in Birmingham with Joe Cocker, who happened to be staying there, before going on the road with their own bands. The couple divorced in 1976, but remained friends and maintained a professional partnership. During the production of \"Rumours\", Christine had an affair with Fleetwood Mac's lighting engineer, Curry Grant, which inspired the song \"You Make Loving Fun\". From 1979 to 1982, she dated Dennis Wilson of the Beach Boys. McVie married Portuguese keyboardist and songwriter on 18 October 1986. Quintela and McVie collaborated on a number of songs together, including \"Little Lies\". They divorced in 2003, and Quintela died in 2020.\nDuring the height of Fleetwood Mac's success in the 1970s, McVie lived in Los Angeles. In 1990, she moved to a Grade II-listed Tudor manor house in Wickhambreaux, near Canterbury in Kent, to which she retired after leaving the band in 1998, and worked on her solo material. For years McVie found inspiration in the home's country setting, not only writing songs there, but also restoring the house. After rejoining Fleetwood Mac in 2014, she began spending more time in London, and put the house on the market in 2015.\nDeath.\nMcVie died of a stroke in hospital on 30 November 2022, at the age of 79. She had also been suffering from metastatic cancer of unknown primary origin.\nFollowing her death, Fleetwood Mac issued a statement saying that she was \"the best musician anyone could have in their band and the best friend anyone could have in their life\". Stevie Nicks said McVie had been her \"best friend in the whole world\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36648", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36648", "title": "Stevie Nicks", "text": "American singer-songwriter (born 1948)\nStephanie Lynn Nicks (born May 26, 1948) is an American singer-songwriter, known for her work with the band Fleetwood Mac and as a solo artist.\nAfter starting her career as a duo with her then-boyfriend Lindsey Buckingham, releasing the album \"Buckingham Nicks\" to little success, the pair joined Fleetwood Mac in 1975, helping the band to become one of the best-selling music acts of all time with over 120 million records sold worldwide. \"Rumours\", the band's second album with Nicks, became one of the best-selling albums worldwide, being certified 21\u00d7 platinum in the US. In 1981, while remaining a member of Fleetwood Mac, Nicks began her solo career, releasing the studio album \"Bella Donna\", which topped the \"Billboard\" 200 and has reached multiplatinum status. She has released eight studio albums as a solo artist and seven with Fleetwood Mac, selling a certified total of 65 million copies in the US alone.\nAfter the release of her first solo album, \"Rolling Stone\" named her the \"Reigning Queen of Rock and Roll\". Nicks was named one of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time and one of the 100 Greatest Singers of All Time by \"Rolling Stone\". Her Fleetwood Mac songs \"Landslide\", \"Rhiannon\", and \"Dreams\", with the last being the band's only number one hit in the U.S., together with her solo hit \"Edge of Seventeen\", have all been included in \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. Nicks is the first woman to have been inducted twice into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; she was inducted as a member of Fleetwood Mac in 1998 and was inducted as a solo artist in 2019.\nNicks has garnered eight Grammy Award nominations and two American Music Award nominations as a solo artist. She has won numerous awards with Fleetwood Mac, including a Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1978 for \"Rumours\". The albums \"Fleetwood Mac\", \"Rumours\", and \"Bella Donna\" have been included in the \"Greatest of All Time \"Billboard\" 200 Albums\" chart by \"Billboard\". \"Rumours\" was also rated the seventh-greatest album of all time in \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", as well as the fourth-greatest album by female acts.\nLife and career.\n1948\u20131971: Early life and career beginnings.\nStephanie Lynn \"Stevie\" Nicks was born at Good Samaritan Hospital in Phoenix, Arizona to Jess and Barbara Nicks. Nicks is of German, English, Welsh, and Irish ancestry.\nNicks's grandfather, Aaron Jess \"A.J.\" Nicks Sr., taught Nicks to sing duets with him by the time she was four years old. Nicks's mother was protective, keeping her at home \"more than most people\" and fostered in her daughter a love of fairy tales.\nAs a toddler, Stephanie could only pronounce her name as \"tee-dee\", which led to her nickname of \"Stevie\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I listened to lots of Top 40 R&amp;B radio. I loved the Shirelles and Martha Reeves and the Vandellas; stuff like \"Remember (Walking in the Sand)\" by The Shangri-Las... [My grandfather] bought me a truckload of records when I was in the fifth grade. There must have been 150 singles: country, rockabilly, some Everly Brothers, a song called \"Party Doll\" that went, \"Come along and be my party doll/And I'll make love to you.\" \u2014\u200a\nHer father's frequent relocation as a vice president of Greyhound had the family living in Phoenix, Albuquerque, El Paso, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. With the Goya guitar that she received for her 16th birthday, Nicks wrote her first song, titled \"I've Loved and I've Lost, and I'm Sad but Not Blue\". She spent her adolescence playing records constantly and lived in her \"own little musical world\".\nWhile attending Arcadia High School in Arcadia, California, she joined her first band, the Changing Times, a folk rock band focused on vocal harmonies.\nNicks met her future musical and romantic partner, Lindsey Buckingham, during her senior year at Menlo-Atherton High School in Atherton, California. When she saw Buckingham playing \"California Dreamin'\" at the Young Life club, she joined him in harmony. She recalled, \"I thought he was darling.\" Buckingham was in psychedelic rock band Fritz, but two of its musicians were leaving for college. He asked Nicks, in mid-1967, to replace the lead singer. Fritz later opened for Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin from 1968 until 1970. Nicks credits both acts as inspiring her stage intensity and performance.\nNicks and Buckingham attended San Jos\u00e9 State University, where Nicks majored in speech communication and planned to become an English teacher. With her father's blessing, she dropped out of college to pursue a musical career with Buckingham.\n1972\u20131978: \"Buckingham Nicks\" and \"Fleetwood Mac\".\nAfter Fritz disbanded in 1972, Nicks and Buckingham continued to write as a duo, recording demo tapes at night in Daly City, California, on a one-inch, four-track Ampex tape machine Buckingham kept at the coffee-roasting plant belonging to his father. They secured a deal with Polydor Records, and the eponymous \"Buckingham Nicks\" was released in 1973. The album was not a commercial success and Polydor dropped the pair.\nWith no money coming in from their album, and Buckingham contracting mononucleosis shortly thereafter, Nicks began working multiple jobs. She waited tables and cleaned producer Keith Olsen's house, where Nicks and Buckingham lived for a time before moving in with producer Richard Dashut. She soon started using cocaine. \"We were told that it was recreational and that it was not dangerous,\" Nicks told Chris Isaak in 2009.\nWhile living with Dashut, Buckingham landed a guitar role with the Everly Brothers 1972 tour. Nicks stayed behind working on songwriting herself. During this time, Nicks wrote \"Rhiannon\" after seeing the name in the novel \"Triad\" by Mary Leader. (Five years later, a fan sent her the Mabinogion novels of Evangeline Walton that featured the legendary character Rhiannon, and Nicks later bought the film rights to Walton's work in the hopes of bringing the epic to the screen.) She also wrote \"Landslide\", inspired by the scenery of Aspen and her slowly deteriorating relationship with Buckingham.\nIn late 1974, Keith Olsen played the Buckingham Nicks track \"Frozen Love\" for drummer Mick Fleetwood, who had come to Sound City in California in search of a recording studio. Fleetwood remembered Buckingham's guitar work when guitarist Bob Welch departed to pursue a solo career. On December 31, 1974, Fleetwood called Buckingham, inviting him to join the band. Buckingham refused, insisting that Nicks and he were \"a package deal\" and that he would not join without her. The group decided that incorporating the pair would improve Fleetwood Mac. The first rehearsals confirmed this feeling, with the harmonies of the newcomers adding a pop accessibility to the band's former style of blues-based rock.\nIn 1975, Fleetwood Mac achieved worldwide success with the album \"Fleetwood Mac\". Nicks's \"Rhiannon\" was voted one of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time by \"Rolling Stone\". Her live performances of the song throughout the decade began to take on a theatrical intensity which differs from how the song plays on the album. The song built to a climax in which Nicks's vocals were so impassioned that Mick Fleetwood declared, \"her 'Rhiannon' in those days was like an exorcism.\" \"Landslide\" became another hit from the album, with three million airplays.\nBecoming aware of her image as a performer, Nicks worked with clothing designer Margi Kent to develop a unique onstage look. Her costumes had a bohemian style that featured flowing skirts, shawls, and platform boots.\nWhile Nicks and Buckingham achieved professional success with \"Fleetwood Mac\", their personal relationship was eroding. Nicks ended the relationship. Fleetwood Mac began recording their follow-up album, \"Rumours\", in early 1976 and continued until late in the year. Also, Nicks and Buckingham sang back-up on Warren Zevon's eponymous second album.\nAmong Nicks's contributions to \"Rumours\" was \"Dreams\", which became the band's only \"Billboard\" Hot 100 number-one hit single. Nicks had also written and recorded the song \"Silver Springs\", but it was not included on the album because the early versions of the song ran too long, and the band did not want too many slow songs on the album. Studio engineer and co-producer Ken Caillat said that Nicks was very unhappy to find that the band had decided against her song \"Silver Springs\", which he said was beautifully crafted, and carried some of the band's best guitar work. \"Silver Springs\", written about her tumultuous relationship with Buckingham, was released as a B-side of the \"Go Your Own Way\" single\u2014Buckingham's equally critical song about Nicks. Copies of the single eventually became collector's items among fans of Fleetwood Mac. \"Silver Springs\" was included on the four-disc Fleetwood Mac retrospective \"25 Years\u00a0\u2013 The Chain\" in 1992.\n\"Rumours\", Fleetwood Mac's second album after the incorporation of Nicks and Buckingham, was the best-selling album of 1977, and as of 2017[ [update]], had sold over 45 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. The album remained at number one on the American albums chart for 31 weeks and reached number one in other countries. The album won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1978. It produced four U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 top ten singles, including Nicks's \"Dreams\".\nIn November 1977, after a New Zealand concert on the \"Rumours\" tour, Nicks and Fleetwood secretly began an affair. Fleetwood was married to Jenny Boyd. \"Never in a million years could you have told me that would happen,\" Nicks has stated. \"Everybody was angry because Mick was married to a wonderful girl and had two wonderful children. I was horrified. I loved these people. I loved his family. So, it couldn't possibly work out. And it didn't. I just couldn't.\" Nicks ended the affair soon after it began. She has stated that had the affair progressed, it \"would have been the end of Fleetwood Mac\". By October 1978, Mick Fleetwood left Boyd for Nicks's friend Sara Recor.\n1979\u20131982: \"Tusk\" and \"Mirage\".\nAfter the success of the \"Rumours\" album and tour in 1977 to 1978, Fleetwood Mac began recording their third album with Nicks and Buckingham, \"Tusk\", in the spring of 1978. By this time, Nicks had amassed a large backlog of songs that she had been unable to record with Fleetwood Mac because of the constraint of having to accommodate three songwriters on each album. \"Tusk\" was released on October 19, 1979. \"Mirage\" was recorded in late 1981 and early 1982.\nBackup vocals and duets.\nWhile working on \"Tusk\", Nicks sang backup on virtually every track of \"Not Shy\", recorded by musician Walter Egan, a friend of both Nicks and Buckingham's. \"Magnet and Steel\", inspired by Nicks, prominently featured her backup vocals and became a hit single on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart during the summer of 1978. Lindsey Buckingham also produced the album, playing guitar and providing backing vocals on some of the tracks. Nicks recorded the hit duets \"Whenever I Call You Friend\" with Kenny Loggins in 1978, and \"Gold\" with John Stewart in 1979. During 1981, Nicks made occasional guest appearances with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers on their \"Hard Promises\" tour.\nSolo career.\nNicks wrote and recorded demonstrations for a solo project during \"Tusk\" sessions in 1979 and the \"Tusk\" world tour of 1979\u201380. Nicks, Danny Goldberg, and Paul Fishkin founded Modern Records to record and release Nicks's material.\nNicks's first solo album, \"Bella Donna\", was released on July 27, 1981, to critical and commercial acclaim, reaching number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, with four singles making the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and \"Rolling Stone\" deeming her \"the Reigning Queen of Rock and Roll\".\nThe day that \"Bella Donna\" reached number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, Nicks was told that her friend Robin Anderson had leukemia. Anderson was pregnant at the time and given only three months to live. She gave birth to a son, appointing Nicks as the child's godmother. \"I never got to enjoy \"Bella Donna\" at all because my friend was dying. Something went out that day; something left.\" Following Robin's death in 1982, Nicks married Robin's widower, Kim Anderson, believing that Robin would want her to care for the baby. \"We were all in such insane grief, just completely deranged,\" she told the \"Telegraph\" in 2007. They divorced three months later.\n\"Bella Donna\" introduced Nicks's permanent back-up singers, Sharon Celani and Lori Perry (now Nicks after marrying Stevie's brother Christopher), who have contributed vocals to all of Nicks's solo albums since then. In November 1981, Nicks embarked on her \"White Winged Dove\" tour, which she had to cut short to record \"Mirage\".\nNicks released her second solo album, \"The Wild Heart\", on June 10, 1983. The album went double platinum, reached number five on the \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart, and featured three hit singles. It also introduced songwriter and performer Sandy Stewart as co-writer and vocalist.\nNicks performed at the second US Festival at Glen Helen Regional Park in San Bernardino, California, and later toured the U.S. from June 1983 to November 1983. Nicks appeared on \"Saturday Night Live\" in December 1983, performing \"Stand Back\" and \"Nightbird\".\nFollowing the tour for \"The Wild Heart\", Nicks commenced work on her third solo album. Originally titled \"Mirror Mirror\", Nicks recorded songs for the album during 1984. However, Nicks was unhappy with the album, and opted to record a new batch of songs in 1985. \"Rock a Little\", as it was retitled, was released November 18, 1985, to commercial success, supported by three successful singles. Nicks toured for \"Rock a Little\" until October 1986, and performed with Bob Dylan and Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers during their tour in Australia.\nThe tour marked a turning point in Nicks's life. The January before the tour was to begin, a plastic surgeon warned her of severe health problems if she did not stop using cocaine. \"I said, 'What do you think about my nose?'\", she recalled on \"The Chris Isaak Hour\" in 2009. \"And he said, 'Well, I think the next time you do a hit of cocaine, you could drop dead.'\" At the end of the Australian tour, Nicks checked herself into the Betty Ford Center for 30 days to overcome her cocaine addiction. Recalling the strong influence of Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix on her music and life, she told a UK interviewer, \"I saw how they went down, and a part of me wanted to go down with them\u00a0... but then another part of me thought, I would be very sad if some 25-year-old lady rock and roll singer 10 years from now said, 'I wish Stevie Nicks would have thought about it a little more.' That's kind of what stopped me and made me really look at the world through clear eyes.\"\nLater that year, on the advice of friends concerned that she might relapse, she visited a psychiatrist, who prescribed the sedative Klonopin to help her remain free from cocaine.\n1987\u20131990: \"Tango in the Night\", \"The Other Side of the Mirror\", and \"Behind the Mask\".\nIn late 1985, Fleetwood Mac began work on \"Tango in the Night\", but due to her promotional schedule for the \"Rock a Little\" album and subsequent tour, Nicks was mostly unavailable to work on the album with the band except for a few weeks following her stay at the Betty Ford Center in 1986 (which was the inspiration for the song \"Welcome to the Room...Sara\"). She sent the band demonstrations of her songs to work on in her absence. The album was released in April 1987 and became the band's second-highest selling album, behind \"Rumours\".\nCreative differences and unresolved personal issues within the band led Buckingham to quit the group right before their world tour. According to bassist John McVie, a \"physically ugly\" confrontation between Nicks and Buckingham ensued when Nicks angrily challenged Buckingham's decision to leave the band.\nThe band embarked on the \"Shake the Cage\" tour in September 1987, with Buckingham replaced by Rick Vito and Billy Burnette. The tour was suspended while Nicks suffered from myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and developed an addiction to Klonopin, though it resumed in 1988. \"Tango in the Night\" met with commercial success and was followed by Fleetwood Mac's \"Greatest Hits\" album in November 1988.\nAlso in 1988, Nicks began work on a fourth solo album with English record producer Rupert Hine. \"The Other Side of the Mirror\" was released on May 11, 1989, to commercial success. Nicks became romantically involved with Hine.\nNicks toured the U.S. and Europe from August to November 1989. She later said she had \"no memory of this tour\" because of her increasing dependency on Klonopin, prescribed in ever increasing amounts by a psychiatrist between 1987 and 1994, in an attempt to keep Nicks from regressing to her former abuse of cocaine.\nIn 1989, Nicks set to work with Fleetwood Mac on \"Behind the Mask\", released in 1990 to moderate commercial success in the U.S. In the UK, however, the album entered the chart at number one and was certified platinum. The band went on a world tour to promote the album, on the last night of which Buckingham and Nicks reunited on stage to perform \"Landslide\". After the tour concluded, Nicks left the group over a dispute with Mick Fleetwood, who would not allow her to release the 1977 track \"Silver Springs\" on her album \"\", because of his plans to save it for release on a forthcoming Fleetwood Mac box set. Fleetwood knew that the song would be valuable as a selling point for the box set, since over the years, it had gained interest among the band's fans.\n1991\u20131996: \"Timespace\" and \"Street Angel\".\nOn the 10th anniversary of her solo career debut, Nicks released \"Timespace: The Best of Stevie Nicks\" on September 3, 1991. The following year, Fleetwood Mac also released a four-disc box set, \"25 Years\u00a0\u2013 The Chain\", which included \"Silver Springs\".\nDuring the 1992 U.S. presidential campaign, Bill Clinton used the Fleetwood Mac hit \"Don't Stop\" as his campaign theme song, and Nicks rejoined the classic \"Rumours\" lineup of the band (including Buckingham) to perform the song at Clinton's 1993 inaugural gala. No plans for an official reunion were made at that time. Nicks was criticized for her weight gain. Nicks, who is , had gained weight, peaking at 175\u00a0lb (79.4\u00a0kg). \"Klonopin was worse than the cocaine,\" she has said. \"I lost those 8 years of my life. I didn't write, and I had gained so much weight.\"\nIn late 1993, while Nicks held a baby shower at her house, she tripped over a box, passed out, and cut her forehead near a fireplace. \"I'm one of those people who doesn't injure themselves. I was horrified to see that blood. I hadn't had enough wine. I knew it was the Klonopin,\" she said. Realizing that she needed help, Nicks endured a painful 47-day detoxification in a hospital.\nFollowing her successful detox, Nicks released her fifth solo album, \"Street Angel\", recorded during 1992 and 1993 using material written mostly in previous years. Released on May 23, 1994, \"Street Angel\" was poorly received, reaching number 45 on the \"Billboard\" Top 200. Nicks has since expressed major disappointment with the album, claiming that a lot of its production work took place during her second stint in rehabilitation, meaning she had little or no say over the final product.\nDespite a three-month tour in support of the album, Nicks was crushed by the focus on her weight and the poor reception of the album. Disgusted by the criticism she received during the tour for being overweight, she vowed to never set foot on a stage again unless she slimmed down.\nIn 1996, Nicks reunited with Lindsey Buckingham and contributed the duet \"Twisted\" to the \"Twister\" movie soundtrack, while in 1996, the Sheryl Crow-penned \"Somebody Stand by Me\" featured on the \"Boys on the Side\" soundtrack, and Nicks also remade Tom Petty's \"Free Fallin'\" for Fox's TV hit \"Party of Five\".\n1997\u20132001: \"The Dance\", \"Enchanted\", and \"Trouble in Shangri-La\".\nIn 1996, Lindsey Buckingham, working on a planned solo album, enlisted the help of Mick Fleetwood and John McVie, which eventually led to a reunion of the entire band. A newly invigorated Nicks joined Fleetwood Mac for \"The Dance\", a highly successful 1997 tour that coincided with the 20th anniversary of the release of \"Rumours\". Prior to the tour, Nicks started work with a voice coach, to lend her voice more control and protect it from the stress of lengthy touring schedules. She also went on a diet and started jogging to lose weight.\nThe band's live CD \"The Dance\" was released to commercial and critical acclaim. \"The Dance\" earned the group several Grammy nominations, including a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for their live performance of \"Silver Springs\". In 1998, Nicks joined the group for its induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. That same year, Fleetwood Mac was awarded the Outstanding Contribution at the BRIT Awards.\nNicks put work on a new solo album on hold when she was approached by Warner Music to release a solo career-spanning box set, to finish her contract with Atlantic Records in the U.S. After the culmination of the Fleetwood Mac reunion tour, Nicks settled down in Los Angeles and Phoenix with close friends and colleagues to devise a track list for this three-disc collection.\nThe box set \"Enchanted\" was released to acclaim on April 28, 1998, with liner notes from Nicks, as well as exclusive rare photographs, and pages from her journals. Nicks supported the box set with a successful U.S. tour. In 1998, Nicks contributed to the \"Practical Magic\" soundtrack and performed in Don Henley's benefit concert for the Walden Woods Project.\nNicks had begun writing actively for \"Trouble in Shangri-La\" in 1994 and 1995, as she came out of her Klonopin dependency. According to her, friend and former musical partner Tom Petty was responsible for convincing her to write music again when he rebuffed her request that he write a song with her. She resumed recording songs for the \"Trouble in Shangri-La\" album with Sheryl Crow, who produced and performed on several tracks. When a scheduling conflict forced Crow to drop out of the project, Nicks first approached R&amp;B producer Dallas Austin, but these sessions have never surfaced. Nicks finally called on John Shanks to produce the remainder of the album, with additional contributions from David Kahne, Rick Nowels, Pierre Marchand, and Jeff Trott. Artists Natalie Maines, Sarah McLachlan, and Macy Gray contributed to some of the tracks.\nReleased May 1, 2001, \"Trouble in Shangri-La\" restored Nicks's solo career to critical and commercial success. \"Planets of the Universe\" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance, and Nicks was named VH1's \"Artist of the Month\" for May 2001. Nicks was named one of \"People\" magazine's 50 Most Beautiful People, was featured in a well-received \"Behind the Music\" episode, and performed an episode of the VH1 Storytellers Concert Program. Nicks made several television appearances in support of the album and performed at the 2001 Radio Music Awards.\nNicks supported the album with a successful tour, although some shows were canceled or postponed because of her bout with acute bronchitis. Shows were also canceled because of the September 11 attacks in the U.S.\n2002\u20132009: \"Say You Will\", \"Crystal Visions\", and \"Soundstage Sessions\".\nIn 2001, Fleetwood Mac began work on a new studio album, though this time without Christine McVie, leaving Nicks as the sole woman in the band for the first time. After the end of her solo tour, Nicks convened with the other members of the band for recording a new album, \"Say You Will\", which was released in April 2003 and met with commercial success, but mixed reviews. Nicks joined the group to support the album with the Say You Will Tour, which lasted until September 2004.\nShe subsequently stated in interviews that she was not happy with the album or world tour that followed, citing production disputes with Buckingham as a core factor, as well as the absence of fellow female band member Christine McVie. A documentary of the making of the album, \"Destiny Rules\", was released on DVD in 2004 and chronicles the sometimes-turbulent relationships between band members, especially Buckingham and Nicks, during that time in the studio.\nAfter a few months' respite from the \"Say You Will\" tour, Nicks did a four-night stint in May 2005 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, and then did 10 shows with Don Henley dubbed the Two Voices tour. During the summer of 2005, Nicks continued doing solo shows (Gold Dust tour) with pop singer Vanessa Carlton as the opening act, playing over 20 dates nationwide.\nOn March 27, 2007, Reprise Records released \"Crystal Visions\u00a0\u2013 The Very Best of Stevie Nicks\" in the U.S. The album debuted at number 21 on the \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart.\nThe compilation includes her hit singles, a dance remix, and one new track, a live version of Led Zeppelin's \"Rock and Roll\". Two versions of this album were made, one with just the audio CD and a deluxe version that includes a DVD featuring all of Nicks's music videos with audio commentary from Nicks herself, as well as rare footage from the \"Bella Donna\" recording sessions.\nA tour with Chris Isaak, opening in Concord, California, on May 17, 2007, supported the release.\nReprise Records initially released two radio-only promotions, the live version of \"Landslide\" with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra and \"Rock and Roll\". Both tracks failed to garner much airplay and made no impact on the charts. Reprise Records released \"Stand Back\" (issued with club mixes) on May 29, 2007. \"Stand Back\", which peaked at number five on the pop singles chart in 1983 and number two on the \"Billboard\" Club chart. Nicks previously reached number one on this chart, with \"Planets of the Universe\" (from \"Trouble in Shangri-La\") in 2001. The remix single of \"Stand Back\" debuted on the \"Billboard\" Hot Singles Sales chart on September 15, 2007, at number 10, peaking at number four the following week. It also debuted on the \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Singles Sales chart at number three, later peaking at number one.\nOn March 31, 2009, Nicks released the album, \"The Soundstage Sessions\", via Reprise Records. The album debuted at number 47 on the \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart. The first single from the album, \"Crash into Me\", was released as a digital download, along with \"Landslide\" (orchestra version) as a B-side, on March 17, 2009.\nIn late 2008, Fleetwood Mac announced that the band would tour in 2009, beginning in March. As per the 2003\u20132004 tour, Christine McVie would not be featured in the lineup. The tour was branded as a 'greatest hits' show titled \"Unleashed\", although they played album tracks such as \"Storms\" and \"I Know I'm Not Wrong\".\n2010\u20132013: \"In Your Dreams\" and Extended Play tour.\nAfter completing the \"Unleashed\" tour with Fleetwood Mac, Nicks began work on her first solo album in a decade with David A. Stewart, a musician and record producer best known for being one half of the duo Eurythmics.\nNicks performed in a series of shows in August 2010 (\"it's not really a tour\", she said). They did not contain any of her new music, because she did not want it to end up on YouTube. The Santa Barbara show benefited a young girl she had met through the Make-a-Wish Foundation in Los Angeles with rhabdomyosarcoma, a rare cancer.\nOn January 13, 2011, Reprise announced Nicks's upcoming album \"In Your Dreams\" would be released on May 3, and the lead single, \"Secret Love\", would be released on February 8. Reprise provided a free download of the single to fans who ordered the album via certain websites. Nicks originally wrote \"Secret Love\" in 1976 and recorded a demo of it for Fleetwood Mac's 1977 album, \"Rumours\". It did not make the final cut for the album. The demo version had been circulating among fans for many years prior to its inclusion on \"In Your Dreams\". Nicks promoted the song with a video directed by Dave Stewart. Nicks's goddaughter Kelly appears in the video wearing a vintage dress that Nicks wore on stage in 1976. According to Nicks, Kelly portrays the young Nicks blending with the soul of Nicks's 62-year-old self. On the U.S. \"Billboard\" charts, \"Secret Love\" was a modest hit on the Adult Contemporary Singles chart, peaking at number 20, and at number 25 on the Triple-A Singles chart. Another song on the album, \"For What It's Worth\", features Nicks's niece in the video. The song reached number 25 on the \"Billboard\" Adult Contemporary chart in September 2011. A documentary film was made for the album, directed by Stewart. The documentary was critically acclaimed, and Nicks appeared at many film festivals to support the documentary.\nNicks promoted the album with appearances on various television shows, including \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\", \"The X Factor\", \"The Talk\", \"Good Morning America\", \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\", \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\", and \"Dancing with the Stars\".\n\"In Your Dreams\" was well received by music critics. \"Rolling Stone\" commented, \"It's not just her first album in 10 years, it's her finest collection of songs since the Eighties\". The album debuted at number six on the \"Billboard\" 200, giving Nicks her fifth top-10 album on that chart, with 52,000 copies sold in the first week. Elsewhere, the album has made numerous top-50 debuts, including number 24 on the Australian ARIA chart, number 22 in Canada, and number 14 in the UK.\nThe same day that Nicks's new album was released, Fox Network broadcast the \"Glee\" episode (https://) \"Rumours\" that featured six songs from Fleetwood Mac's 1977 album, including Nicks's song \"Dreams\" (the band's only number-one song on the U.S. charts). The show sparked renewed interest in the band and its most commercially successful album, and \"Rumours\" re-entered the \"Billboard\" 200 chart at number 11, the same week that \"In Your Dreams\" debuted at number six. Nicks was quoted by \"Billboard\" saying that her new album was \"my own little \"Rumours\"\".\nNicks contributed a cover of Buddy Holly's \"Not Fade Away\" for the tribute album \"\", released in September 2011.\nOn March 29, 2012, Nicks made a guest appearance as herself on the NBC sitcom \"Up All Night\". The show featured an excerpt of the 1981 track \"Sleeping Angel\", as well as new duets with both Maya Rudolph and Christina Applegate of \"Whenever I Call You Friend\" and \"Edge of Seventeen\".\nOn December 14, 2012, Nicks was announced to be featured on an original track done in collaboration with Dave Grohl for his Sound City soundtrack, alongside other artists.\nIn 2013, Fleetwood Mac toured again as a four-piece band throughout North America and Europe. On April 30, the band released their first new studio material since 2003's \"Say You Will\" via digital download on iTunes with the four-track EP, \"Extended Play\" containing three new songs and one new song from the Buckingham Nicks sessions (\"Without You\").\nOn December 3, 2013, Nicks released the \"In Your Dreams\" documentary film on DVD. The DVD debuted at number seven on the \"Billboard\" Top Music Video sales chart and number 29 on the UK Music Video Top 40 chart.\nSince 2014: \"24 Karat Gold: Songs from the Vault\" and future endeavors.\nIn 2014, Nicks appeared on the third season of television series \"American Horror Story\", ', in a role she reprised in the eighth season, '. She played a fictional version of herself, portraying a \"white witch\" with supernatural powers in three episodes. On the show, she performed the songs \"Rhiannon\", \"Has Anyone Ever Written Anything for You?\", \"Seven Wonders\", and \"Gypsy\".\n\"I said 'That's perfect,'\" she told \"Us\" magazine in response to the show's music request. \"Because that's exactly how I like to affect people. I want people to put my songs on because they are unhappy and need a boost to dance around their apartment a little and feel good. That's why I write. 'Of course, you can use my music. Take it!'\" In May 2014, Nicks was honored with a BMI Icon Award. In July 2014, it was announced that Nicks would join \"The Voice\" as the adviser for Adam Levine's team.\nIn September 2014, Nicks released her eighth studio album, \"\", which reached number seven on the \"Billboard\" 200. She also began a North American tour with Fleetwood Mac, now reunited with Christine McVie, the On with the Show tour. The tour began in September 2014 and concluded in November 2015.\nIn May 2015, Nicks reissued \"Crystal Visions\u00a0\u2013 The Very Best of Stevie Nicks\" on \"crystal clear\" transparent double vinyl. The vinyl came with a vinyl messenger bag and a limited-edition lithograph. Throughout 2016 and 2017, Nicks toured with The Pretenders on the 24 Karat Gold Tour.\nOn April 26, 2017, \"Pitchfork\" revealed that Nicks would be featured on a track from American singer Lana Del Rey's fifth studio album, \"Lust for Life\", which was released on July 21, 2017. The song is titled \"Beautiful People Beautiful Problems\".\nOn July 9, 2017, Nicks performed at the British Summer Time festival in Hyde Park in London, supporting Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. She later performed \"Stop Draggin' My Heart Around\" with Petty as part of the Heartbreakers' set, in what would turn out to be their final performance of the song together before Tom Petty's death in October 2017.\nIn April 2018, Lindsey Buckingham was fired from Fleetwood Mac, following disagreements with Nicks and Mick Fleetwood. Nicks helped recruit his replacements, Mike Campbell of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers and Neil Finn of Crowded House. This reworked lineup embarked on a world tour entitled An Evening with Fleetwood Mac in 2018\u20132019.\nIn April 2019, Nicks was elected to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. She became the first woman to be inducted twice, once as a member of Fleetwood Mac and once as a solo artist.\nIn September 2020, Nicks released a live album and concert film, with recordings from the 24 Karat Gold Tour (2016\u20132017), directed by Joe Thomas. On October 9, 2020, Nicks released her first new music in six years. The official video accompanying the track \"Show Them the Way\" was directed by Cameron Crowe.\nIn December 2020, music publishing company Primary Wave bought an 80% stake of Nicks' song catalog. \"The Wall Street Journal\" valued the deal at US$100 million.\nOn May 27, 2021, Stevie Nicks was one of the headliners of the 2021 Shaky Knees Music Festival in Atlanta, Georgia. In August 2021, Nicks canceled her five planned 2021 solo appearances due to concern about catching COVID-19.\nNicks appeared on the track \"Oil\" on the 2023 Gorillaz album \"Cracker Island\".\nNicks sang \"What Has Rock and Roll Ever Done for You\" with Dolly Parton on her \"Rockstar\" album in 2023.\nOn September 27, 2024, Nicks released a new song called \"The Lighthouse\". Nicks wrote the song with Magnus Birgersson and Vincent Villuis to promote women's rights. Nicks appeared as a featured vocalist on a cover of Ron Sexsmith's \"Maybe This Christmas\" on the charity Christmas album \"A Philly Special Christmas Party\", released on November 22, 2024.\nArtistry.\nStanding at , Nicks has stated she felt \"a little ridiculous\" standing next to Mick Fleetwood, who is . For this reason, she developed a penchant for platform boots. \"Even when platforms went completely out of style, I kept wearing them because I didn't want to go back to being in heels\", she told \"Allure\" in 1995. Over the years, Nicks has developed a style which she calls her \"uniform\", consisting of flowing diaphanous clothing, boots and shawls.\nNicks' music encompasses the pop and blues sounds of Fleetwood Mac, while her debut solo album \"Bella Donna\" (1981) cemented her status as one of the biggest stars in rock music. Nicks has said that her vocal style and performance antics evolved from female singers such as Grace Slick and Janis Joplin. She admitted inspiration when she saw Joplin perform live (and opened for her with her first band Fritz) shortly before Joplin's death. Nicks owns a strand of Joplin's stage beads. She also commented that she once saw a woman in her audience dressed in dripping chiffon with a Gibson Girl hairstyle and big boots, and Nicks knew she wanted something similar. She took the look and made it her own. Nicks possesses a contralto vocal range, and her voice has been described as \"gruff\" and \"feathery\". Over the years, she has decorated her microphone stand with roses, ribbons, chiffon, crystal beads, scarves, and small stuffed toys.\nPhilanthropy.\nNicks has started a charity foundation titled Stevie Nicks's Band of Soldiers, which is used for the benefit of wounded military personnel.\nIn late 2004, Nicks began visiting Army and Navy medical centers in Washington, DC. While visiting wounded service men and women, she became determined to find an object she could leave with the soldiers that would raise their spirits, motivate, and give them something to look forward to each day. She eventually decided to purchase hundreds of iPod Nanos, load them with music, artists, and playlists, which she would hand select, and autograph them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I call it a soldier's iPod. It has all the crazy stuff that I listen to, and my collections I've been making since the 1970s for going on the road, when I'm sick\u00a0... or the couple of times in my life that I have really been down, music is what always dances me out of bed.\u2014\u200a\nShe now regularly delivers these tokens of her appreciation, bringing her closest friends, such as Mick Fleetwood, along to share the experience:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So, as Mick [Fleetwood] and I went from room to room delivering their tiny iPod, they told us their stories. Mick became his tall, loving, father figure, English self, taking in every word they said, remaining calm (at least on the outside) inspiring them. We floated from room to room down through the halls of the two hospitals over a three-day period. We gave out all our iPods. Right before I left for DC, Steven Tyler and Joe Perry dug into their pockets and came up with $10,000 for me. In my eyes they went from the coolest rock stars to generous great men; as my press agent Liz Rosenberg said, every returning wounded soldier should be given an iPod. It will be an integral part of their recovery.\u2014\u200a\nStyle.\nNicks's style has remained the same throughout her years in the spotlight and even \"at 60 she is still working the gossamer tunics and shawls that have influenced two generations of Stevie acolytes and given her performances the feel of a Wiccan ritual,\" writes \"New York Times\" reporter Ruth La Ferla.\nIn the late '70s, Nicks began receiving threatening mail accusing her of witchcraft. Nicks told the \"Los Angeles Times\" in 2013, \"In the beginning of my career, the whole idea that some wacky, creepy people were writing, 'You're a witch, you're a witch!' was so arresting. And there I am like, 'No, I'm not! I just wear black because it makes me look thinner, you idiots.'\" The witch rumors frightened Nicks so much that she gave up black for a period of time (roughly 1978 to 1982), instead opting to wear colors such as apricot and seafoam green. Nicks later stated that she felt ugly in the new colors, ultimately gave up, and went back to black in 1983. That same year, when asked what she thought about people who still believed the rumor, Nicks said, \"I don't like it all and I wish people would stop thinking about that, because I spent thousands of dollars on beautiful black clothes and had to stop wearing them for a long time, because a lot of people scared me.\"\nNicks sings about the store where her iconic style all started in the song \"Gypsy\" on Fleetwood Mac's 13th studio album \"Mirage\", released in 1982. In the song, Nicks sings of a store called the Velvet Underground, a boutique in San Francisco, California, where famous rockers like Janis Joplin and Grace Slick were known to shop.\nLegacy.\nMany artists have cited Nicks as a source of influence and musical inspiration. These include Beyonc\u00e9 and Destiny's Child, Courtney Love, Michelle Branch, Belinda Carlisle, The Chicks (formerly known as Dixie Chicks), Mary J. Blige, Sheryl Crow, Nadia Ali, Florence Welch, Taylor Swift, Harry Styles, Vanessa Carlton, Delta Goodrem, and Lorde. Australian singer Darren Hayes cited Nicks as one his favorite musicians during his teenage years, while Eminem's mother Debbie Nelson mentioned in her book \"My Son Marshall, My Son Eminem\" that her son loved the song \"Rhiannon\".\nThe Dixie Chicks covered \"Landslide\", which became a top-10 hit (number one on the Adult Contemporary chart) and a number one hit on the Country chart. This cover also earned her a BMI Songwriters Award in 2003 when it won Song of the Year (the award is given to the songwriter of the track, regardless of the performer). According to BMI, \"Landslide\" also earned Nicks the 35th Robert J. Burton Award as \"Most Performed Country Song of the Year\". This distinction is given to the song tallying the most feature U.S. broadcast performances during the eligibility period. Included on the Dixie Chicks' platinum Monument album \"Home\", \"Landslide\" was a Country, Adult Top 40, Hot 100 and AC \"Billboard\" charts smash. Alternative rock band the Smashing Pumpkins made an acoustic cover of the song that was featured on their 1994 B-side collection \"Pisces Iscariot\".\nOther successful covers have included the Corrs' \"Dreams\" and Courtney Love's band Hole with \"Gold Dust Woman\". \"Edge of Seventeen\" was sampled on Destiny's Child's 2001 number one single \"Bootylicious\". Nicks appeared in the video for \"Bootylicious\" and in an episode of MTV's \"Making the Video\" that featured it, in which she expressed her admiration for both the song and the group. Also, American actress and singer Lindsay Lohan covered \"Edge of Seventeen\" on her second studio album \"A Little More Personal (Raw)\" (2005). Deep Dish fulfilled their \"Dreams\" of working with Nicks in 2005 when Nicks offered to re-record vocals on a remix of her number-one penned song, \"Dreams\". The Deep Dish version went on to reach number two on the \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Airplay chart, as well as providing Nicks with her third UK top-40 hit. Nicks provided additional vocals on Vanessa Carlton's 2007 album, \"Heroes and Thieves\".\nOn January 31, 2010, Nicks performed with Taylor Swift at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards. Swift, who describes Nicks as one of her childhood heroes, introduced her to the audience by saying, \"It's a fairy tale and an honor to share the stage with Stevie Nicks.\"\nIn October 2018, Nicks was one of fifteen artists to be nominated for induction to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. On December 13, 2018, she was announced as one of seven inductees to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame class of 2019, making her the first woman to be inducted twice to the hall.\nOn April 19, 2024, Taylor Swift referenced Nicks in the song \"Clara Bow\" from her eleventh studio album \"The Tortured Poets Department\" (2024). In the song, she wrote \"You look like Stevie Nicks / In '75, the hair and lips\". Nicks also wrote a poem in the liner notes.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and family.\nNicks was romantically linked to Lindsey Buckingham from 1972 to 1976. She was linked to Mick Fleetwood in 1978, Eagles drummer/vocalist Don Henley during the late 1970s, and briefly to Eagles songwriter JD Souther. In 1979, Nicks had an abortion after becoming pregnant by Henley. She was involved with Jimmy Iovine, who produced \"Bella Donna,\" during 1980\u201381, and with Eagles and James Gang guitarist Joe Walsh during 1983\u20131986, to whom she referred in 2007 as one of her greatest loves, but the couple could not sustain the relationship because of mutual drug abuse. Nicks toured with Walsh in 1984 and wrote \"Has Anyone Ever Written Anything for You?\" about Walsh's deceased daughter.\nNicks's only marriage was to Kim Anderson, the widower of her best friend Robin Anderson. They married in 1983 soon after Robin Anderson died of leukemia while the \"Bella Donna\" album was on the top of the charts. Nicks later explained of the marriage, \"I was determined to take care of [Robin's] baby, so I said to Kim, 'I don't know, I guess we should just get married.'\" Nicks and Anderson divorced after only three months: \"And so we got married three months after she died, and it was a terrible, terrible mistake. We didn't get married because we were in love, we got married because we were grieving and it was the only way that we could feel like we were doing anything.\"\nYears after the divorce, she reunited with her stepson when he was a teenager, putting him through college, and has maintained contact with him ever since. In 2020, Nicks said in an interview for \"The Guardian\" that his daughter, named Robin after his late mother, calls Nicks \"Grandma Stevie\".\nNicks has said that she consciously chose not to have children of her own, due to her demanding career and desire to follow her art wherever it should take her: \"My mission maybe wasn't to be a mom and a wife; maybe my particular mission was to write songs to make moms and wives feel better.\"\nOf her niece, godchildren, former stepson, and extended family she says: \"I have lots of kids. It's much more fun to be the crazy auntie than it is to be the mom, anyway.\"\nNicks has maintained a journal nearly every day since her tenure in Fleetwood Mac began. She has said, \"I like to tell all my fairy goddaughters and my niece that when I'm gone they can sit on the floor and go through all these journals, and they can walk through my life, and they can smell the gardenia perfume on the pages. They can have it in their hands, who I was.\"\nRegarding a book based on her life, she has said, \"I wouldn't write a book unless I could really tell the truth, and say all the people are in it are represented right... If I'm gonna talk about all the people in my life, I need to be old enough and so do they, that nobody's gonna care\u00a0... I would never write a book about the bad parts. I would mostly revel in the fantastic parts, of which there were so many.\"\nResidences.\nUntil July 2007, Nicks lived in Paradise Valley, Arizona, a suburb of Phoenix, in a home she had built in 1981 and shared with her brother, Christopher Nicks, his wife, Lori Perry-Nicks, and their daughter, Jessica, her niece. She announced in mid-2007 that her Paradise Valley home would be put up for sale, citing her aspirations to \"downsize\" and focus more on her charity work, and that in the previous year she had only \"spent about two weeks there\". The house was put on the market for a reported $3.8 million and later sold for $3 million. She owns an oceanside home in Santa Monica, California.\nReligion.\nNicks became an ordained minister with the Universal Life Church and officiated at the wedding of Deer Tick singer John McCauley and singer-songwriter Vanessa Carlton on December 27, 2013.\nTours.\nIn October 2005, Nicks attended the Melbourne Cup Week in Australia, and one of the horse-racing stakes was named after her: The Stevie Nicks Plate. She used this opportunity to launch her promotion of an Australian/New Zealand extension to her \"Gold Dust\" tour in February and March 2006. Nicks toured in Australia and New Zealand with popular Australian performer John Farnham. She also appeared in concert with Tom Petty in June near Manassas, Virginia, and at the Bonnaroo Music Festival that same month.\nIn 2006, Nicks performed with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers for the first leg of their tour in the summer, and later in the year returned as a guest performer for a number of songs on the tour celebrating Petty's 30th anniversary since his debut album. Tom Petty's Homecoming Concert in Gainesville, FL, which contained performances with Stevie Nicks, was filmed for PBS \"Soundstage\" as well as DVD release for March 2007. Nicks was also the featured performer for Bette Midler's benefit function, Hulaween, in October 2006.\nIn 2008, Nicks embarked on the \"Soundstage Sessions\" tour in the U.S. A video recording of one concert date was released in 2009: \"Live in Chicago\". Vanessa Carlton performed as a guest artist.\nRod Stewart and Nicks co-headlined the Heart &amp; Soul Tour. Launched March 20, 2011, in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the tour united the two singers for a series of arena concerts throughout North America\u00a0\u2013 with performances in New York, Toronto, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Chicago, Detroit, Tampa, Montreal, and more.\nA solo tour for \"In Your Dreams\" began on August 9, 2011, in Denver, Colorado. Nicks announced on her July 27 appearance on \"America's Got Talent\" that Michael Grimm would be going on tour with her. She then continued on an Australian and New Zealand leg of the tour accompanied by Dave Stewart until December 2011.\nNicks joined Rod Stewart in the summer of 2012 for another leg of the Heart &amp; Soul Tour, and resumed the \"In Your Dreams\" tour in June 2012. In 2023, she and Billy Joel performed a series of concerts across the United States, beginning with SoFi Stadium outside Los Angeles on March 10. This was in conjunction with a solo tour. In early 2024, she announced a European leg to the tour, starting in Dublin, Ireland on July 3.\nAwards and nominations.\nGrammy Awards.\nNicks has been nominated for eight Grammy Awards as a solo artist, holding the record for most nominations for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance without a win.\nNicks has been nominated for six Grammy Awards as a member of Fleetwood Mac, winning the 1978 Grammy Award for Album of the Year for \"Rumours\", and received the 2003 Grammy Hall of Fame Award.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36649", "revid": "3465809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36649", "title": "Mount St. Helens", "text": "Volcano in Washington, U.S.\nMount St.\u00a0Helens (known as Lawetlat'la to the local Cowlitz people, and Loowit or Louwala-Clough to the Klickitat) is an active stratovolcano located in Skamania County, Washington, in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. It lies northeast of Portland, Oregon, and south of Seattle. Mount St.\u00a0Helens takes its English name from that of the British diplomat Alleyne FitzHerbert, 1st Baron St Helens, a friend of explorer George Vancouver who surveyed the area in the late 18th century. The volcano is part of the Cascade Volcanic Arc, a segment of the Pacific Ring of Fire.\nThe Mount St.\u00a0Helens major eruption of May 18, 1980, is currently the most economically destructive volcanic event in U.S. history. Fifty-seven people were killed and 200\u00a0homes, 47\u00a0bridges, of railways, and of highway were destroyed. A massive debris avalanche, triggered by a magnitude\u00a05.1 earthquake, caused a lateral eruption that reduced the elevation of the mountain's summit from , leaving a horseshoe-shaped crater. The debris avalanche was in volume. The 1980 eruption disrupted terrestrial ecosystems near the volcano. By contrast, aquatic ecosystems in the area greatly benefited from the amounts of ash, allowing life to multiply rapidly. Six years after the eruption, most lakes in the area had returned to their normal state.\nAfter its 1980 eruption, the volcano experienced continuous volcanic activity until 2008. Geologists predict that future eruptions will be more destructive, as the configuration of the lava domes requires more pressure to erupt. However, Mount St. Helens is a popular hiking spot and it is climbed year-round. In 1982, the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument was established by Congress.\nGeographic setting and description.\nGeneral.\nMount St.\u00a0Helens is west of Mount Adams, in the western part of the Cascade Range. Considered \"brother and sister\" mountains, the two volcanoes are approximately from Mount Rainier, the highest of the Cascade volcanoes. Mount Hood, the nearest major volcanic peak in Oregon, is southeast of Mount St.\u00a0Helens.\nMount St. Helens is geologically young compared with the other major Cascade volcanoes. It formed only within the past 40,000\u00a0years, and the summit cone present before its 1980 eruption began rising about 2,200\u00a0years ago. The volcano is considered the most active in the Cascades within the Holocene epoch, which encompasses roughly the last 10,000 years.\nPrior to the 1980 eruption, Mount St.\u00a0Helens was the fifth-highest peak in Washington. It stood out prominently from surrounding hills because of the symmetry and extensive snow and ice cover of the pre-1980 summit cone, earning it the nickname, by some, \"Fujiyama of America\".201 Its ice cover just prior to the 1980 eruption included eleven named glaciers: Wishbone, Loowit, Leschi, Forsyth, Nelson, Ape,\nShoestring, Swift, Dryer, Toutle, and Talus. Of these eleven, only the Shoestring Glacier revived somewhat post-eruption. The peak rose more than above its base, where the lower flanks merge with adjacent ridges. The mountain is across at its base, which is at an elevation of on the northeastern side and elsewhere. At the pre-eruption tree line, the width of the cone was .\nStreams that originate on the volcano enter three main river systems: The Toutle River on the north and northwest, the Kalama River on the west, and the Lewis River on the south and east. The streams are fed by abundant rain and snow. The average annual rainfall is , and the snowpack on the mountain's upper slopes can reach . The Lewis River is impounded by three dams for hydroelectric power generation. The southern and eastern sides of the volcano drain into an upstream impoundment, the Swift Reservoir, which is directly south of the volcano's peak.\nAlthough Mount St.\u00a0Helens is in Skamania County, Washington, access routes to the mountain run through Cowlitz County to the west, and Lewis County to the north. State Route 504, locally known as the Spirit Lake Memorial Highway, connects with Interstate\u00a05 at Exit\u00a049, to the west of the mountain.297 That north\u2013south highway skirts the low-lying cities of Castle Rock, Longview and Kelso along the Cowlitz River, and passes through the Vancouver, Washington\u2013Portland, Oregon metropolitan area less than to the southwest. The community nearest the volcano is Cougar, Washington, in the Lewis River valley south-southwest of the peak. Gifford Pinchot National Forest surrounds Mount St.\u00a0Helens.\nCrater Glacier and other new rock glaciers.\nDuring the winter of 1980\u20131981, a new glacier appeared. Now officially named Crater Glacier, it was formerly known as the Tulutson Glacier. Shadowed by the crater walls and fed by heavy snowfall and repeated snow avalanches, it grew rapidly ( per year in thickness). By 2004, it covered about , and was divided by the dome into a western and eastern lobe. Typically, by late summer, the glacier looks dark from rockfall from the crater walls and ash from eruptions. As of 2006, the ice had an average thickness of and a maximum of , nearly as deep as the much older and larger Carbon Glacier of Mount Rainier. The ice is all post-1980, making the glacier very young geologically. However, the volume of the new glacier is about the same as all the pre-1980 glaciers combined.\nFrom 2004, volcanic activity pushed aside the glacier lobes and upward by the growth of new volcanic domes. The surface of the glacier, once mostly without crevasses, turned into a chaotic jumble of icefalls heavily criss-crossed with crevasses and seracs caused by movement of the crater floor. The new domes have almost separated the Crater Glacier into an eastern and western lobe. Despite the volcanic activity, the termini of the glacier have still advanced, with a slight advance on the western lobe and a more considerable advance on the more shaded eastern lobe. Due to the advance, two lobes of the glacier joined in late May\u00a02008 and thus the glacier completely surrounds the lava domes. In addition, since 2004, new glaciers have formed on the crater wall above Crater Glacier feeding rock and ice onto its surface below; there are two rock glaciers to the north of the eastern lobe of Crater Glacier.\nClimate.\nMount St. Helens has an alpine tundra climate (ET).\nGeology.\nMount St.\u00a0Helens is part of the Cascades Volcanic Province, an arc-shaped band extending from southwestern British Columbia to Northern California, roughly parallel to the Pacific coastline. Beneath the Cascade Volcanic Province, a dense oceanic plate sinks beneath the North American Plate; a process known as subduction in geology. As the oceanic slab sinks deeper into the Earth's interior beneath the continental plate, high temperatures and pressures allow water molecules locked in the minerals of solid rock to escape. The supercritical water rises into the pliable mantle above the subducting plate, causing some of the mantle to melt. This newly formed magma ascends upward through the crust along a path of least resistance, both by way of fractures and faults as well as by melting wall rocks. The addition of melted crust changes the geochemical composition. Some of the melt rises toward the Earth's surface to erupt, forming the Cascade Volcanic Arc above the subduction zone.\nThe magma from the mantle has accumulated in two chambers below the volcano: one approximately below the surface, the other about . The lower chamber may be shared with Mount Adams and the Indian Heaven volcanic field.\nAncestral stages of eruptive activity.\nThe early eruptive stages of Mount St.\u00a0Helens are known as the \"Ape Canyon Stage\" (around 40,000\u201335,000\u00a0years ago), the \"Cougar Stage\" (ca. 20,000\u201318,000\u00a0years ago), and the \"Swift Creek Stage\" (roughly 13,000\u20138,000 years ago). The modern period, since about 2500\u00a0BC, is called the \"Spirit Lake Stage\". Collectively, the pre\u2013Spirit Lake stages are known as the \"ancestral stages\". The ancestral and modern stages differ primarily in the composition of the erupted lavas; ancestral lavas consisted of a characteristic mixture of dacite and andesite, while modern lava is very diverse (ranging from olivine basalt to andesite and dacite).214\nSt.\u00a0Helens started its growth in the Pleistocene 37,600\u00a0years ago, during the Ape Canyon stage, with dacite and andesite eruptions of hot pumice and ash.214 Thirty-six thousand years ago a large mudflow cascaded down the volcano;214 mudflows were significant forces in all of St.\u00a0Helens' eruptive cycles. The Ape Canyon eruptive period ended around 35,000\u00a0years ago and was followed by 17,000\u00a0years of relative quiet. Parts of this ancestral cone were fragmented and transported by glaciers 14,000\u201318,000\u00a0years ago during the last glacial period of the current ice age.214\nThe second eruptive period, the Cougar Stage, started 20,000\u00a0years ago and lasted for 2,000\u00a0years.214 Pyroclastic flows of hot pumice and ash along with dome growth occurred during this period. Another 5,000\u00a0years of dormancy followed, only to be upset by the beginning of the Swift Creek eruptive period, typified by pyroclastic flows, dome growth and blanketing of the countryside with tephra. Swift Creek ended 8,000\u00a0years ago.\nSmith Creek and Pine Creek eruptive periods.\nA dormancy of about 4,000\u00a0years was broken around 2500\u00a0BC with the start of the Smith Creek eruptive period, when eruptions of large amounts of ash and yellowish-brown pumice covered thousands of square miles.215 An eruption in 1900\u00a0BC was the largest known eruption from St.\u00a0Helens during the Holocene epoch, depositing the Yn tephra.215 This eruptive period lasted until about 1600\u00a0BC and left deep deposits of material distant in what is now Mount Rainier National Park. Trace deposits have been found as far northeast as Banff National Park in Alberta, and as far southeast as eastern Oregon.215 All told there may have been up to of material ejected in this cycle.215 Some 400 years of dormancy followed.\nSt.\u00a0Helens came alive again around 1200\u00a0BC\u2014the Pine Creek eruptive period.215 This lasted until about 800\u00a0BC and was characterized by smaller-volume eruptions. Numerous dense, nearly red hot pyroclastic flows sped down St.\u00a0Helens's flanks and came to rest in nearby valleys. A large mudflow partly filled of the Lewis River valley sometime between 1000\u00a0BC and 500\u00a0BC.\nCastle Creek and Sugar Bowl eruptive periods.\nThe next eruptive period, the Castle Creek period, began about 400\u00a0BC, and is characterized by a change in the composition of St.\u00a0Helens' lava, with the addition of olivine and basalt.216 The pre-1980 summit cone started to form during the Castle Creek period. Significant lava flows in addition to the previously much more common fragmented and pulverized lavas and rocks (tephra) distinguished this period. Large lava flows of andesite and basalt covered parts of the mountain, including one around the year 100\u00a0BC that traveled all the way into the Lewis and Kalama river valleys.216 Others, such as Cave Basalt (known for its system of lava tubes), flowed up to from their vents.216 During the first century, mudflows moved down the Toutle and Kalama river valleys and may have reached the Columbia River. Another 400\u00a0years of dormancy ensued.\nThe Sugar Bowl eruptive period was short and markedly different from other periods in Mount St.\u00a0Helens history. It produced the only unequivocal laterally directed blast known from Mount St.\u00a0Helens before the 1980 eruptions. During Sugar Bowl time, the volcano first erupted quietly to produce a dome, then erupted violently at least twice producing a small volume of tephra, directed-blast deposits, pyroclastic flows, and lahars. East Dome, a small hypersthene-homblende dacite dome on the east slope of the volcano, was likely formed around the Sugar Bowl period. Formation of East Dome was preceded by an explosive eruption.\nKalama and Goat Rocks eruptive periods.\nRoughly 700\u00a0years of dormancy were broken in about 1480, when large amounts of pale gray dacite pumice and ash started to erupt, beginning the Kalama period. The 1480 eruption was several times larger than that of May 18, 1980. In 1482, another large eruption rivaling the 1980 eruption in volume is known to have occurred. Ash and pumice piled northeast of the volcano to a thickness of ; away, the ash was deep. Large pyroclastic flows and mudflows subsequently rushed down St.\u00a0Helens' west flanks and into the Kalama River drainage system.\nThis 150-year period next saw the eruption of less silica-rich lava in the form of andesitic ash that formed at least eight alternating light- and dark-colored layers.216 Blocky andesite lava then flowed from St.\u00a0Helens' summit crater down the volcano's southeast flank.216 Later, pyroclastic flows raced down over the andesite lava and into the Kalama River valley. It ended with the emplacement of a dacite dome several hundred feet (~200\u00a0m) high at the volcano's summit, which filled and overtopped an explosion crater already at the summit.217 Large parts of the dome's sides broke away and mantled parts of the volcano's cone with talus. Lateral explosions excavated a notch in the southeast crater wall. St.\u00a0Helens reached its greatest height and achieved its highly symmetrical form by the time the Kalama eruptive cycle ended, in about 1647.217 The volcano remained quiet for the next 150\u00a0years.\nThe 57-year eruptive period that started in 1800 was named after the Goat Rocks dome and is the first period for which both oral and written records exist.217 As with the Kalama period, the Goat Rocks period started with an explosion of dacite tephra, followed by an andesite lava flow, and culminated with the emplacement of a dacite dome. The 1800 eruption probably rivaled the 1980 eruption in size, although it did not result in massive destruction of the cone. The ash drifted northeast over central and eastern Washington, northern Idaho, and western Montana. There were at least a dozen reported small eruptions of ash from 1831 to 1857, including a fairly large one in 1842. (The 1831 eruption is likely what tinted the sun bluish-green in Southampton County, Virginia on the afternoon of August 13\u2014which Nat Turner interpreted as a final signal to launch the United States' largest slave rebellion.) The vent was apparently at or near Goat Rocks on the northeast flank.217 Goat Rocks dome was near the site of the bulge in the 1980 eruption, and it was obliterated in the major eruption event on May 18, 1980, that destroyed the entire north face and top of the mountain.\nModern eruptive period.\n1980 to 2001 activity.\nOn March 20, 1980, Mount St.\u00a0Helens experienced a magnitude\u00a04.2 earthquake, and on March 27, steam venting started. By the end of April, the north side of the mountain had started to bulge. \nOn May 18, at 8:32 am, a second earthquake, of magnitude 5.1, triggered a massive collapse of the north face of the mountain. It was the largest known debris avalanche in recorded history. The magma in St.\u00a0Helens burst forth into a large-scale pyroclastic flow that flattened vegetation and buildings over an area of . More than 1.5\u00a0million metric tons of sulfur dioxide were released into the atmosphere. On the Volcanic Explosivity Index scale, the eruption was rated a 5, and categorized as a Plinian eruption.\nThe collapse of the northern flank of St.\u00a0Helens mixed with ice, snow, and water to create lahars (volcanic mudflows). The lahars flowed many miles down the Toutle and Cowlitz Rivers, destroying bridges and lumber camps. A total of of material was transported south into the Columbia River by the mudflows.209\nFor more than nine hours, a vigorous plume of ash erupted, eventually reaching above sea level. The plume moved eastward at an average speed of with ash reaching Idaho by noon. Ashes from the eruption were found on top of cars and roofs the next morning as far away as Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.\nBy about 5:30\u00a0p.m. on May 18, the vertical ash column declined in stature, and less-severe outbursts continued through the night and for the next several days. The St.\u00a0Helens May\u00a018 eruption released 24\u00a0megatons of thermal energy and ejected more than of material. The removal of the north side of the mountain reduced St.\u00a0Helens' height by about and left a crater wide and deep, with its north end open in a huge breach. The eruption killed 57\u00a0people, nearly 7,000\u00a0big-game animals (deer, elk, and bear), and an estimated 12\u00a0million fish from a hatchery. It destroyed or extensively damaged more than 200\u00a0homes, of highway, and of railways.\nBetween 1980 and 1986, activity continued at Mount St.\u00a0Helens, with a new lava dome forming in the crater. Numerous small explosions and dome-building eruptions occurred. From December 7, 1989, to January 6, 1990, and from November 5, 1990, to February 14, 1991, the mountain erupted, sometimes with huge clouds of ash.\n2004 to 2008 activity.\nMagma reached the surface of the volcano about October 11, 2004, resulting in the building of a new lava dome on the existing dome's south side. This new dome continued to grow throughout 2005 and into 2006. Several transient features were observed, such as a lava spine nicknamed the \"whaleback\", which comprised long shafts of solidified magma being extruded by the pressure of magma beneath. These features were fragile and broke down soon after they were formed. On July 2, 2005, the tip of the whaleback broke off, causing a rockfall that sent ash and dust several hundred meters into the air.\nMount St.\u00a0Helens showed significant activity on March 8, 2005, when a plume of steam and ash emerged\u2014visible from Seattle. This relatively minor eruption was a release of pressure consistent with ongoing dome building. The release was accompanied by a magnitude\u00a02.5 earthquake.\nAnother feature to emerge from the dome was called the \"fin\" or \"slab\". Approximately half the size of a football field, the large, cooled volcanic rock was being forced upward as quickly as per day. In mid-June 2006, the slab was crumbling in frequent rockfalls, although it was still being extruded. The height of the dome was , still below the height reached in July 2005 when the whaleback collapsed.\nOn October 22, 2006, at 3:13\u00a0p.m. PST, a magnitude\u00a03.5 earthquake broke loose Spine\u00a07. The collapse and avalanche of the lava dome sent an ash plume over the western rim of the crater; the ash plume then rapidly dissipated.\nOn December 19, 2006, a large white plume of condensing steam was observed, leading some media people to assume there had been a small eruption. However, the Cascades Volcano Observatory of the USGS did not mention any significant ash plume. The volcano was in continuous eruption from October\u00a02004, but this eruption consisted in large part of a gradual extrusion of lava forming a dome in the crater.\nOn January 16, 2008, steam began seeping from a fracture on top of the lava dome. Associated seismic activity was the most noteworthy since 2004. Scientists suspended activities in the crater and the mountain flanks, but the risk of a major eruption was deemed low. By the end of January, the eruption paused; no more lava was being extruded from the lava dome. On July 10, 2008, it was determined that the eruption had ended, after more than six months of no volcanic activity.\nFuture hazards.\nFuture eruptions of Mount St.\u00a0Helens will likely be even larger than the 1980 eruption. A large lahar flow is likely on branches of the Toutle River, possibly causing destruction in inhabited areas along the I-5 corridor.\nThe volcano is considered \"very high threat\" by the United States Geological Survey and is closely monitored by the Cascades Volcano Observatory.\nEcology.\nIn its undisturbed state, the slopes of Mount St.\u00a0Helens lie in the Western Cascades Montane Highlands ecoregion. This ecoregion has abundant precipitation; an average of of precipitation falls each year at Spirit Lake. This precipitation supported dense forest up to , with western hemlock, Douglas fir, and western redcedar. Above this, this forest was dominated by Pacific silver fir up to . Finally, below treeline, the forest consisted of mountain hemlock, Pacific silver fir and Alaska yellow cedar. Large mammals included Roosevelt elk, black-tailed deer, American black bear, and mountain lion.\nThe treeline at Mount St. Helens was unusually low, at about , the result of prior volcanic disturbance of the forest, as the treeline was thought to be moving up the slopes before the eruption. Alpine meadows were uncommon at Mount St. Helens. Mountain goats inhabited higher elevations of the peak, although their population was eliminated by the 1980 eruption.\nEcological disturbance caused by eruption.\nThe eruption of Mount St.\u00a0Helens has been subject to more ecological study than has any other eruption, because research into disturbance commenced immediately after the eruption and because the eruption did not sterilize the immediate area. More than half of the papers on ecological response to volcanic eruption originated from studies of Mount St.\u00a0Helens.\nPerhaps the most important ecological concept originating from the study of Mount St.\u00a0Helens is the biological legacy. Biological legacies are the survivors of catastrophic disturbance; they can either be alive (e.g., plants that survive ashfall or pyroclastic flow), organic debris, or biotic patterns remaining from before the disturbance. These biological legacies highly influence the reestablishment of the post-disturbance ecology.\nSome species from each trophic level survived the 1980 eruption, which allowed for relatively quick re-establishment of food webs. Larger species saw greater mortality rates, with each of the area's large mammals \u2014 mountain goats, elk, deer, black bear and cougars \u2014 completely decimated. Eventually, each of the larger mammals migrated back into the area. Without access to adequate forage, many elk starved to death in the winters in the following decades. By 2014, the mountain goat population had grown back to 65 members. In 2015, there were 152. Mountain goats are culturally significant to the Cowlitz Tribe, whose members historically harvested shed tufts of goat wool left behind on the mountain, and the tribe has played a role in monitoring the population, which continues to recover without human intervention.\nHuman history.\nImportance to indigenous tribes.\nNative American lore contains numerous stories to explain the eruptions of Mount St.\u00a0Helens and other Cascade volcanoes. The best known of these is the Bridge of the Gods story told by the Klickitat people.\nIn the story, the chief of all the gods and his two sons, Pahto (also called Klickitat) and Wy'east, traveled down the Columbia River from the Far North in search for a suitable area to settle.\nThey came upon an area that is now called The Dalles and thought they had never seen a land so beautiful. The sons quarreled over the land, so to solve the dispute their father shot two arrows from his mighty bow \u2013 one to the north and the other to the south. Pahto followed the arrow to the north and settled there while Wy'east did the same for the arrow to the south. The chief of the gods then built the Bridge of the Gods, so his family could meet periodically.\nWhen the two sons of the chief of the gods fell in love with a beautiful maiden named Loowit, she could not choose between them. The two young chiefs fought over her, burying villages and forests in the process. The area was devastated and the earth shook so violently that the huge bridge fell into the river, creating the cascades of the Columbia River Gorge.\nFor punishment, the chief of the gods struck down each of the lovers and transformed them into great mountains where they fell. Wy'east, with his head lifted in pride, became the volcano known today as Mount Hood. Pahto, with his head bent toward his fallen love, was turned into Mount Adams. The beautiful Loowit became Mount St.\u00a0Helens, known to the Klickitats as Louwala-Clough, which means \"smoking or fire mountain\" in their language (the Sahaptin call the mountain Loowit).\nThe mountain is also of sacred importance to the Cowlitz and Yakama tribes that also live in the area. They find the area above its tree line to be of exceptional spiritual significance, and the mountain (which they call \"Lawetlat'la\", roughly translated as \"the smoker\") features prominently in their creation story, and in some of their songs and rituals. In recognition of its cultural significance, over of the mountain (roughly bounded by the Loowit Trail) have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nOther area tribal names for the mountain include \"n\u0161h'\u00e1k'w\" (\"water coming out\") from the Upper Chehalis, and \"aka akn\" (\"snow mountain\"), a Kiksht term.\nExploration by Europeans.\nRoyal Navy Commander George Vancouver and the officers of HMS \"Discovery\" made the Europeans' first recorded sighting of Mount St.\u00a0Helens on May 19, 1792, while surveying the northern Pacific Ocean coast. Vancouver named the mountain for British diplomat Alleyne FitzHerbert, 1st Baron St Helens, on October 20, 1792, as it came into view when the \"Discovery\" passed into the mouth of the Columbia River.\nYears later, explorers, traders, and missionaries heard reports of an erupting volcano in the area. Geologists and historians determined much later that the eruption took place in 1800, marking the beginning of the 57\u00a0year-long Goat Rocks Eruptive Period (see geology section).217 Alarmed by the \"dry snow\", the Nespelem tribe of northeastern Washington supposedly danced and prayed rather than collecting food and suffered during that winter from starvation.217\nIn late 1805 and early 1806, members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition spotted Mount St.\u00a0Helens from the Columbia River but did not report either an ongoing eruption or recent evidence of one. They did however report the presence of quicksand and clogged channel conditions at the mouth of the Sandy River near Portland, suggesting an eruption by Mount Hood sometime in the previous decades.\nIn 1829, Hall J. Kelley led a campaign to rename the Cascade Range as the President's Range and also to rename each major Cascade mountain after a former President of the United States. In his scheme Mount St.\u00a0Helens was to be renamed Mount Washington.\nEuropean colonization and use of the area.\nThe first authenticated non-Indigenous eyewitness report of a volcanic eruption was made in March\u00a01835 by Meredith Gairdner, while working for the Hudson's Bay Company stationed at Fort Vancouver.219 He sent an account to the \"Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal\", which published his letter in January\u00a01836. James Dwight Dana of Yale University, while sailing with the United States Exploring Expedition, saw the quiescent peak from off the mouth of the Columbia River in 1841. Another member of the expedition later described \"cellular basaltic lavas\" at the mountain's base.\nIn the late fall or early winter of 1842, nearby European settlers and missionaries witnessed the so-called Great Eruption. This small-volume outburst created large ash clouds, and mild explosions followed for 15 years. The eruptions of this period were likely phreatic (steam explosions). Josiah Parrish in Champoeg, Oregon witnessed Mount St.\u00a0Helens in eruption on November 22, 1842. Ash from this eruption may have reached The Dalles, Oregon, southeast of the volcano.\nIn October\u00a01843, future California governor Peter H. Burnett recounted a very likely apocryphal story of an Indigenous man who badly burned his foot and leg in lava or hot ash while hunting for deer. The story went that the injured man sought treatment at Fort Vancouver, but the contemporary fort commissary steward, Napoleon McGilvery, disclaimed knowledge of the incident.224 British lieutenant Henry J. Warre sketched the eruption in 1845, and two years later Canadian painter Paul Kane created watercolors of the gently smoking mountain. Warre's work showed erupting material from a vent about a third of the way down from the summit on the mountain's west or northwest side (possibly at Goat Rocks), and one of Kane's field sketches shows smoke emanating from about the same location.\nOn April 17, 1857, the \"Republican\", a Steilacoom, Washington, newspaper, reported that \"Mount St.\u00a0Helens, or some other mount to the southward, is seen ... to be in a state of eruption\".228 The lack of a significant ash layer associated with this event indicates that it was a small eruption. This was the first reported volcanic activity since 1854.228\nBefore the 1980 eruption, Spirit Lake offered year-round recreational activities. In the summer there was boating, swimming, and camping, while in the winter there was skiing.\nHuman impact from the 1980 eruption.\nFifty-seven people were killed during the eruption. Had the eruption occurred one day later, when loggers would have been at work, rather than on a Sunday, the death toll could have been much higher.\nEighty-three-year-old Harry R. Truman, who ran the Spirit Lake Lodge and had lived near the mountain since 1929, gained much media attention when he decided not to evacuate before the impending eruption, despite repeated pleas by local authorities. His body was never found after the eruption.\nAnother victim of the eruption was 30-year-old volcanologist David A. Johnston, who was stationed on the nearby Coldwater Ridge. Moments before his position was hit by the pyroclastic flow, Johnston radioed his last words: \"Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!\" Johnston's body was never found. Robert Landsburg was another victim, a photographer who took pictures of the approaching ash cloud. He placed his camera in his backpack and laid on top of it to protect the film. His body and the camera were found on June 4, 1980. The photos survived and provided geologists with valuable documentation of the eruption.\nU.S. President Jimmy Carter surveyed the damage and said, \"Someone said this area looked like a moonscape. But the moon looks more like a golf course compared to what's up there.\" A film crew, led by Seattle filmmaker Otto Seiber, was dropped by helicopter on St.\u00a0Helens on May 23 to document the destruction. Their compasses, however, spun in circles and they quickly became lost. A second eruption occurred on May\u00a025, but the crew survived and was rescued two days later by National Guard helicopter pilots. Their film, \" The Eruption of Mount St. Helens!\", later became a popular documentary.\nThe eruption had negative effects beyond the immediate area of the volcano. Ashfall caused approximately $100 million of damage to agriculture downwind in Eastern Washington, equivalent to $ in 2024.\nThe eruption also had positive impacts on society. Apple and wheat production were higher in the 1980 growing season, possibly due to ash helping to retain moisture in the soil. The ash was also a source of income: it was the raw material for the artificial gemstone helenite, or for ceramic glazes, or sold as a tourist curio.\nProtection and later history.\nIn 1982, President Ronald Reagan and the U.S. Congress established the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, a area around the mountain and within the Gifford Pinchot National Forest.\nFollowing the 1980 eruption, the area was left to gradually return to its natural state. In 1987, the U.S. Forest Service reopened the mountain to climbing. It remained open until 2004 when renewed activity caused the closure of the area around the mountain (see \"Geological history\" section above for more details). The Monitor Ridge trail, which previously let up to 100 permitted hikers per day climb to the summit, ceased operation. On July 21, 2006, the mountain was again opened to climbers. In February\u00a02010, a climber died after falling from the rim into the crater.\nDue to the eruption, the state recognizes the month of May as \"Volcano Awareness Month\" and events are held at Mt. St. Helens, or within the region, to discuss the eruption, safety concerns, and to commemorate lives lost during the natural disaster.\nOn May 14, 2023, a mudslide and debris flow given the moniker, South Coldwater Slide by the U.S. Forest Service, destroyed the Spirit Lake Outlet Bridge on Washington State Route 504 and cut off access to the Johnston Ridge Observatory. Closures and access to Coldwater Lake and hiking trails would vary in the month after the slide.\nClimbing and recreation.\nMount St.\u00a0Helens is a common climbing destination for both beginning and experienced mountaineers. The peak is climbed year-round, although it is more often climbed from late spring through early fall. All routes include sections of steep, rugged terrain. A permit system has been in place for climbers since 1987. A climbing permit is required year-round for anyone who will be above on the slopes of Mount St.\u00a0Helens.\nThe standard hiking/mountaineering route in the warmer months is the Monitor Ridge Route, which starts at the Climbers Bivouac. This is the most crowded route to the summit in the summer and gains about in approximately to reach the crater rim. Although strenuous, it is considered a non-technical climb that involves some scrambling. Most climbers complete the round trip in 7 to 12\u00a0hours.\nThe Worm Flows Route is considered the standard winter route on Mount St.\u00a0Helens, as it is the most direct route to the summit. The route gains about in elevation over about from trailhead to summit but does not demand the technical climbing that some other Cascade peaks like Mount Rainier do. The route name refers to the rocky lava flows that surround the route. This route can be accessed via the Marble Mountain Sno-Park and the Swift Ski Trail.\nThe mountain is now circled by the Loowit Trail at elevations of . The northern segment of the trail from the South Fork Toutle River on the west to Windy Pass on the east is a restricted zone where camping, biking, pets, fires, and off-trail excursions are all prohibited.\nOn April 14, 2008, John Slemp, a snowmobiler from Damascus, Oregon, fell 1,500 feet into the crater after a snow cornice gave way beneath him on a trip to the volcano with his son. Despite his long fall, Slemp survived with minor injuries, and was able to walk after coming to a stop at the foot of the crater wall, where he was rescued by a mountain rescue helicopter.\nA visitor center run by the Washington State Parks is in Silver Lake, Washington, about west of Mount St. Helens. Exhibits include a large model of the volcano, a seismograph, a theater program, and an outdoor natural trail.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "36651", "revid": "34218277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36651", "title": "ESP", "text": "ESP most commonly refers to:\nESP may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36653", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36653", "title": "Mobile magazine explosion", "text": "1865 explosion in Mobile, Alabama, U.S.\nOn May 25, 1865, in Mobile, Alabama, in the Southern United States, an ordnance depot or \"magazine\" exploded, killing some 300 persons. This event occurred just before the end of the American Civil War, during the occupation of the city by Federal troops.\nThe depot was a warehouse on Beauregard Street, where the troops had stacked some 200 tons of shells and powder. Some time in the afternoon of May 25, a cloud of black smoke rose into the air and the ground began to rumble. Flames shot up into the sky and bursting shells were heard throughout the city. In the nearby Mobile River, two ships sank, and a man standing on a wharf was blown into the river. Several houses collapsed from the concussion.\nA reporter for \"The Mobile Morning News\" newspaper described \"bursting shells, flying timbers, bales of cotton, horses, men, women, and children co-mingled and mangled into one immense mass\". He continued: \"The heart stood still, and the stoutest cheek paled as this rain of death fell from the sky and crash after crash foretold a more fearful fate yet impending ... old and young, soldier and citizen vied with each other in deeds of daring to rescue the crumbled and imprisoned.\"\nOn the heels of the explosion came fires, which burned until the entire northern part of Mobile lay in smoking ruins. A huge hole where the warehouse once stood remained for many years, a reminder of the disaster.\nThe exact cause of the magazine explosion was never determined. Some northern newspapers tried to pin the blame on an imagined gang of unreconstructed Confederate officers. Most people, though, accepted that it was the result of simple carelessness on the part of workers handling wheelbarrows full of live ammunition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36656", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36656", "title": "County", "text": "Geographical and administrative region in some countries\nA county is a type of officially recognized geographical division within a modern country, federal state, or province. Counties are defined in diverse ways, but they are typically current or former official administrative divisions within systems of local government, and in this sense counties are similar to shires, and typically larger than municipalities. Various non-English terms can be translated as \"county\" or \"shire\" in other languages, and in English new terms with less historical connection have been invented such as \"council area\" and \"local government district\". On the other hand, in older English-speaking countries the word can still refer to traditional historical regions such as some of those which exist in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The term is also sometimes used for districts with specific non-governmental purposes such as courts, or land registration. \nHistorically the concept of a geographical administrative \"county\" is European (from , ), and represented the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of a medieval count, or a viscount (, ) supposedly standing in the place of a count. However, there were no such counts in medieval England, and when the French-speaking Normans took control of England after 1066 they transplanted the French and medieval Latin terms to describe the pre-existing Anglo Saxon shires, but they did not establish any system placing the administration of shires under the control of high-level nobles. Instead, although there were exceptions, the officers responsible for administrative functions, such as tax collection, or the mustering of soldiers, were sheriffs, theoretically assigned by the central government, and controlled directly by the monarch. \nThe Counties of England have evolved in several different directions, so that there is now more than one definition. The 39 \"traditional\", \"ancient\" or \"historic\" counties of England have on the one hand evolved into 83 metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties, which are modern administrative districts covering the whole country except London, Berkshire, and the Isles of Scilly. The historic counties are also the basis for the 48 ceremonial counties of England, which still each have lords-lieutenants and high sheriffs, who theoretically represent the monarchy in different parts of the country. In cases such as Yorkshire and Sussex, some historical counties remain as geographical regions without any administrative function. The postal counties of the United Kingdom, based upon older county definitions, were used by the Royal Mail until 1996. Scotland replaced its 34 historic counties or shires with 32 modern \"council areas\", some of which correspond to the old counties, or use the old names. In Wales the modern \"principal areas\" correspond to some extent to the old county boundaries, and they can also still be referred to as \"counties\" and \"county boroughs\". The 32 modern Irish counties were first defined after the Norman invasion, but several of these were broadly continuations with earlier divisions clan lordships (T\u00edr Eoghain became county Tyrone, T\u00edr Chonaill became county Donegal, west Breifne became county Leitrim and F\u00edr Manach became modern county Fermanagh). \nNotable examples of more recently-founded English-speaking administrations which have taken up the term \"county\" as a level of local government include the United States and Canada, where counties sometimes evolved from historic districts governed by courts or magistrates, before the countries became independent of the United Kingdom. In New Zealand there were counties historically, but these have been replaced by cities or districts. In Australian local government, the term \"shire\" is among the several which are typically used in local government, depending upon the state, but the term \"county\", which was used by the colonial administration, is mainly relevant for land registration districts (for example in Queensland lands administration). It is also used for the County Court of Victoria, which is a court covering an entire Australian state.\nAfrica.\nKenya.\nCounties are the current second-level political division in Kenya. Each county has an assembly where members of the county assembly (MCAs) sit. This assembly is headed by a governor. Each county is also represented in the Senate of Kenya by a senator. Additionally, a women's representative is elected from each county to the Parliament of Kenya to represent women's interests. Counties replaced provinces as the second-level division after the promulgation of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya.\nLiberia.\nLiberia has 15 counties, each of which elects two senators to the Senate of Liberia.\nAsia.\nChina.\nThe English word \"county\" is used to translate the Chinese term ( or ). In Mainland China, governed by the People's Republic of China (PRC), counties and county-level divisions are the third level of regional/local government, coming under the provincial level and the prefectural level, and above the township level and village level.\nThere are 1,464 so-named \"counties\" out of 2,862 county-level divisions in the PRC, and the number of counties has remained more or less constant since the Han dynasty (206 BC \u2013 AD 220). It remains one of the oldest titles of local-level government in China and significantly predates the establishment of provinces in the Yuan dynasty (1279\u20131368). The county government was particularly important in imperial China because this was the lowest level at which the imperial government is functionally involved, while below it the local people are managed predominantly by the gentries. The head of a county government during imperial China was the magistrate, who was often a newly ascended \"jinshi\".\nIn older context, \"district\" was an older English translation of before the establishment of the Republic of China (ROC). The English nomenclature \"county\" was adopted following the establishment of the ROC. \nDuring most of the imperial era, there were no concepts like municipalities in China. All cities existed within counties, commanderies, prefectures, etc., and had no governments of their own. Large cities (must be imperial capitals or seats of prefectures) could be divided and administered by two or three counties. Such counties are called \u501a\u90ed\u7e23 (, 'county leaning on the city walls') or (, 'county attached to the city walls'). The yamen or governmental houses of these counties exist in the same city. In other words, they share one county town. In this sense, a or is similar to a district of a city.\nFor example, the city of Guangzhou (seat of the eponymous prefecture, also known as \"Canton\" in the Western world) was historically divided by Nanhai County () and Panyu County (). When the first modern city government in China was established in Guangzhou, the urban area was separated from these two counties, with the rural areas left in the remaining parts of them. However, the county governments remained in the city for years, before moving into the respective counties. Similar processes happened in many Chinese cities.\nNowadays, most counties in mainland China, i.e. with \"Xian\" in their titles, are administered by prefecture-level cities and have mainly agricultural economies and rural populations.\nIndonesia.\nRegency (\"kabupaten\") in Indonesia is an administrative unit under a province that is equivalent to a city. A regency is headed by a regent who is directly elected by the people, and is responsible for public services such as education, health, and infrastructure. The structure of a regency includes several districts (\"kecamatan\") which are further divided into villages or ward. Regency in Indonesia is similar to the concept of \"county\" in countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom, but with differences in cultural context and government system. Indonesia has more than 400 regencies spread across all provinces.\nIran.\nThe ostans (provinces) of Iran are further subdivided into counties called (). County consists of a city centre, a few (), and many villages around them. There are usually a few cities (, ) and rural agglomerations (, ) in each county. Rural agglomerations are a collection of a number of villages. One of the cities of the county is appointed as the capital of the county.\nEach has a government office known as (), which coordinates different events and government offices. The , or the head of , is the governor of the .\nFars province has the highest number of , with 36, while Qom uniquely has one, being coextensive with its namesake county. Iran had 324 in 2005 and 443 in 2021.\nKorea.\nCounty is the common English translation for the character ( or ) that denotes the current second level political division in South Korea. In North Korea, the county is one type of municipal-level division.\nTaiwan.\nThere are currently 13 counties in the Republic of China (Taiwan). In addition, provincial cities have the same level of authority as counties. Above county, there are special municipalities (in effect) and province (suspended due to economical and political reasons). \nEurope.\nDenmark.\nDenmark was divided into counties () from 1662 to 2006. On 1 January 2007 the counties were replaced by five Regions. At the same time, the number of municipalities was slashed to 98.\nThe counties were first introduced in 1662, replacing the 49 fiefs () in Denmark\u2013Norway with the same number of counties. This number does not include the subdivisions of the Duchy of Schleswig, which was only under partial Danish control. The number of counties in Denmark (excluding Norway) had dropped to around 20 by 1793. Following the reunification of South Jutland with Denmark in 1920, four counties replaced the Prussian . Aabenraa and S\u00f8nderborg County merged in 1932 and Skanderborg and Aarhus were separated in 1942. From 1942 to 1970, the number stayed at 22. The number was further decreased by the 1970 Danish municipal reform, leaving 14 counties plus two cities unconnected to the county structure; Copenhagen and Frederiksberg.\nIn 2003, Bornholm County merged with the local five municipalities, forming the Bornholm Regional Municipality. The remaining 13 counties were abolished on 1 January 2007 where they were replaced by five new regions. In the same reform, the number of municipalities was slashed from 270 to 98 and all municipalities now belong to a region.\nFrance.\nA was a territory ruled by a count () in medieval France. In modern France, the rough equivalent of a county as used in many English-speaking countries is a department (). Ninety-six departments are in metropolitan France, and five are overseas departments, which are also classified as overseas regions. Departments are further subdivided into 334 arrondissements, but these have no autonomy; they are the basis of local organisation of police, fire departments and, sometimes, administration of elections.\nGermany.\nEach administrative district consists of an elected council and an executive, and whose duties are comparable to those of a county executive in the United States, supervising local government administration. Historically, counties in the Holy Roman Empire were called .\nThe majority of German districts are \"rural districts\" (German: ), of which there are 294 as of 2017[ [update]]. Cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants (and smaller towns in some states) do not usually belong to a district, but take on district responsibilities themselves, similar to the concept of independent cities and there are 107 of them, bringing the total number of districts to 401.\nHungary.\nThe administrative unit of Hungary is called (between 1950 and 2022 they were called , historically also in Latin), which can be translated with the word \"county\". The two names are used interchangeably ('megye' used in common parlance, and when referring to the counties of other states), just like before 1950, when the word 'megye' even appeared in legal texts. The 19 counties constitute the highest level of the administrative subdivisions of the country together with the capital city Budapest, although counties and the capital are grouped into seven statistical regions.\nCounties are subdivided into districts () and municipalities, the two types of which are towns (\"v\u00e1ros\") and villages (\"k\u00f6zs\u00e9g\"), each one having their own elected mayor and council. 23 of the towns have the rights of a county although they do not form independent territorial units equal to counties.\nThe was also the historic administrative unit in the Kingdom of Hungary, which included areas of present-day neighbouring countries of Hungary. Its Latin name () is the equivalent of the French . Actual political and administrative role of counties changed much through history. Originally they were subdivisions of the royal administration, but from the 13th century they became self-governments of the nobles and kept this character until the 19th century when in turn they became modern local governments.\nIreland.\nThe island of Ireland was historically divided into 32 counties, of which 26 later formed the Republic of Ireland and 6 made up Northern Ireland.\nThese counties are traditionally grouped into four provinces: Leinster (12 counties), Munster (6), Connacht (5) and Ulster (9). Historically, the counties of Meath and Westmeath and small parts of surrounding counties constituted the province of Mide, which was one of the \"Five Fifths\" of Ireland (in the Irish language the word for province, , means 'a fifth': from , 'five'); however, these have long since been absorbed into Leinster. In the Republic each county is administered by an elected \"county council\", and the old provincial divisions are merely traditional names with no political significance.\nThe number and boundaries of administrative counties in the Republic of Ireland were reformed in the 1990s. For example, County Dublin was divided into three: D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal, and South Dublin; the City of Dublin had existed for centuries before. The cities of Cork and Galway have been separated from the town and rural areas of their counties. The cities of Limerick and Waterford were merged with their respective counties in 2014. Thus, the Republic of Ireland now has 31 'county-level' authorities, although the borders of the original twenty-six counties are still officially in place.\nIn Northern Ireland, the six county councils and the smaller town councils were abolished in 1973 and replaced by a single tier of local government. However, in the north as well as in the south, the traditional 32 counties and 4 provinces remain in common usage for many sporting, cultural and other purposes. County identity is heavily reinforced in the local culture by allegiances to county teams in hurling and Gaelic football. Each Gaelic Athletic Association county has its own flag/colours (and often a nickname), and county allegiances are taken quite seriously. See the counties of Ireland and the Gaelic Athletic Association.\nItaly.\nIn Italy the word \"county\" is not used; the administrative sub-division of a region is called . Italian provinces are mainly named after their principal town and comprise several administrative subdivisions called ('communes'). There are currently 110 provinces in Italy.\nIn the context of pre-modern Italy, the Italian word generally refers to the countryside surrounding, and controlled by, the city state. The provided natural resources and agricultural products to sustain the urban population. In contemporary usage, can refer to a metropolitan area, and in some cases large rural/suburban regions providing resources to distant cities.\nLithuania.\n (plural ) is the Lithuanian word for county. Since 1994 Lithuania has 10 counties; before 1950 it had 20. The only purpose with the county is an office of a state governor who shall conduct law and order in the county.\nNorway.\nNorway has been divided into 11 counties (, ; singular: ) since 2020; they previously numbered 19 following a local government reform in 1972. Until that year Bergen was a separate county, but today it is a municipality within the county of Vestland. All counties form administrative entities called county municipalities ( or ; singular: ), further subdivided into municipalities ( or ; singular: ). One county, Oslo, is not divided into municipalities, rather it is equivalent to the municipality of Oslo.\nEach county has its own county council () whose representatives are elected every four years together with representatives to the municipal councils. The counties handle matters such as high schools and local roads, and until 1 January 2002 hospitals as well. This last responsibility was transferred to the state-run health authorities and health trusts, and there is a debate on the future of the county municipality as an administrative entity. Some people, and parties, such as the Conservative and Progress Party, call for the abolition of the county municipalities once and for all, while others, including the Labour Party, merely want to merge some of them into larger regions.\nPoland.\nThe territorial administration of Poland since 1999 has been based on three levels of subdivision. The country is divided into \"voivodeships\" (provinces); these are further divided into \"powiats\". The term \"powiat\" is often translated into English as \"county\" (or sometimes \"district\"). In historical contexts this may be confusing because the Polish term \"hrabstwo\" (a territorial unit administered/owned by a \"hrabia\", count) is also literally translated as \"county\" and it was subordinated under \"powiat\".\nThe 380 county-level entities in Poland include 314 \"land counties\" (powiaty ziemskie) and the 66 \"city counties\" (\"miasta na prawach powiatu\" or \"powiaty grodzkie\") . They are subdivisions of the 16 \"voivodeship\", and are further subdivided into 2,479 gminas (also called commune or municipality).\nRomania.\nThe Romanian word for county, , is not currently used for any Romanian administrative divisions. Romania is divided into a total of 41 counties (), which along with the municipality of Bucharest, constitute the official administrative divisions of Romania. They represent the country's NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics \u2013 Level 3) statistical subdivisions within the European Union and each of them serves as the local level of government within its borders. Most counties are named after a major river, while some are named after notable cities within them, such as the county seat.\nSweden.\nThe Swedish division into counties, , which literally means 'fief', was established in 1634, and was based on an earlier division into provinces; Sweden is divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities (\"kommuner\"). At the county level there is a county administrative board led by a governor appointed by the central government of Sweden, as well as an elected county council that handles a separate set of issues, notably hospitals and public transportation for the municipalities within its borders. The counties and their expanse have changed several times, most recently in 1998.\nEvery county council corresponds to a county with a number of municipalities per county. County councils and municipalities have different roles and separate responsibilities relating to local government. Health care, public transport and certain cultural institutions are administered by county councils while general education, public water utilities, garbage disposal, elderly care and rescue services are administered by the municipalities. Gotland is a special case of being a county council with only one municipality and the functions of county council and municipality are performed by the same organisation.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine the county () was introduced in Ukrainian territories under Poland in the second half of the 14th century, and in the eighteenth century under the Russian Empire in the Cossack Hetmanate, Sloboda Ukraine, Southern Ukraine, and Right-Bank Ukraine. In 1913 there were 126 counties in Ukrainian-inhabited territories of the Russian Empire. Under the Austrian Empire in 1914 there were 59 counties in Ukrainian-inhabited Galicia, 34 in Transcarpathia, and 10 in Bukovina. Counties were retained by the independent Ukrainian People's Republic of 1917\u20131921, and in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Romania until the Soviet annexations at the start of World War II. 99 counties formed the Ukrainian SSR in 1919, where they were abolished in 1923\u201325 in favour of 53 okruhas (in turn replaced by oblasts in 1930\u201332), although they existed in the Zakarpattia Oblast until 1953.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom is divided into a number of metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties. There are also ceremonial counties which group small non-metropolitan counties into geographical areas broadly based on the historic counties of England. In 1974, the metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties replaced the system of administrative counties and county boroughs which was introduced in 1889. The counties generally belong to level 3 of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS 3).\nIn 1965 and 1974\u20131975, major reorganisations of local government in England and Wales created several new administrative counties such as Hereford and Worcester (abolished again in 1998 and reverted, with some transfers of territory, to the two separate historic counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire) and also created several new metropolitan counties based on large urban areas as a single administrative unit. In Scotland, county-level local government was replaced by larger regions, which lasted until 1996. Modern local government in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and a large part of England is trending towards smaller unitary authorities: a system similar to that proposed in the 1960s by the Redcliffe-Maud Report for most of Britain.\nThe name \"county\" was introduced by the Normans, and was derived from a Norman term for an area administered by a Count (lord). These Norman \"counties\" were simply the Saxon shires, and kept their Saxon names. Several traditional counties, including Essex, Sussex and Kent, predate the unification of England by Alfred the Great, and were originally more or less independent kingdoms (although the most important Saxon Kingdom on the island of Britain, Alfred's own Wessex, no longer survives in any form).\nEngland.\nIn England, in the Anglo-Saxon period, \"shires\" were established as areas used for the raising of taxes, and usually had a fortified town at their centre. This became known as the \"shire town\" or later the county town. In many cases, the shires were named after their shire town (for example Bedford\"shire\"), but there are several exceptions, such as Cumberland, Norfolk and Suffolk. In several other cases, such as Buckinghamshire, the modern county town is different from the town after which the shire is named. (See Toponymical list of counties of the United Kingdom)\nMost non-metropolitan counties in England are run by county councils and are divided into non-metropolitan districts, each with its own council. Local authorities in the UK are usually responsible for education, emergency services, planning, transport, social services, and a number of other functions.\nUntil 1974, the county boundaries of England changed little over time. In the medieval period, a number of important cities were granted the status of counties in their own right, such as London, Bristol and Coventry, and numerous small exclaves such as Islandshire were created. In 1844, most of these exclaves were transferred to their surrounding counties.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn Northern Ireland, the six county councils, if not their counties, were abolished in 1973 and replaced by 26 local government districts. The traditional six counties remain in common everyday use for many cultural and other purposes.\nScotland and Wales.\nThe thirteen historic counties of Wales were fixed by statute in 1539 (although counties such as Pembrokeshire date from 1138) and most of the shires of Scotland are of at least this age. The Welsh word for county is \"sir\" which is derived from the English 'shire'. The word is officially used to signify counties in Wales. In the Gaelic form, Scottish traditional county names are generally distinguished by the designation \u2014literally \"sheriffdom\", e.g. (Argyllshire). This term corresponds to the jurisdiction of the sheriff in the Scottish legal system.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nAlberta.\nA \"county\" in Alberta used to be a type of designation in a single-tier municipal system; but this was nominally changed to \"municipal district\" under the \"Municipal Government Act\", when the \"County Act\" was repealed in the mid-1990s. However, at the time the new \"municipal districts\" were also permitted to retain the usage of \"county\" in their official names.\nAs a result, in Alberta, the term \"county\" is synonymous with the term \"municipal district\" \u2013 it is not its own incorporated municipal status that is different from that of a municipal district. As such, Alberta Municipal Affairs provides municipal districts with the opportunity to change to a \"county\" in their official names, but some have chosen to hold out with the \"municipal district\" title. The vast majority of \"municipal districts\" in Alberta are branded as counties.\nBritish Columbia.\nBritish Columbia has counties for the purposes of its justice system but otherwise they hold no governmental function. For the provision of all other governmental services, the province is divided into regional districts that form the upper tier, which are further subdivided into local municipalities that are partly autonomous, and unincorporated electoral areas that are governed directly by the regional districts.\nManitoba.\nThe province of Manitoba was divided into counties; however, these counties were abolished in 1890. Manitoba is divided into rural municipalities, which do not overlap with urban municipalities.\nNew Brunswick.\nThe counties of New Brunswick were upper-tier governance units until the municipal reform of 1967; they were also used as electoral districts until 1973. They remain in use as census divisions by Statistics Canada and by locals as geographic identifiers. The Territorial Division Act defining them remains in effect; their subdivisions are called parishes; their government centres are called shiretowns.\nNewfoundland and Labrador.\nNewfoundland and Labrador does not have any second-level administrative subdivision between the provincial government and its municipalities.\nNorthwest Territories.\nThe Northwest Territories are divided into regions; however, these regions only serve to streamline the delivery of territorial governmental services, and have no government of their own.\nNova Scotia.\nNova Scotia formerly had a two-tier system of local government in which counties were upper-tier municipalities.\nNunavut.\nNunavut is divided into regions; however, these regions only serve to streamline the delivery of territorial governmental services, and have no government of their own.\nOntario.\nOntario has a two-tier system of local government in which counties are upper-tier municipalities.\nThe primary administrative division of southern Ontario is its 22 counties, which are upper-tier local governments providing limited municipal services to rural and moderately dense areas\u2014within them, there are a variety of lower-tier towns, cities, villages, etc. that provide most municipal services. This contrasts with northern Ontario's 10 districts, which are geographic divisions but not local governments\u2014although some towns, etc. are within them that are local governments, the low population densities and much larger area have significant impacts on how government is organized and operates. In both northern and southern Ontario, urban densities in cities are one of two other local structures: regional municipalities (restructured former counties which are also upper-tier) or single-tier municipalities.\nPrince Edward Island.\nThe counties of Prince Edward Island are historical and have no governments of their own today. However, they remain used as census divisions by Statistics Canada, and by locals as geographic identifiers.\nQuebec.\nQuebec has a two-tier system of local government in which counties are upper-tier municipalities. Quebec's counties are more properly called \"regional county municipalities\" (). The province's former counties proper were supplanted in the early 1980s.\nSaskatchewan.\nSaskatchewan is divided into rural and urban municipalities, which do not overlap. Saskatchewan does not have any second-level administrative subdivision between the provincial government and the municipalities.\nYukon.\nYukon does not have any second-level administrative subdivision between the territorial government and its municipalities.\nJamaica.\nJamaica is divided into 14 parishes which are grouped together into three historic counties: Cornwall, Middlesex, and Surrey.\nUnited States.\nCounties in U.S. states are administrative or political subdivisions of the state in which their boundaries are drawn. In addition, the United States Census Bureau uses the term \"county equivalent\" to describe places that are comparable to counties, but called by different names.\nForty-seven of the 50 U.S. states use the term \"county\", while Alaska, Connecticut, and Louisiana use the terms \"borough\", \"planning region\", and \"parish\", respectively, for analogous jurisdictions. A \"consolidated city-county\", such as the City and County of San Francisco, is formed when a city and county merge into one unified jurisdiction. Conversely, \"independent cities\", including Baltimore, St. Louis, Carson City, and all cities in Virginia, legally belong to no county, i.e. no county even nominally exists in those places compared to a consolidated city-county where a county does legally exist in some form. Washington, D.C., is known as a \"federal city\" because it is outside the jurisdiction of any state; the U.S. Census Bureau treats it as a single county equivalent.\nThe specific governmental powers of counties vary widely between the states. They are generally the intermediate tier of state government, between the statewide tier and the immediately local government tier (typically a city, town/borough, or village/township). Some of the governmental functions that a county may offer include judiciary, county prisons, land registration, enforcement of building codes, and federally mandated services programs. Depending on the individual state, counties or their equivalents may be administratively subdivided into townships, boroughs or boros, or towns (in the New England states, New York, and Wisconsin).\nNew York City is a special case where the city is made up of five boroughs, each of which is territorially coterminous with a county, though not always with an identical name. The Bronx is Bronx County, Brooklyn is Kings County, Manhattan is New York County, Queens is Queens County, and Staten Island is Richmond County. In the context of city government, the boroughs are subdivisions of the city but are still called \"county\" where county function is involved, e.g., \"\"New York County\" Courthouse\".\nCounty governments in Rhode Island and Connecticut have been completely abolished but the entities remain for administrative and statistical purposes in Rhode Island, while Connecticut has replaced them with planning regions served by councils of municipal governments. Alaska's Unorganized Borough also has no county equivalent government, but the U.S. Census Bureau further divides it into statistical county equivalent subdivisions called census areas. Massachusetts eliminated county governments in 8 of its 14 counties.\nToday, 3,142 counties and county equivalents carve up the United States, ranging in number from 3 for Delaware to 254 for Texas. The areas of each county also vary widely between the states. For example, the territorially medium-sized state of Pennsylvania has 67 counties delineated in geographically convenient ways. By way of contrast, Massachusetts, with far less territory, has massively sized counties in comparison even to Pennsylvania's largest, yet each organizes their judicial and incarceration officials similarly.\nMost counties have a county seat: a city, town, or other named place where its administrative functions are centered. Some New England states use the term shire town to mean \"county seat\". A handful of counties like Harrison County, Mississippi have two or more county seats, usually located on opposite sides of the county, dating back from the days when travel was difficult. In Virginia, where all cities are independent, some double as county seats despite not being part of a county. Notable examples include the independent City of Fairfax serving as the seat of Fairfax County and Salem serving as the county seat of Roanoke County.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nIn the eastern states of Australia, counties are used in the administration of land titles. They do not generally correspond to a level of government, but are used in the identification of parcels of land.\nThe local communities in Australia that share the same post code are usually referred to as suburbs or localities. Several neighboring suburbs are often serviced by the same local government known as a council, whose jurisdiction is officially known as the local government area (LGA). An LGA functions basically the same way as a county of other countries, although it is called instead as \"city\", \"municipality\", \"shire\", \"borough\", \"town\", \"district\" or simple \"councils\" depending on the state/territory and subregion. It performs municipal services and regulates permits for land uses, but lacks any legislative or law enforcement powers.\nNew Zealand.\nAfter New Zealand abolished its provinces in 1876, a system of counties similar to other countries' systems was instituted, lasting until 1989. They had chairmen, not mayors as boroughs and cities had; many legislative provisions (such as burial and land subdivision control) were different for the counties.\nDuring the second half of the 20th century, many counties received overflow population from nearby cities. The result was often a merger of the two into a \"district\" (e.g. Rotorua) or a change of name to either \"district\" (e.g. Waimairi) or \"city\" (e.g. Manukau City).\nThe Local Government Act 1974 began the process of bringing urban, mixed, and rural councils into the same legislative framework. Substantial reorganisations under that Act resulted in the 1989 shake-up, which covered the country in (non-overlapping) cities and districts and abolished all the counties except for the Chatham Islands County, which survived under that name for a further 6 years but then became a \"Territory\" under the \"Chatham Islands Council\".\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nProvinces in Argentina are divided into departments (), except in the Buenos Aires Province, where they are called . The Autonomous City of Buenos Aires is divided into communes ().\nBrazil.\nStates in Brazil were divided into microregions () before they were replaced by \"immediate geographic regions\" in 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36660", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36660", "title": "1054", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1054 (MLIV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\nEast-West schism: the ongoing break of communion between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. &lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36664", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36664", "title": "David/Biblical character", "text": ""}
{"id": "36666", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36666", "title": "290s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 290s decade ran from January 1, 290, to December 31, 299.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36667", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36667", "title": "Counterfactual definiteness", "text": "Concept in quantum mechanics\nIn quantum mechanics, counterfactual definiteness (CFD) is the ability to speak \"meaningfully\" of the definiteness of the results of measurements that have not been performed (i.e., the ability to assume the existence of objects, and properties of objects, even when they have not been measured). The term \"counterfactual definiteness\" is used in discussions of physics calculations, especially those related to the phenomenon called quantum entanglement and those related to the Bell inequalities. In such discussions \"meaningfully\" means the ability to treat these unmeasured results on an equal footing with measured results in statistical calculations. It is this (sometimes assumed but unstated) aspect of counterfactual definiteness that is of direct relevance to physics and mathematical models of physical systems and not philosophical concerns regarding the meaning of unmeasured results.\nOverview.\nThe subject of counterfactual definiteness receives attention in the study of quantum mechanics because it is argued that, when challenged by the findings of quantum mechanics, classical physics must give up its claim to one of three assumptions: locality (no \"spooky action at a distance\"), no-conspiracy (called also \"asymmetry of time\"), or counterfactual definiteness (or \"non-contextuality\").\nIf physics gives up the claim to locality, it brings into question our ordinary ideas about causality and suggests that events may transpire at faster-than-light speeds.\nIf physics gives up the \"no conspiracy\" condition, it becomes possible for \"nature to force experimenters to measure what she wants, and when she wants, hiding whatever she does not like physicists to see.\"\nIf physics rejects the possibility that, in all cases, there can be \"counterfactual definiteness,\" then it rejects some features that humans are very much accustomed to regarding as enduring features of the universe.\n\"The elements of reality the EPR paper is talking about are nothing but what the property interpretation calls properties existing independently of the measurements. In each run of the experiment, there exist some elements of reality, the system has particular properties &lt; #ai &gt; which unambiguously determine the measurement outcome &lt; ai &gt;, given that the corresponding measurement a is performed.\"\nAs a noun, \"counterfactual\" may refer to an inferred effect or consequence of an unobserved macroscopic event. An example is counterfactual quantum computation.\nTheoretical considerations.\nAn interpretation of quantum mechanics can be said to involve the use of counterfactual definiteness if it includes in the mathematical modelling outcomes of measurements that are counterfactual; in particular, those that are excluded according to quantum mechanics by the fact that quantum mechanics does not contain a description of simultaneous measurement of conjugate pairs of properties.\nFor example, the uncertainty principle states that one cannot simultaneously know, with arbitrarily high precision, both the position and momentum of a particle. Suppose one measures the position of a particle. This act destroys any information about its momentum. Is it then possible to talk about the outcome that one would have obtained if one had measured its momentum instead of its position? In terms of mathematical formalism, is such a counterfactual momentum measurement to be included, together with the factual position measurement, in the statistical population of possible outcomes describing the particle? If the position were found to be r0 then in an interpretation that permits counterfactual definiteness, the statistical population describing position and momentum would contain all pairs (r0,p) for every possible momentum value p, whereas an interpretation that rejects counterfactual values completely would only have the pair (r0,\u22a5) where \u22a5 (called \"up tack\" or \"eet\") denotes an undefined value. To use a macroscopic analogy, an interpretation which rejects counterfactual definiteness views measuring the position as akin to asking where in a room a person is located, while measuring the momentum is akin to asking whether the person's lap is empty or has something on it. If the person's position has changed by making him or her stand rather than sit, then that person has no lap and neither the statement \"the person's lap is empty\" nor \"there is something on the person's lap\" is true. Any statistical calculation based on values where the person is standing at some place in the room and simultaneously has a lap as if sitting would be meaningless.\nThe dependability of counterfactually definite values is a basic assumption, which, together with \"time asymmetry\" and \"local causality\" led to the Bell inequalities. Bell showed that the results of experiments intended to test the idea of hidden variables would be predicted to fall within certain limits based on all three of these assumptions, which are considered principles fundamental to classical physics, but that the results found within those limits would be inconsistent with the predictions of quantum mechanical theory. Experiments have shown that quantum mechanical results predictably exceed those classical limits. Calculating expectations based on Bell's work implies that for quantum physics the assumption of \"local realism\" must be abandoned. Bell's theorem proves that every type of quantum theory must necessarily violate locality \"or\" reject the possibility of extending the mathematical description with outcomes of measurements which were not actually made.\nCounterfactual definiteness is present in any interpretation of quantum mechanics that allows quantum mechanical measurement outcomes to be seen as deterministic functions of a system's state or of the state of the combined system and measurement apparatus. Cramer's (1986) transactional interpretation does not make that interpretation.\nExamples of interpretations rejecting counterfactual definiteness.\nCopenhagen interpretation.\nThe traditional Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics rejects counterfactual definiteness as it does not ascribe any value at all to a measurement that was not performed. When measurements are performed, values result, but these are not considered to be revelations of pre-existing values. In the words of Asher Peres, \"unperformed experiments have no results\".\nMany worlds.\nThe many-worlds interpretation rejects counterfactual definiteness in a different sense; instead of not assigning a value to measurements that were not performed, it ascribes many values. When measurements are performed each of these values gets realized as the resulting value in a different world of a branching reality. As Prof. Guy Blaylock of the University of Massachusetts Amherst puts it, \"The many-worlds interpretation is not only counterfactually indefinite, it is factually indefinite as well.\"\nConsistent histories.\nThe consistent histories approach rejects counterfactual definiteness in yet another manner; it ascribes single but hidden values to unperformed measurements and disallows combining values of incompatible measurements (counterfactual or factual) as such combinations do not produce results that would match any obtained purely from performed compatible measurements. When a measurement is performed the hidden value is nevertheless realized as the resulting value. Robert Griffiths likens these to \"slips of paper\" placed in \"opaque envelopes\". Thus Consistent Histories does not reject counterfactual results per se, it rejects them only when they are being combined with incompatible results. Whereas in the Copenhagen interpretation or the Many Worlds interpretation, the algebraic operations to derive Bell's inequality cannot proceed due to having no value or many values where a single value is required, in Consistent Histories, they can be performed but the resulting correlation coefficients can not be equated with those that would be obtained by actual measurements (which are instead given by the rules of quantum mechanical formalism). The derivation combines incompatible results, only some of which could be factual for a given experiment and the rest counterfactual.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "36668", "revid": "50888794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36668", "title": "Mick Fleetwood", "text": "British musician and actor (born 1947)\nMichael John Kells Fleetwood (born 24 June 1947) is a British musician, songwriter and actor. He is the drummer, co-founder, and leader of the rock band Fleetwood Mac. Fleetwood, whose surname was merged with that of the group's bassist John \"Mac\" McVie (the only two members to appear on every studio album during the band's run) to form the name of the band. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with Fleetwood Mac in 1998. \nBorn in Redruth, Cornwall, Fleetwood lived in Egypt and Norway for much of his childhood. Choosing to follow his musical interests, Fleetwood travelled to London at the age of 15, eventually forming the first incarnation of Fleetwood Mac with Peter Green, Jeremy Spencer and Bob Brunning. After several album releases and line-up changes, the group moved to the United States in 1974. Fleetwood then invited Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks to join. Buckingham and Nicks contributed to much of Fleetwood Mac's later commercial success, including the celebrated album \"Rumours\", while Fleetwood's own determination to keep the band together was essential to the band's longevity. \nFleetwood has also enjoyed a solo career, published written works, and flirted briefly with acting.\nEarly life.\nMichael John Kells Fleetwood was born in Redruth, Cornwall, second child to John Joseph Kells Fleetwood and Bridget Maureen (n\u00e9e Brereton) Fleetwood. His elder sister was actress Susan Fleetwood. In early childhood, Fleetwood and his family followed his father, a Royal Air Force fighter pilot, to Egypt. Six years later, they moved to Norway where his father was deployed by NATO. He attended school there and became fluent in Norwegian.\nBiographer Cath Carroll describes the young Fleetwood as \"a dreamer, an empathetic youth\" who, though intelligent, did not excel academically. According to his own autobiography, Fleetwood had an extremely difficult and trying time academically at the English boarding schools he attended, including King's School at Sherborne House in Gloucestershire and Wynstones School in Gloucestershire. He performed poorly on exams, which he attributed to his inability to memorise facts. He nevertheless enjoyed acting during school, often in drag, and was a competent fencer. At tall, he was an imposing figure, and sported a beard and long hair for much of his life. \"Mick was very aristocratic,\" recalls Ken Caillat, a sound engineer on \"Rumours\". \"The way he formed sentences was impeccable. When he spoke, everyone stopped and listened. He was quiet and wise, and he had a great sense of humour. He loved to laugh, but he was also a straight shooter.\"\nAbandoning academic pursuits, Fleetwood took up the drums after his parents, recognising that he might find a future in music, bought him a \"Gigster\" drum kit when he was thirteen. His family encouraged his artistic side, as his father composed poetry and was an amateur drummer himself. Fleetwood was inspired\u2014as he said at the Brits Awards ceremony in 1989\u2014by Cliff Richard, Tony Meehan (drummer of the Shadows), and The Everly Brothers. With his parents' support, he dropped out of school at 15 and, in 1963, moved to London to pursue a career as a drummer. At first, he stayed with his younger sister Sally in Notting Hill. After a brief stint working at Liberty in London, he found his first opportunity in music.\nCareer.\nEarly efforts in London.\nKeyboard player Peter Bardens lived only a few doors away from Fleetwood's first home in London, and upon hearing of the proximity of an available drummer, Bardens gave Fleetwood his first gig in Bardens' band the Cheynes in July 1963, thus seeding the young drummer's musical career. It would take him from the Cheynes\u2014with whom he supported early gigs by the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds\u2014to stints in the Bo Street Runners, where he replaced original drummer Nigel Hutchinson, who had enjoyed brief television fame on \"Ready Steady Go!\". However, by April 1965, when Fleetwood joined the band, it was fading into obscurity. By February 1966, Bardens, who had left the group, called on Fleetwood to join his new band, the Peter Bs, which soon expanded to become Shotgun Express (with Rod Stewart). Peter Green, who was a guitarist in the Peter Bs, left to join John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers, followed by Fleetwood in April 1967. Mayall\u2019s new band already featured John McVie.\nGreen became a supportive bandmate who helped Fleetwood in his early experimentation with the drum kit. Fleetwood was, however, dismissed from the Bluesbreakers for repeated insobriety during gigs. Both Fleetwood and McVie were heavy drinkers, and their combined efforts were too much for Mayall and the band to cope with. Green, feeling trapped within the Bluesbreakers, also left in June 1967. Recalling \"his favourite rhythm section, 'Fleetwood Mac'\"\u2014Mick Fleetwood and John McVie\u2014Green elected to invite both to join him in his new band, Fleetwood Mac. Though McVie hesitated briefly due to financial reasons, both joined Green by the summer of 1967 with a record contract on the horizon.\nPeter Green's Fleetwood Mac.\nThe initial incarnation of Fleetwood Mac performed its first gig in August 1967 at the seventh annual Windsor Jazz and Blues Festival, playing a Chicago-style blues. McVie, initially hesitant to commit, was later prompted to leave the Bluesbreakers and join Fleetwood Mac full-time when the former adopted a horns section with which he disagreed. He replaced the initial bassist, Bob Brunning. McVie, Fleetwood, Green and guitarist Jeremy Spencer thus formed the first fixed line-up of Fleetwood Mac.\nThe band's first album, \"Peter Green's Fleetwood Mac\", was released in 1968, and the band toured the United States for the first time, though Green was reluctant to do so for fear of gun crime. Upon their return, they recorded a second album, \"Mr. Wonderful\", under simply \"Fleetwood Mac\" with Green's name dropped. A guest musician on the album, Christine Perfect, became close with the group. She and McVie married in 1968. A third guitarist, Danny Kirwan, was also added to the line-up. Despite the success of their third album, \"Then Play On\", and a string of hit singles including \"Albatross\" and \"Man of the World\", Green himself drifted away from the band, struggling both creatively and with increasing use of LSD.\n1970\u20131973.\nFleetwood remained a consistent presence in the ever-changing line-up of the group following the departure of Green in May 1970, when Spencer and Kirwan assumed more central roles in the group's song-writing. In September 1970 the release of \"Kiln House\" saw a line-up of Spencer, Kirwan, John McVie and Fleetwood, with Christine McVie providing keyboards and backing vocals. Fleetwood, \"a social creature who prized community and communication\", was particularly taken with the group's new living arrangements: they moved into a large Victoria-era mansion near Headley, Hampshire.\nBy early 1971, with Christine McVie becoming an official member of the band, Fleetwood and the group boarded a plane to San Francisco. Spencer, fearful following the recent 1971 San Fernando earthquake, reluctantly boarded the plane. He left the hotel abruptly one afternoon and disappeared. He was found several days later to have joined Family International, then known as Children of God, a religious group. Once more, Fleetwood attempted to mediate; however, Spencer would not return. Bob Welch would become their next member. Their next album, \"Future Games\", was released later that year. \"Bare Trees\" came a year later, in 1972. During the subsequent tours to promote the latter, Fleetwood once more adopted the role of mediator. Kirwan's self-destructive personality and problems with alcohol culminated in a refusal to go on stage before one concert; Fleetwood himself made the decision to fire the band member. Furthermore, there were early signs of strife in the marriage of John and Christine McVie. Fleetwood again stepped in to mediate between the two members, talking Christine out of a decision to leave the group. The band added guitarist Bob Weston and vocalist Dave Walker, formerly of Savoy Brown and the Idle Race. The resulting turmoil, however, negatively affected their next album, \"Penguin\", released in 1973 to poor reviews. Walker was subsequently asked to leave the group, and the next album \"Mystery to Me\" was received more warmly.\nIn October 1973, Fleetwood instructed Weston\u2014who had engaged in an affair with Fleetwood's wife\u2014to leave Fleetwood Mac. Meanwhile, manager Clifford Davis began to lead a separate group of musicians under the name 'Fleetwood Mac', and his increasing legal assault on the original group pushed Fleetwood and his fellow band members to consider managing themselves. Fleetwood took on more managerial responsibility and leadership over the group.\n\"Heroes Are Hard to Find\", \"Fleetwood Mac\", \"Rumours\".\nIn 1974, the band moved to Los Angeles, where they recorded the album \"Heroes Are Hard to Find\". By November 1974, Bob Welch had left the band. Meanwhile, Fleetwood was planning a follow-up album to \"Heroes Are Hard to Find\" \u2013 Welch's last with the group \u2013 which had charted at #34 in the US. Fleetwood was shopping with his children when a chance encounter with an old friend led him to visit Sound City and producer Keith Olsen. While at the studio, Olsen played samples from an album entitled \"Buckingham Nicks\". Fleetwood immediately \"was in awe\". On New Year's Eve, 1974, Fleetwood contacted Olsen to advise him that their planned project was on hiatus after Welch's departure, however, he then suggested that Nicks and Buckingham join Fleetwood Mac. The group ate together with Nicks and Fleetwood at a local restaurant before practising together for the first time in the new studio.\nThe next year, the new line-up released \"Fleetwood Mac\". The album proved to be a breakthrough for the band and became a huge hit, reaching No.1 in the US and selling over five million copies. Fleetwood and Olsen collaborated on a number of drumming innovations. \"It was all about 'plastic puke.' First off, for the kick drum I had Mick use a real skin, not a plastic head. All the bass drum sounds had snap and rack and warmth, but the snare drum on the whole album was a plastic puke.\" The album had reached No. 1 come November 1976, and at this time Fleetwood Mac became self-managing, with Fleetwood himself arguing that an external manager would be less apt at holding together such a group of dynamic personalities. He put forward an idea of promising to reimburse any losses suffered by promoters should they occur, in an attempt to raise the group's profile and earn more contracts and gigs. \"Self-management was the right decision,\" remembered freelance \"Rolling Stone\" writer John Grissim. \"Mick Fleetwood had great leadership skills\u00a0... had a great deal of experience\u2014nine years. They were business-like, they always delivered the product and had the right lawyers and accountants for the job. They didn't need what Van Morrison called 'pressure mongers,'...\u00a0they just needed to get on and make a really good album.\" Ken Caillat, sound engineer on \"Rumours\", concurred that Fleetwood \"had superb intuition and a flair for taking risks\".\nLike many musicians during the 1970s in Los Angeles, Fleetwood Mac began using copious amounts of cocaine. Fleetwood would go on to recollect in his autobiography that \"Until then, Fleetwood Mac hadn't had much experience with this Andean rocket fuel. Now we discovered that a toot now and then relieved the boredom of long hours in the studio with little nourishment.\" The personal relationships between the band members were becoming frayed. After six months of non-stop touring, the McVies divorced in August 1976, ending nearly eight years of marriage. The couple stopped talking to each other socially and discussed only musical matters. Buckingham and Nicks also fought often, a fact that was revealed to fans by \"Rolling Stone\" in April 1976. The duo's arguments stopped only when they worked on songs together. At the same time, Christine McVie and Nicks became closer. Fleetwood, meanwhile, began searching for a new recording location, and landed on the Record Plant of Sausalito, California. Grissim, working for \"Rolling Stone\", frequently met with the group and took a particular liking to Fleetwood, whom he described as \"a real pro.\"\nFleetwood Mac convened at the Record Plant February 1976 with hired engineers Ken Caillat and Richard Dashut. Most band members complained about the studio and wanted to record at their homes, but Fleetwood did not allow any moves. Despite his talent at keeping the group together, the recording of \"Rumours\" was fraught with emotional turmoil due to the collapsing relationships within the line-up. Christine McVie and Nicks decided to live in two condominiums near the city's harbour, while the male contingent stayed at the studio's lodge in the adjacent hills. Chris Stone, one of the Record Plant's owners, recalled that \"The band would come in at 7\u00a0at\u00a0night, have a big feast, party till\u00a01\u00a0or\u00a02 in the morning, and then when they were so whacked-out they couldn't do anything, they'd start recording\". Fleetwood often played his drum kit outside the studio's partition screen to better gauge Caillat's and Dashut's reactions to the music's groove. After the final mastering stage and hearing the songs back-to-back, the band members sensed they had recorded something \"pretty powerful\".\n\"Rumours\" was a huge commercial success and became Fleetwood Mac's second US number one record. It stayed at the top of the \"Billboard\"\u00a0200 for 31\u00a0non-consecutive weeks, while also reaching number one in Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. The album was certified platinum in America and the UK within months of release after one\u00a0million units and 300,000\u00a0units were shipped respectively. The band and co-producers Caillat and Dashut, would go on to win the 1978 Grammy Award for Album of the Year. By March, the album had sold over 10\u00a0million copies worldwide, including over eight\u00a0million in the US alone.\n\"Tusk\", experimentation.\n\"Tusk\", Fleetwood Mac's 12th studio album, was released in 1979. The work represented a more experimental direction taken by Buckingham. Fleetwood, recently diagnosed as having diabetes after suffering recurring bouts of hypoglycaemia during several live shows, was again instrumental in maintaining the band's cohesion. He placated Buckingham over feelings of creative claustrophobia and discomfort playing alongside Nicks. On the issue of Buckingham taking creative control away from the other members of the group for the creation of \"Tusk\", Fleetwood recounts that his three-day discussion with Buckingham culminated in him telling the latter that \"if it's good, then go ahead.\" Though the nature of the album strained relationships again within the band\u2014particularly John McVie, a long-established blues musician who disliked the experimental nature of the album\u2014Fleetwood himself rates the album as his favourite by Fleetwood Mac, and cites the freedom of creative expression allotted to each band member as integral to the survival of the group. The album sold four million copies worldwide, a return noticeably poorer than \"Rumours\". Though Buckingham was blamed by the record labels, Fleetwood linked the album's relative failure to the RKO radio chain playing the album in its entirety prior to release, thus allowing mass home taping.\nLater career.\nFleetwood has also led a number of side projects. 1981's \"The Visitor\", produced by Richard Dashut, featured heavy African stylistics and a rerecording of \"Rattlesnake Shake\" with Peter Green.\nIn 1983, Fleetwood formed Mick Fleetwood's Zoo and recorded \"I'm Not Me\". The album featured a minor hit, \"I Want You Back\", and a cover version of the Beach Boys' \"Angel Come Home\". By 1987, the band consisted of himself, Billy Burnette, Steve Ross, Kenny Gradney, and Bobbye Hall. The band embarked on some live shows before Fleetwood Mac's Shake the Cage Tour commenced.\nA later version of the group featured Bekka Bramlett on vocals and recorded 1991's \"Shaking the Cage\". Fleetwood released \"Something Big\" in 2004 with the Mick Fleetwood Band, and his most recent album is \"Blue Again!\", appearing in October 2008 with the Mick Fleetwood Blues Band touring to support it, interspersed with the \"Unleashed\" tour of Fleetwood Mac.\nFleetwood has played drums on many of his bandmates' solo records, including \"Law and Order\", where he played on the album's biggest hit, \"Trouble\". Other albums include \"French Kiss\", \"Three Hearts\", \"The Wild Heart\", \"Christine McVie\", \"Try Me\", \"Under the Skin\", \"Gift of Screws\", and \"In Your Dreams\". In 2007 he was featured on drums for the song \"God\" along with Jack's Mannequin in the Pop album \"\", a collection of covers of John Lennon songs.\nFleetwood co-authored \"Fleetwood\u2014My Life and Adventures with Fleetwood Mac\" with writer Stephen Davis. The book was published in 1990. In the book, he discussed his experiences with other musicians including Eric Clapton, members of the Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin, as well as the affair with Stevie Nicks and his addiction to cocaine and his personal bankruptcy. Reception was mixed. Robert Waddell of the \"New York Times\" described the piece as \"a blithe, slapdash memoir.\" The \"Los Angeles Times\"'s Steve Hochman noted that \"Fleetwood tells the story as if he was sitting in your living room, which is good for the intimacy of the tale, but bad for the rambling, sometimes redundant telling.\" Hochman did acknowledge that Fleetwood was \"one of rock's more colorful characters.\"\nFleetwood has a secondary career as a TV and film actor, usually in minor parts. His roles in this field have included a leader of the Resistance in \"The Running Man\" (1987), and as a guest alien in the \"\" episode \"Manhunt\" (1989).\nFleetwood co-hosted the 1989 BRIT Awards, which contained numerous gaffes and flubbed lines. In the wake of this public mishap, the BRIT Awards were pre-recorded for the next 18 years; the awards are now again broadcast live to the British public.\nIn 1998, Fleetwood was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Fleetwood Mac.\nAs of March 2021, Fleetwood had been a member of Fleetwood Mac for 53 years and was the only band member who had been in the band for its entire history.\nPlaying style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGod knows, if the drums aren't right, then the song is not survivable.\n\u2014Mick Fleetwood\nFleetwood was a self-taught drummer from his early childhood, after moving from a lacklustre academic performance at school to a love of music encouraged by his family, who bought him his first drum kit. His first years were heavily influenced by Tony Meehan and The Everly Brothers, and during his formative years in London during the late 1960s, Green helped Fleetwood through bouts of \"rhythmic dyslexia\" during live performances when Fleetwood panicked and lost the beat. He often sang filled pauses along to songs to help keep the beat. Green also instilled in Fleetwood an ability to follow and predict the lead guitarist, enabling him to meet the guitar with the drum rhythm as well as allowing him to know a good guitarist when he saw one\u2014which would in part lead him later in his career to select Lindsey Buckingham.\nBob Brunning recalled from his early involvement with Fleetwood Mac that Fleetwood was \"very open to playing with different people as long as he didn't have to change his style. He was, and is, a completely straightforward drummer, and it works with a lot of different styles. I don't s'pose [sic] he's played a traditional drum solo in his life!\" Biographer Carroll highlights this ability as integral to the success of Fleetwood Mac, arguing that Fleetwood was not a virtuoso, but his disciplined and in-distractable manner of play allowed him to hold together a band of strong leading personalities without impinging upon their expression.\nCaillat, in contrast, cites Fleetwood as \"still one of the most amazing drummers I've ever met. He had his rack of tom drums arranged back to front. Most drummers place them from high to low (in pitch) from their left to right, but Mick chose to place his mid, high, low. I think perhaps this helped him develop his unique style. He hit his drums very hard, except for his kick drum. For some reason, when he played his high hat, it distracted him. He would keep perfect beat with his kick, but he played it so softly that we could hear his mouth noises through his kick mic.\"\nPersonal life.\nFleetwood has been married to three women and has four children.\nIn the 1960s, Fleetwood became infatuated with model Jenny Boyd, the younger sister of Pattie Boyd. In June 1970, Fleetwood and Jenny Boyd were married. \nIn 1973, during Fleetwood Mac\u2019s Mystery to Me U.S. tour, Fleetwood discovered that Boyd was having an affair with band member Weston. Fleetwood, after wrestling with the idea of leaving the band, was later critical of his own role in \"neglecting\" his family. Upon cancelling the remaining Mystery to Me tour, Fleetwood travelled to Zambia to convalesce. Christine McVie, who was also suffering marital problems, travelled with him for part of the journey. Fleetwood and Boyd divorced in 1976.\nBoyd and Fleetwood began living together once more in 1976, and temporarily remarried to help their children emigrate from the UK to the US. In November 1977, Fleetwood and Nicks began having an affair. The affair continued sporadically for the next two years until the pair mutually decided to end it. Fleetwood and Boyd's second marriage also ended in divorce. They had two daughters together.\nIn November 1978, Fleetwood moved into a Bel-Air home with Sara Recor, a mutual friend of Fleetwood and Nicks who was at the time married to another music producer. Fleetwood married Recor in 1988; the couple divorced in 1995. Fleetwood married Lynn Frankel in 1995. Fleetwood and Frankel had twin daughters who were born in 2002. The couple divorced in 2015.\nFleetwood was a heavy cocaine user starting in the 1970s, which continued throughout the 1980s during the making of Fleetwood Mac's \"Tango in the Night\" album. Fleetwood quit cocaine cold turkey in the early 1990s with the help of his third wife, Lynn. He became a U.S. citizen on 22 November 2006 in Los Angeles.\nFleetwood has lived in Lahaina, Maui, Hawaii for years. His restaurant and bar called Fleetwood's were lost to the 2023 Hawaii wildfires. He previously owned a restaurant in West Hollywood, California, which closed eight weeks after it opened due to difficulties in securing a liquor license. In 1994, he opened a restaurant/blues club in Alexandria, Virginia.\nEquipment.\nWhen he was 15, Fleetwood's parents bought him a Rogers drum kit, which helped him land his first gig as a drummer. During his tenure in Fleetwood Mac, he primarily used Ludwig Drums for live performances and Sonor Drums in the studio. He specifically sought Ludwig drums for their oversized bass drums and tom-toms. By the Tusk tour, Fleetwood dropped both drum kits from his arsenal in favour of Tama Drums. He attributed his pivot to Tama to Ludwig's supposed deterioration in quality and Sonor's inability to produce a bass drum suitable for Fleetwood's large frame. From the 1990s onwards, Fleetwood has been an endorser of Drum Workshop. His drum kit for the Say You Will Tour was made from wood dredged from the bottom of the Great Lakes. All of his drum shells and hardware are coated in 18 carat gold.\nFleetwood had played Paiste cymbals from the late 60s to early 90s, favouring their expressiveness and higher frequencies over Zildjian cymbals. He stopped using Paiste cymbals by 1994 and subsequently switched over to Zildjian.\nHe also uses Remo drumheads, Easton Ahead 5B Light Rock drumsticks and Latin Percussion. Fleetwood has incorporated many percussion instruments into his drum rig, including a 40 inch Zildjian gong, two rows of wind chimes, and congas.\nDiscography.\nMick Fleetwood's Zoo.\nOther\nSongwriting credits for Fleetwood Mac.\nAlthough not a prolific writer, Fleetwood has co-written or written a few songs on Fleetwood Mac's albums.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWritten sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36670", "revid": "940017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36670", "title": "Soma cube", "text": "Solid-dissection puzzle\nThe Soma cube is a solid dissection puzzle invented by Danish polymath Piet Hein in 1933 during a lecture on quantum mechanics conducted by Werner Heisenberg.\nSeven different pieces made out of unit cubes must be assembled into a 3\u00d73\u00d73 cube. The pieces can also be used to make a variety of other 3D shapes.\nThe pieces of the Soma cube consist of all possible combinations of at most four unit cubes, joined at their faces, such that at least one inside corner is formed. There are no combinations of one or two cubes that satisfy this condition, but one combination of three cubes and six combinations of four cubes that do. Thus, 3 + (6 \u00d7 4) is 27, which is exactly the number of cells in a 3\u00d73\u00d73 cube. Of these seven combinations, two are mirror images of each other (see Chirality).\nThe Soma cube was popularized by Martin Gardner in the September 1958 Mathematical Games column in \"Scientific American.\" The book \"Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays\" also contains a detailed analysis of the Soma cube problem.\nThere are 240 distinct solutions of the Soma cube puzzle, excluding rotations and reflections: these are easily generated by a simple backtracking search computer program similar to that used for the eight queens puzzle. John Horton Conway and Michael Guy first identified all 240 possible solutions by hand in 1961. \nPieces.\nThe seven Soma pieces are six polycubes of order four, and one of order three:\nProduction.\nPiet Hein authorized a finely crafted rosewood version of the Soma cube manufactured by Theodor Skj\u00f8de Knudsen's company Skj\u00f8de Skjern (of Denmark). Beginning in about 1967, it was marketed in the U.S. for several years by the game manufacturer Parker Brothers. Plastic Soma cube sets were also commercially produced by Parker Brothers in several colors (blue, red, and orange) during the 1970s. The package for the Parker Brothers version claimed there were 1,105,920 possible solutions. This figure includes rotations and reflections of each solution as well as rotations of the individual pieces. The puzzle is currently sold as a logic game by Piet Hein Trading and by ThinkFun (formerly Binary Arts) under the name Block by Block.\nSolutions.\nSolving the Soma cube has been used as a task to measure individuals' performance and effort in a series of psychology experiments. In these experiments, test subjects are asked to solve a soma cube as many times as possible within a set period of time. For example, In 1969, Edward Deci, a Carnegie Mellon University graduate assistant at the time, asked his research subjects to solve a soma cube under conditions with varying incentives in his dissertation work on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation establishing the social psychological theory of crowding out.\nIn each of the 240 distinct solutions to the cube puzzle, there is only one place that the \"T\" piece can be placed. Each solved cube can be rotated such that the \"T\" piece is on the bottom with its long edge along the front and the \"tongue\" of the \"T\" in the bottom center cube (this is the normalized position of the large cube). This can be proven as follows: If you consider all the possible ways that the \"T\" piece can be placed in the large cube (without regard to any of the other pieces), it will be seen that it will always fill either two corners of the large cube or zero corners. There is no way to orient the \"T\" piece such that it fills only one corner of the large cube. The \"L\" piece can be oriented such that it fills two corners, or one corner, or zero corners. Each of the other five pieces have no orientation that fills two corners; they can fill either one corner or zero corners. Therefore, if you exclude the \"T\" piece, the maximum number of corners that can be filled by the remaining six pieces is seven (one corner each for five pieces, plus two corners for the \"L\" piece). A cube has eight corners. But the \"T\" piece cannot be oriented to fill just that one remaining corner, and orienting it such that it fills zero corners will obviously not make a cube. Therefore, the \"T\" must always fill two corners, and there is only one orientation (discounting rotations and reflections) in which it does that. It also follows from this that in all solutions, five of the remaining six pieces will fill their maximum number of corners and one piece will fill one fewer than its maximum (this is called the deficient piece).\nFigures.\nIn addition to constructing a cube, the Soma manual provides assorted figures to construct with the seven pieces. The figure on the right shows solutions to some of the figures in the same colour scheme.\nSimilar puzzles.\nAnother puzzle similar to the Soma cube is the 3D pentomino puzzle, which can fill boxes of 2\u00d73\u00d710, 2\u00d75\u00d76 and 3\u00d74\u00d75 units.\nThe Bedlam cube is a 4\u00d74\u00d74 sided cube puzzle consisting of twelve pentacubes and one tetracube. The Diabolical cube is a puzzle of six polycubes that can be assembled together to form a single 3\u00d73\u00d73 cube.\nEye Level also makes use of the Thinking Cube (once students are in levels 30-32 of Basic Thinking Math or levels 29-32 of Critical Thinking Math), as one of its Teaching Tools, similar to the Soma cube.\nRubik's Bricks, a puzzle produced under the Rubik's branding, is a similar puzzle made of 27 cubes, but the pieces are formed by joining cubes either by faces or by edges. There are exactly 9 such ways to join three cubes, so the puzzle can make a 3x3x3 cube. The individual cubes are colored in such a way as to give a unique solution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36673", "revid": "40286053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36673", "title": "Lhotshampa", "text": "Bhutanese people of Nepalese descent\nThe Lhotshampa or Lhotsampa (; ) people are a heterogeneous Bhutanese people of Nepali descent. The Lhotshampa were estimated by the U.S. Department of State to comprise around 35% of Bhutan's population as of 2008. The Lhotshampa are predominantly Hindu and Buddhist, who speak the Nepali language.\nPeople of Nepali origin started to settle in uninhabited areas of southern Bhutan in the 19th century. The term \"Lhotshampa\", which means \"southern borderlanders\" in Dzongkha, began to be used by the Bhutanese state in the second half of the twentieth century to refer to the population of people of Nepali origin in the south of the country. By the 1990s, over 100,000 Lhotshampa had been forcibly displaced and removed from Bhutan.\nAfter being displaced as a result of state violence and ethnic cleansing, and then living in refugee camps in eastern parts of Nepal, starting in 2007 most of the Bhutanese refugees were resettled under international refugee conventions to a number of countries outside the region, such as the United States, Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, and other European countries. As of 2021[ [update]], the number of Lhotshampa who remain in Nepal is significantly lower than that in the United States and other countries where they have resettled.\nHistory.\nEarly immigration.\nThe first small groups of Nepalis emigrated primarily from eastern Nepal under British auspices in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. The beginning of Nepali immigration largely coincided with Bhutan's political development: in 1885, Druk Gyalpo Ugyen Wangchuck consolidated power after a period of civil unrest and cultivated closer ties with the British ruled India. \nIn 1910, the government of Bhutan signed a treaty with the British Raj, granting them control over Bhutan's foreign relations. The actual immigrants registered and settled through the agent from Kalimpong, Raja Ugen Dorji and (son) Raja Sonam Togbay Dorji started in the reigns of the second and third kings. Immigrants from Nepal and British ruled India continued to enter Bhutan with an increase from the 1960s when Bhutan's first modern five-year plan began, many arriving as construction workers.\n1960s-present.\nThe government traditionally attempted to limit immigration and restrict Nepalis' residences and employment to the southern region. Liberalization measures in the 1970s and 1980s encouraged intermarriage and provided increasing opportunities for public service. The government allowed more internal migration by Nepalis seeking better education and business opportunities. \nIn the 1980s and 1990s, the most divisive issue in Bhutan was the accommodation of the Nepali Hindu minority. In 1988, the government census recategorized people with Nepali heritage as illegal immigrants. Local Lhotshampa leaders responded with antigovernmental protests demanding citizenship and damaged government institutions.\nIn 1989, the Bhutanese government enacted reforms that directly impacted the Lhotshampa. First, it elevated the status of the national dress code of the Driglam namzha from recommended to mandatory. All citizens including the Lhotshampa were required to observe the dress code in public during business hours. This decree was resented by the Lhotshampa who complained about being forced to wear the clothing of the Ngalong majority. Second, the government removed Nepali as a language of instruction in schools in favor of Dzongkha, the national language. This alienated the Lhotshampa, many of whom knew no Dzongkha at all.\nExpulsion.\nSince the late 1980s, over 100,000 Lhotshampa have been forced out of Bhutan, accused by the government of being illegal aliens. Between 1988 and 1993, thousands of others left, alleging ethnic and political repression. \nIn a 1992 interview with the \"Calcutta Statesman,\" Bhutanese foreign minister Dawa Tsering stated that an increase in the country's Nepali population would lead the country to become \"another Sikkim and Darjeeling\". \nIn 1990, violent ethnic unrest and anti-government protests in southern Bhutan pressed for greater democracy and respect for minority rights. That year, the Bhutan Peoples' Party, whose members are mostly Lhotshampa, began a campaign of violence against the Bhutanese government. In the wake of this unrest, thousands fled Bhutan. Bill Frelick of Human Rights Watch reported that state security forces forcibly removed ethnic Lhotshampa from their homes and coerced them into renouncing their citizenship. A refugee accounted that:\"The army took all the people from their houses... As we left Bhutan, we were forced to sign the document. They snapped our photos. The man told me to smile, to show my teeth. He wanted to show that I was leaving my country willingly, happily, that I was not forced to leave\"Many of them have either entered Nepal's seven refugee camps (on 20 January 2010, 85,544 refugees resided in the camps) or are working in India. According to U.S. State Department estimates in 2008, about 35% of the population of Bhutan is Lhotshampa.\nCulture.\nTraditionally, the Lhotshampa have been involved mostly in sedentary agriculture, although some have cleared forest cover and conducted \"tsheri\" and slash and burn agriculture. The Lhotshampa are generally classified as Hindus. However, this is an oversimplification as many groups that include Tamang and the Gurung are largely Buddhist; the Kiranti groups that include the Rai and Limbu are largely animist followers of Mundhum (these latter groups are mainly found in eastern Bhutan). Whether they are Hindu or Tibetan Buddhist, most of them abstain from beef, notably those belonging to the orthodox classes who are vegetarians. Their main festivals include Dashain and Tihar.\nLanguage.\n Dagana, Samdrubjongkhar\nLhotshampas speak Nepali as their first language. Samchi, Chirang and Sarpang are southern dzongkhags that have a large Lhotshampa community where most people speak Nepali. In southern Bhutan, Nepali used to be taught in the school and was spoken and written in these areas. However, this changed during the 1980s when there was racial conflict between Nepali in Bhutan and Bhutanese. Since then, Nepali is only taught in the home and has become a spoken language in Bhutan. Thus, some Nepali speakers from southern Bhutan cannot read or write in Nepali. Currently, Nepali is the first language for most southern Bhutanese and most people use it in their home. Also, Nepali is most commonly used in school outside of the classes.\nNepali in Bhutan is different in the rural areas and Thimphu. Also, some Nepali words are used differently in Bhutan than Nepali in Nepal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36674", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36674", "title": "Glycerius", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 473 to 474\nGlycerius (died after 474) was Roman emperor of the West from 473 to 474. He served as (commander of the palace guard) during the reign of Olybrius (r.472), until Olybrius died in November 472. After a four-month interregnum, Glycerius was proclaimed as emperor in March 473 by Gundobad, the (master of soldiers) and power behind the throne. Very few of the events of his reign are known other than that an attempted invasion of Italy by the Visigoths was repelled by local commanders, diverting them to Gaul. Glycerius also prevented an invasion by the Ostrogoths through diplomacy, including a gift of 2,000 .\nGlycerius was not recognized by the Eastern Roman emperor Leo I (r.\u2009457\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474), who instead nominated Julius Nepos (r.\u2009474\u00a0\u2013\u00a0475/480) as Western Emperor and sent him with an army to invade the Western Empire. Glycerius was without allies because Gundobad had abandoned him, and therefore was forced to abdicate on 24 June 474, and was succeeded by Nepos. He was appointed Bishop of Salona, which position he held until his death. He died, possibly in 480, and a nearly contemporaneous source blames him for the assassination of Nepos, but the records for this event are muddled.\nLife.\nBackground.\nThe historian Penny MacGeorge states the summary that \"almost nothing is known of Glycerius\". Glycerius was born probably in Dalmatia. His family is unknown, and may not have been aristocratic. He rose to the office of (commander of the palace guard), and likely served as such during the reign of Western Roman Emperor Olybrius (r.472). The Germanic (master of soldiers) Ricimer had deposed the Western Roman Emperor Majorian (r.\u2009457\u00a0\u2013\u00a0461) in 461, and thereafter installed a series of Western Roman emperors as puppets: Libius Severus (r.\u2009461\u00a0\u2013\u00a0465), Anthemius (r.\u2009467\u00a0\u2013\u00a0472), and Olybrius, enthroned in July 472, after Ricimer overthrew Anthemius. Ricimer died on 18 August 472, forty days after deposing Anthemius, and was succeeded as and kingmaker by his Burgundian nephew Gundobad. Olybrius died shortly thereafter, on 2 November 472, and an interregnum ensued for nearly four months, before Gundobad convinced Glycerius to assume the throne, and proclaimed him as emperor at Ravenna: the , a record of consular years, states that it was on 5 March 473, however, the , also a consular record, asserts it was on the 3rd.\nReign.\nFew events of Glycerius' reign are known. Glycerius is known from a few fragmented references in what historian Ralph Mathisen calls \"jejune chronicles\", such as the \"Annales\" of Marcellinus Comes, the \"Gallic Chronicle of 511\", and the \"Chronicle of Saragossa\", as well as some small references provided by the 6th-century writer Jordanes and the bishop Ennodius. Under Glycerius, invasions by both the Visigoths and the Ostrogoths were repelled, through a mixture of diplomatic and military activities. The Visigoths and Ostrogoths were Germanic groups that were settled in Gallia Aquitania, and Pannonia Prima and Valeria, respectively, as . In 473, the Visigothic king Euric (r.\u2009466\u00a0\u2013\u00a0484) ordered an invasion of Italy, but for reasons we don't know Euric chose instead to invade Gaul, occupying both Arles and Marseille. The Ostrogothic king Videmir (r.\u2009469\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474) proposed to invade Italy, but Glycerius was able to dissuade Videmir through the gift of 2,000 (high-value gold coins), and diverted them from Italy to Gaul, where surrounding groups, described by Jordanes as \"various peoples\", later attacked them. Mathisen comments that these actions to defend the empire may be the reason that Glycerius receives a generally favorable reception in Roman and Byzantine sources. The 9th-century historian Theophanes describes him only as a \"not despicable man\", but Ennodius, the bishop of Pavia, describes him more thoroughly in his :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After Olybrius, Glycerius ascended to the rule. With regard to whom I summarize, in my desire for brevity, the numerous things he did for the well being of many people. For, when the blessed man [Bishop Epiphanius of Pavia] interceded, he pardoned the injury done to his mother by some men under his authority.\nMathisten states that the aforementioned injuries to Glycerius' mother may have been in reaction to his bribery of Videmir, but remarks that \"such measures were a regular part of imperial policy\", and speculates that the attackers may have been soldiers, explaining their lack of punishment. Glycerius seems to have primarily reigned in northern Italy, as all the coins found from his reign but one were minted in either Ravenna or Milan. The only law enacted by Glycerius which has survived was dated 11 March 473, and issued to Himilco, the Praetorian prefect of Italy, and later reissued to the Praetorian prefects of Illyricum, the East, and Gaul, regarding simony (the selling of church offices). It was adopted not just by the prefects of Italy and Gaul, who were a part of the Western Roman Empire, but also by the prefects of Illyricum and the East, despite the fact that he did not have the authority to issue laws to them. The law was designed to grant Glycerius the support of the clergy, but would likely also have appealed to the senatorial class, who were concerned about increasingly violent elections, as well as the use of church funds by clergy for personal reasons. This law was also the last known one issued by a Western Roman emperor.\nIt is possible that Glycerius attempted reconciliation with the Eastern Roman Empire, evidenced by the fact that Glycerius did not nominate a consul for 474, and instead accepted the eastern consul, the infant Emperor Leo II (r.\u2009473\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474). Despite this, the Eastern Roman Emperor, Leo I (r.\u2009457\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474), refused to recognize Glycerius as emperor because he was merely a puppet of Gundobad. Emperor Leo instead chose to recognize one of his own men, Julius Nepos (r.\u2009474\u00a0\u2013\u00a0475/480), and sent him with a fleet to invade the Western Empire. The 7th-century historian John of Antioch states that Leo made the decision to remove Glycerius after hearing that he had assumed the throne of the Western Roman Empire, but Mathisen comments that Leo must have hesitated for some time, as the actual invasion was delayed by the onset of winter, and Julius Nepos was forced to wait until the beginning of spring to launch his invasion.\nGlycerius was without allies, as Gundobad seemingly abandoned him, leaving him with no option but to surrender. After Nepos landed at Ostia in June 474, Glycerius abdicated on 24 June 474, in Ravenna, and Nepos assumed the throne. The historian John Michael O'Flynn states that the \"circumstances surrounding this speedy overthrow are obscure and, at first sight, puzzling\", noting that while the forces of Nepos were likely small, Gundobad made no moves to counter them, but rather \"disappeared entirely from the Italian scene.\" He speculates that, while Gundobad could have put up stiff resistance, rather than attempting to oppose the imperial legitimacy of Leo, he accepted Leo's authority to reject Glycerius as an imperial colleague and to install one of his own choosing. Additionally, Glycerius seems to never have attracted the favor of the Roman Senate or the Gallo-Roman aristocracy, which would make the decision to back him, and therefore alienate both, far less palatable for Gundobad. Notably, as king of Burgundy, Gundobad (r.\u2009473/474\u00a0\u2013\u00a0516) enjoyed warm relations with the Eastern Roman Empire, which he served as a (treaty subject). Mathisen suggests the alternatives that Gundobad was attempting to raise further troops in Gaul, or that he left to ensure he received his inheritance after the death of his father, King Gondioc (r.\u2009437\u00a0\u2013\u00a0473).\nLater life.\nAfter being deposed, Glycerius was promptly ordained as Bishop of Salona. According to the 5th-century Byzantine historian Malchus, Glycerius had some part in organizing the assassination of Julius Nepos in 480, after Nepos had been forced to flee Italy and was ruling in exile in Dalmatia, although the historical records for the assassination are muddled. Glycerius died sometime after 474, possibly in 480. He has sometimes been identified with a Glycerius who was Archbishop of Milan by King Odoacer (r.\u2009476\u00a0\u2013\u00a0493), but this is likely incorrect. The source for the promotion of Glycerius to archbishop is an obscure line written by Ennodius, in which he praises an archbishop named Glycerius, among other archbishops of Milan, however, this section seems to have been either corrupted or added later, to identify the archbishop Glycerius with the emperor Glycerius.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36676", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36676", "title": "VW", "text": ""}
{"id": "36679", "revid": "1319848424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36679", "title": "Milan Kundera", "text": "Czech and French novelist (1929\u20132023)\nMilan Kundera ( ; ; 1 April 1929 \u2013 11 July 2023) was a Czech and French novelist. Kundera went into exile in France in 1975, acquiring citizenship in 1981. His Czechoslovak citizenship was revoked in 1979, but he was granted Czech citizenship in 2019.\nKundera's best-known work is \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\". Before the Velvet Revolution of 1989, the country's ruling Communist Party of Czechoslovakia banned his books. He led a low-profile life and rarely spoke to the media. He was thought to be a contender for the Nobel Prize in Literature and was also a nominee for other awards.\nKundera was awarded the Jerusalem Prize in 1985, the Austrian State Prize for European Literature in 1987, and the Herder Prize in 2000. In 2021, he received the Golden Order of Merit from the president of Slovenia, Borut Pahor.\nEarly life and education.\nMilan Kundera was born on 1 April 1929 at Purky\u0148ova 6 (6 Purkyn\u011b Street) in Kr\u00e1lovo Pole, a district of Brno, Czechoslovakia (present-day Czech Republic), to a middle-class family. His father, Ludv\u00edk Kundera (1891\u20131971), was an important Czech musicologist and pianist who served as the head of the Jan\u00e1\u010dek Music Academy in Brno from 1948 to 1961. His mother Milada Kunderov\u00e1 (born Jano\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1) was an educator. His father died in 1971, and his mother in 1975.\nKundera learned to play the piano from his father and later studied musicology and musical composition. Musicological influences, references and notation can be found throughout his work. Kundera was a cousin of Czech writer and translator Ludv\u00edk Kundera. In his youth, having been supported by his father in his musical education, he was testing his abilities as a composer. One of his teachers at the time was Pavel Haas. His approach to music was eventually dampened due to his father not being able to launch a piano career for insisting on playing the music of modernist Jewish composer Arnold Schoenberg.\nAt the age of eighteen, he joined the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in 1947. In 1984, he recalled that \"Communism captivated me as much as Stravinsky, Picasso and Surrealism.\"\nHe attended lectures on music and composition at the Charles University in Prague but soon moved to the Film and TV School of the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague (FAMU) to study film. In 1950, he was expelled from the party. After graduating, the Film Faculty appointed Kundera a lecturer in world literature in 1952. Following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, he lost his job at the Film Faculty.\nIn 1956, Kundera also married for the first time, the operetta singer Olga Haas, the daughter of the composer and his teacher Pavel Haas and the doctor of Russian origin Sonia Jakobson, the first wife of Roman Jakobson.\nPolitical activism and professional career.\nHis expulsion from the Communist party was described by Jan Trefulka in his novella \"Pr\u0161elo jim \u0161t\u011bst\u00ed\" (\"Luck Rained on Them\", 1962). Kundera also used the expulsion as an inspiration for the main theme of his novel \"\u017dert\" (\"The Joke\", 1967), in which he ridiculed the ruling Communist party. In 1956 Kundera was readmitted to the party but was expelled for a second time in 1970. He took part in the Fourth Congress of the Czech Writers union in June 1967, where he delivered an impressive speech. In the speech he focused on the Czech effort to maintain a certain cultural independence among its larger European neighbours. Along with other reformist Communist writers such as Pavel Kohout, he was peripherally involved in the 1968 Prague Spring. This brief period of reformist activities was crushed by the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. Kundera remained committed to reforming Czechoslovak Communism, and argued vehemently in print with fellow Czech writer V\u00e1clav Havel, saying, essentially, that everyone should remain calm and that \"nobody is being locked up for his opinions yet,\" and \"the significance of the Prague Autumn may ultimately be greater than that of the Prague Spring.\" In 1968, the year his books were banned by the Czech Government, he made his first journey to Paris, where he befriended the publisher Claude Gallimard. After he returned to Prague, he was frequently visited by Gallimard who encouraged Kundera to emigrate to France and also smuggled the manuscript for \"Life Is Elsewhere\" out of Czechoslovakia. Finally, Kundera gave in and moved to France in 1975. In 1979, his Czechoslovak citizenship was revoked. He lectured for a few years at the University of Rennes. After three years, he moved to Paris.\nWorks.\nAlthough his early poetic works are staunchly pro-communist, his novels escape ideological classification. Kundera repeatedly insisted that he was a novelist rather than a politically motivated writer. Political commentary all but disappeared from his novels after the publication of \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\" except in relation to broader philosophical themes. Kundera's style of fiction, interlaced with philosophical digression, was greatly inspired by the novels of Robert Musil and the philosophy of Nietzsche. In 1945 the journal \"Gong\" published his translation of some of the works from the Russian poet Vladimir Majakovsky. The next year the journal \"Mlad\u00e9 archy\" printed a poem of his, to which he was inspired by his cousin Ludv\u00edk Kundera, also a writer.\nIn the mid-1950s he was readmitted to the Communist party and he was able to publish \"Man\u02d0 A Wide Garden\" in 1953, a long epic poem in 1955 called \"The Last May\" dedicated to Julius Fucik and the collection of lyrical poetry \"Monologue\" in 1957. Those, together with other fore and afterwords are deemed to be written in the fashion of uncontroversial propaganda which allowed him to benefit to a certain degree from the advantages that came with being an established writer in a Communist environment. In 1962 he wrote the play \"The Owners of the Keys,\" which became an international success and was translated into several languages. Kundera himself claimed inspiration from Renaissance authors such as Giovanni Boccaccio, Rabelais and, perhaps most importantly, Miguel de Cervantes, to whose legacy he considered himself most committed. Other influences include Laurence Sterne, Henry Fielding, Denis Diderot, Robert Musil, Witold Gombrowicz, Hermann Broch, Franz Kafka, Martin Heidegger and Georges Bataille. Originally he wrote in the Czech language, but from 1985 onwards, he made a conscious transition from Czech towards the French which has since become the reference language for his translations. Between 1985 and 1987, he undertook the revision of the French translations of his earlier works himself. With \"Slowness\" his first work in French was published in 1995. His works were translated into more than eighty languages.\n\"The Joke\".\nIn his first novel, \"The Joke\" (1967), he satirized the totalitarianism of the Communist era. Following the Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia in August 1968, the book was banned. His criticism of the Soviet invasion in 1968 led to his blacklisting in Czechoslovakia and the banning of his books.\n\"Life Is Elsewhere\".\nKundera's second novel was first published in French as \"La vie est ailleurs\" in 1973 and in Czech as in 1979. \"Life Is Elsewhere\" is a satirical portrait of the fictional poet Jaromil, a young and very na\u00efve idealist who becomes involved in political scandals. For the novel Kundera was awarded the Prix M\u00e9dicis the same year.\n\"The Book of Laughter and Forgetting\".\nIn 1975, Kundera moved to France where \"The Book of Laughter and Forgetting\" was published in 1979. An unusual mixture of novel, short story collection, and authorial musings which came to characterize his works in exile, the book dealt with how Czechs opposed the Communist regime in various ways. Critics noted that the Czechoslovakia Kundera portrays \"is, thanks to the latest political redefinitions, no longer precisely there,\" which is the \"kind of disappearance and reappearance\" Kundera ironically explores in the book.\n\"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\".\nKundera's most famous work, \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\", was published in 1984. The book chronicles the fragile nature of an individual's fate, theorizing that a single lifetime is insignificant in the scope of Nietzsche's concept of eternal return. In an infinite universe, everything is guaranteed to recur infinitely. In 1988, American director Philip Kaufman released a film adaptation, which Kundera disliked. The book focuses on the life of a Czech dissident surgeon's journey from Prague to Zurich and his return to Prague, where he was not permitted to take up work as a surgeon. He worked instead as a window washer and used his job to arrange sex with hundreds of women. At the end he and his wife move to the country. The book was not published in Czechoslovakia due to Kundera's fear it would be badly edited. He eventually delayed the publishing date for years and only in 2006 would an official translation be available in the Czech language. The book had already been available in Czech, having been translated in 1985 by a Czech expatriate in Canada.\n\"Ignorance\".\nIn 2000, \"Ignorance\" was published. The novel centres on the romance of two alienated Czech \u00e9migr\u00e9s, two decades after the Prague Spring of 1968. It is thematically concerned with the suffering of emigration. In it, Kundera undermines the myths surrounding nostalgia and the \u00e9migr\u00e9's longing for return. He concludes that in the \"etymological light nostalgia seems something like the pain of ignorance, of not knowing.\" Kundera suggests a complex relationship between memory and nostalgia, writing that our memory can \"create rifts both with our earlier selves and between people who ostensibly share a past.\" The main characters of Irena and Josef discover how emigration and forgetfulness have ultimately freed them from their pain. Kundera draws heavily from the myth of Odysseus, specifically the \"mythology of home, the delusions of roots.\" Linda Asher translated the original French version of the novel to English in 2002.\n\"The Festival of Insignificance\".\nThe 2014 novel focuses on the musings of four male friends living in Paris who discuss their relationships with women and the existential predicament confronting individuals in the world, among other things. The novel received generally negative reviews. Michiko Kakutani of the \"New York Times\" describes the book as being a \"knowing, pre-emptive joke about its own superficiality\". A review in the \"Economist\" stated that the book was \"sadly let down by a tone of breezy satire that can feel forced\".\nWriting style and philosophy.\nFran\u00e7ois Ricard suggested that Kundera conceived his fiction with regard to the overall body of his work, rather than limiting his ideas to the scope of just one novel at a time, his themes and meta-themes traversing his entire \u0153uvre. Each new book manifests the latest stage of his personal philosophy. Some of these meta-themes include exile, identity, life beyond the border (beyond love, beyond art, beyond seriousness), history as a continual return, and the pleasure of a less \"important\" life.\nMany of Kundera's characters seem to develop as expositions of one of these themes at the expense of their full humanity. Specifics in regard to the characters tend to be rather vague. Often, more than one main character is used in a novel; Kundera may have even completely discontinued a character, resuming the plot with somebody new. As he told Philip Roth in an interview in \"The Village Voice\": \"Intimate life [is] understood as one's personal secret, as something valuable, inviolable, the basis of one's originality\".\nKundera's early novels explore the dual tragic and comic aspects of totalitarianism. He did not view his works, however, as political commentary. \"The condemnation of totalitarianism doesn't deserve a novel\", he said. According to the Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes, \"What he finds interesting is the similarity between totalitarianism and the immemorial and fascinating dream of a harmonious society where private life and public life form but one unity and all are united around one will and one faith\". In exploring the dark humour of this topic, Kundera seems deeply influenced by Franz Kafka.\nKundera considered himself a writer without a message. In \"Sixty-three Words,\" a chapter in \"The Art of the Novel\", Kundera tells of a Scandinavian publisher who hesitated to publish \"The Farewell Party\" because of its apparent anti-abortion message. Not only was the publisher wrong about the existence of such a message, Kundera explained, but, \"I was delighted with the misunderstanding. I had succeeded as a novelist. I succeeded in maintaining the moral ambiguity of the situation. I had kept faith with the essence of the novel as an art: irony. And irony doesn't give a damn about messages!\".\nKundera also ventured often into musical matters, analyzing Czech folk music for example; or quoting from Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek and Bart\u00f3k; or placing musical excerpts into the text, as in \"The Joke\"; or discussing Schoenberg and atonality.\nMiroslav Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek controversy.\nOn 13 October 2008, the Czech weekly \"Respekt\" reported that an investigation was being carried out by the state-funded historical archive and research Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes, into whether a young Kundera had denounced a returned defector, Miroslav Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek, to the StB, or Czechoslovak secret police, in 1950. The accusation was based on a police station report which named \"Milan Kundera, student, born 1.4.1929\" as the informant in regard to Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek's presence at a student dormitory. But the report did not include his ID card number, which was usually included, nor his signature. According to the police report, the ultimate source of the information about Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek's previous desertion from military service and defection to the West was Iva Militk\u00e1.\nDvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek had allegedly fled Czechoslovakia after being ordered to join the infantry in the wake of a purge of the flight academy, and returned to Czechoslovakia as an agent of an anti-communist espionage agency organised by Czechoslovak exiles, an allegation which was not mentioned in the police report. Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek returned secretly to the student dormitory of a friend's ex-girlfriend, Iva Militk\u00e1. Militk\u00e1 was dating and later married a fellow student, Ivan Dlask, who knew Kundera. The police report alleges that Militk\u00e1 told Dlask of Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek's presence, and that Dlask told Kundera, who told the secret police. Although the prosecutor sought the death penalty, Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek was sentenced to 22 years of hard labour, fined 10,000 crowns, stripped of personal property, and deprived of his civic rights for ten years. Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek served 14 years in a labor camp, some of it working in a uranium mine, before he was released.\nIn his response to \"Respekt\"'s announcement, Kundera denied turning Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek into the StB, stating he never knew him at all, and could not even remember an individual named \"Militk\u00e1\". On 14 October 2008, the Czech Security Forces Archive announced that they had ruled out the possibility that the document could be a forgery, but refused to arrive at any other definite conclusions. Vojtech Ripka of the Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes said, \"There are two pieces of circumstantial evidence [the police report and its sub-file], but we, of course, cannot be one hundred percent sure. Unless we find all survivors, which is unfortunately impossible, it will not be complete.\" Ripka added that the signature on the police report matches the name of a man who worked in the corresponding National Security Corps section and that a police protocol is missing.\nMany in the Czech Republic condemned Kundera as a \"police informer\", while many others accused \"Respekt\" of committing journalistic misconduct by publishing such a poorly researched piece. On the other hand, presenting an ID card was a procedure whenever dealing with the StB in 1950. Kundera was the student representative of the dorm Dvo\u0159\u00e1\u010dek had visited, and while it cannot be ruled out that another student could have denounced him to the StB using Kundera's name, impersonating someone else in a Stalinist police state posed a significant risk. Contradictory statements by Kundera's fellow students appeared in the Czech news media in the wake of this scandal. Historian Adam Hrad\u00edlek, the co-author of the \"Respekt\" article, was also accused of an undeclared conflict of interest since one of the individuals involved in the incident was his aunt. Nonetheless, \"Respekt\" states on its website that its task is to \"impartially study the crimes of the former communist regime\". With time, the Western journalists realized the whole controversy was flawed, with French newspapers defending Kundera. The literary scholar Karen de Kunes investigated the reports and came to the conclusion that even if Kundera had issued the report, all he reported was the existence of a suitcase in the hallway.\nOn 3 November 2008, eleven internationally recognized writers came to Kundera's defence, including four Nobel laureates, Orhan Pamuk, Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez, Nadine Gordimer and J. M. Coetzee, as well as Carlos Fuentes, Juan Goytisolo, Philip Roth, Salman Rushdie, and Jorge Sempr\u00fan.\nAwards and honours.\nIn 1973, \"Life Is Elsewhere\" received the French Prix M\u00e9dicis. In 1979 Kundera was awarded the Mondello Prize for The Farewell Party. In 1985, Kundera received the Jerusalem Prize. His acceptance address appears among the essays collected in \"The Art of the Novel\". He won The Austrian State Prize for European Literature in 1987. In 2000, he was awarded the international Herder Prize. In 2007, he was awarded the Czech State Literature Prize. In 2009, he was awarded the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca. In 2010, he was made an honorary citizen of his hometown, Brno. When he died the Greek Newspaper \"Efimerida ton Syntakton\" (\"Journal of the editors\") published a special section where all the current affairs on each page were described with a book title of Kundera's.\nIn 2011, he received the Ovid Prize. The asteroid 7390 Kundera, discovered at the Kle\u0165 Observatory in 1983, is named in his honour. In 2020, he was awarded the Franz Kafka Prize, a Czech literary award.\nPersonal life.\nStripped of Czechoslovak citizenship in 1979, Kundera became a French citizen in 1981. He maintained contact with Czech and Slovak friends in his homeland, but rarely returned and never with any fanfare. He was granted Czech citizenship in 2019. He saw himself as a French writer and insisted his work should be studied as French literature and classified as such in bookstores.\nKundera was married twice. His first wife was the singer Olga Haasov\u00e1-Smr\u010dkov\u00e1 (1937\u20132022), daughter of composer Pavel Haas, whom he married in 1956. His second marriage was to V\u011bra Hrab\u00e1nkov\u00e1 (1935\u20132024), whom he married in 1967. Vera reportedly was his secretary, translator of his works and the gatekeeper between Kundera and the outside world.\nKundera died after a prolonged illness, in Paris on 11 July 2023, at the age of 94. He was cremated in Paris on 19 July 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nBiographical\nBook reviews; interviews\nOpen letters\nArchives"}
{"id": "36680", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36680", "title": "Combinatorial chemistry", "text": "Compound library-based chemical synthesis method\nCombinatorial chemistry comprises chemical synthetic methods that make it possible to prepare a large number (tens to thousands or even millions) of compounds in a single process. These compound libraries can be made as mixtures, sets of individual compounds or chemical structures generated by computer software. Combinatorial chemistry can be used for the synthesis of small molecules and for peptides.\nStrategies that allow identification of useful components of the libraries are also part of combinatorial chemistry. The methods used in combinatorial chemistry are applied outside chemistry, too.\nIntroduction.\nThe basic principle of combinatorial chemistry is to prepare libraries of a very large number of compounds and identify those which are useful as potential drugs or agrochemicals. This relies on high-throughput screening which is capable of assessing the output at sufficient scale.\nAlthough combinatorial chemistry has only really been taken up by industry since the 1990s, its roots can be seen as far back as the 1960s when a researcher at Rockefeller University, Bruce Merrifield, started investigating the solid-phase synthesis of peptides. Synthesis of peptides in a combinatorial fashion quickly leads to large numbers of molecules. Using the twenty natural amino acids, for example, in a tripeptide creates 8,000 (203) possibilities. Solid-phase methods for small molecules were later introduced and Furka devised a \"split and mix\" approach\nIn its modern form, combinatorial chemistry has probably had its biggest impact in the pharmaceutical industry. Researchers attempting to optimize the activity profile of a compound create a 'library' of many different but related compounds. Advances in robotics have led to an industrial approach to combinatorial synthesis, enabling companies to routinely produce over 100,000 new and unique compounds per year.\nIn order to handle the vast number of structural possibilities, researchers often create a 'virtual library', a computational enumeration of all possible structures of a given pharmacophore with all available reactants. Such a library can consist of thousands to millions of 'virtual' compounds. The researcher will select a subset of the 'virtual library' for actual synthesis, based upon various calculations and criteria (see ADME, computational chemistry, and QSAR). \nIn 1996, at Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research, scientist Anthony Czarnik directed research and reported the first use of automation in synthesizing compound libraries. As the founding editor of the American Chemical Society's Journal of Combinatorial Chemistry, he also led research into RFID tags for targeted sorting in compound library synthesis.\nPolymers (peptides and oligonucleotides).\nCombinatorial split-mix (split and pool) synthesis.\nCombinatorial split-mix (split and pool) synthesis is based on the solid-phase synthesis developed by Merrifield. If a combinatorial peptide library is synthesized using 20 amino acids (or other kinds of building blocks) the bead form solid support is divided into 20 equal portions. This is followed by coupling a different amino acid to each portion. The third step is the mixing of all portions. These three steps comprise a cycle. Elongation of the peptide chains can be realized by simply repeating the steps of the cycle.\nThe procedure is illustrated by the synthesis of a dipeptide library using the same three amino acids as building blocks in both cycles. Each component of this library contains two amino acids arranged in different orders. The amino acids used in couplings are represented by yellow, blue and red circles in the figure. Divergent arrows show dividing solid support resin (green circles) into equal portions, vertical arrows mean coupling and convergent arrows represent mixing and homogenizing the portions of the support.\nThe figure shows that in the two synthetic cycles 9 dipeptides are formed. In the third and fourth cycles, 27 tripeptides and 81 tetrapeptides would form, respectively.\nThe \"split-mix synthesis\" has several outstanding features:\nIn 1990 three groups described methods for preparing peptide libraries by biological methods and one year later Fodor et al. published a remarkable method for synthesis of peptide arrays on small glass slides.\nA \"parallel synthesis\" method was developed by Mario Geysen and his colleagues for preparation of peptide arrays. They synthesized 96 peptides on plastic rods (pins) coated at their ends with the solid support. The pins were immersed into the solution of reagents placed in the wells of a microtiter plate. The method is widely applied particularly by using automatic parallel synthesizers. Although the parallel method is much slower than the real combinatorial one, its advantage is that it is exactly known which peptide or other compound forms on each pin.\nFurther procedures were developed to combine the advantages of both split-mix and parallel synthesis. In the method described by two groups the solid support was enclosed into permeable plastic capsules together with a radiofrequency tag that carried the code of the compound to be formed in the capsule. The procedure was carried out similar to the split-mix method. In the split step, however, the capsules were distributed among the reaction vessels according to the codes read from the radiofrequency tags of the capsules.\nA different method for the same purpose was developed by Furka et al. is named \"string synthesis\". In this method, the capsules carried no code. They are strung like the pearls in a necklace and placed into the reaction vessels in stringed form. The identity of the capsules, as well as their contents, are stored by their position occupied on the strings. After each coupling step, the capsules are redistributed among new strings according to definite rules.\nSmall molecules.\nIn the drug discovery process, the synthesis and biological evaluation of small molecules of interest have typically been a long and laborious process. Combinatorial chemistry has emerged in recent decades as an approach to quickly and efficiently synthesize large numbers of potential\nsmall molecule drug candidates. In a typical synthesis, only a single target molecule is produced at the end of a synthetic scheme, with each step in a synthesis producing only a single product. In a combinatorial synthesis, when using only single starting material, it is possible to synthesize a large library of molecules using identical reaction conditions that can then be screened for their biological activity. This pool of products is then split into three equal portions containing each of the three products, and then each of the three individual pools is then reacted with another unit of reagent B, C, or D, producing 9 unique compounds from the previous 3. This process is then repeated until the desired number of building blocks is added, generating many compounds. When synthesizing a library of compounds by a multi-step synthesis, efficient reaction methods must be employed, and if traditional purification methods are used after each reaction step, yields and efficiency will suffer.\nSolid-phase synthesis offers potential solutions to obviate the need for typical quenching and purification steps often used in synthetic chemistry. In general, a starting molecule is adhered to a solid support (typically an insoluble polymer), then additional reactions are performed, and the final product is purified and then cleaved from the solid support. Since the molecules of interest are attached to a solid support, it is possible to reduce the purification after each reaction to a single filtration/wash step, eliminating the need for tedious liquid-liquid extraction and solvent evaporation steps that most synthetic chemistry involves. Furthermore, by using heterogeneous reactants, excess reagents can be used to drive sluggish reactions to completion, which can further improve yields. Excess reagents can simply be washed away without the need for additional purification steps such as chromatography.\nOver the years, a variety of methods have been developed to refine the use of solid-phase organic synthesis in combinatorial chemistry, including efforts to increase the ease of synthesis and purification, as well as non-traditional methods to characterize intermediate products. Although\nthe majority of the examples described here will employ heterogeneous reaction media in every reaction step, Booth and Hodges provide an early example of using solid-supported reagents only during the purification step of traditional solution-phase syntheses. In their view,\nsolution-phase chemistry offers the advantages of avoiding attachment and cleavage reactions necessary to anchor and remove molecules to resins as well as eliminating the need to recreate solid-phase analogues of established solution-phase reactions.\nThe single purification step at the end of a synthesis allows one or more impurities to be removed, assuming the chemical structure of the offending impurity is known. While the use of solid-supported reagents greatly simplifies the synthesis of compounds, many combinatorial syntheses require multiple steps, each of which still requires some form of purification. Armstrong, et al. describe a one-pot method for generating combinatorial libraries, called multiple-component condensations (MCCs). In this scheme, three or more reagents react such that each reagent is incorporated into the final product in a single step, eliminating the need for a multi-step synthesis that involves many purification steps. In MCCs, there is no deconvolution required to determine which compounds are biologically active because each synthesis in an array has only a single product, thus the identity of the compound should be unequivocally known.\nIn another array synthesis, Still generated a large library of oligopeptides by split synthesis. The drawback to making many thousands of compounds is that it is difficult to determine the structure of the formed compounds. Their solution is to use molecular tags, where a tiny amount (1 pmol/bead) of a dye is attached to the beads, and the identity of a certain bead can be determined by analyzing which tags are present on the bead. Despite how easy attaching tags makes identification of receptors, it would be quite impossible to individually screen each compound for its receptor binding ability, so a dye was attached to each receptor, such that only those receptors that bind to their substrate produce a color change.\nWhen many reactions need to be run in an array (such as the 96 reactions described in one of Armstrong's MCC arrays), some of the more tedious aspects of synthesis can be automated to improve efficiency. This work, the \"DIVERSOMER method\" was pioneered at Parke-Davis in the early 1990s to run up to 40 chemical reactions in parallel. These efforts led to the first commercially available equipment for combinatorial chemistry (Diversomer synthesizer which was sold by Chemglass) and the first use of liquid handling robotics within a chemistry labortory. This method uses a device that automates the resin loading and wash cycles, as well as the reaction cycle monitoring and purification, and demonstrates the feasibility of their method and apparatus by using it to synthesize a variety of molecule classes, such as hydantoins and benzodiazepines, running 8 or 40 individual reactions in parallel. This and several other pioneering efforts in combinatorial chemistry were featured as \"classical\" papers in the field in 1999.\nOftentimes, it is not possible to use expensive equipment, and Schwabacher, et al. describe a simple method of combining parallel synthesis of library members and evaluation of entire libraries of compounds. In their method, a thread that is partitioned into different regions is wrapped around a cylinder, where a different reagent is then coupled to each region which bears only a single species. The thread is then re-divided and wrapped around a cylinder of a different size, and this process is then repeated. The beauty of this method is that the identity of each product can be known simply by its location along the thread, and the corresponding biological activity is identified by Fourier transformation of fluorescence signals.\nIn most of the syntheses described here, it is necessary to attach and remove the starting reagent to/from a solid support. This can lead to the generation of a hydroxyl group, which can potentially affect the biological activity of a target compound. Ellman uses solid phase supports in a multi-step synthesis scheme to obtain 192 individual 1,4-benzodiazepine derivatives, which are well-known therapeutic agents. To eliminate the possibility of potential hydroxyl group interference, a novel method using silyl-aryl chemistry is used to link the molecules to the solid support which cleaves from the support and leaves no trace of the linker.\nWhen anchoring a molecule to a solid support, intermediates cannot be isolated from one another without cleaving the molecule from the resin. Since many of the traditional characterization techniques used to track reaction progress and confirm product structure are solution-based,\ndifferent techniques must be used. Gel-phase 13C NMR spectroscopy, MALDI mass spectrometry, and IR spectroscopy have been used to confirm structure and monitor the progress of solid-phase reactions. Gordon et al., describe several case studies that utilize imines and peptidyl phosphonates to generate combinatorial libraries of small molecules. To generate the imine library, an amino acid tethered to a resin is reacted in the presence of an aldehyde. The authors demonstrate the use of fast 13C gel phase NMR spectroscopy and magic angle spinning 1 H NMR spectroscopy to monitor the progress of reactions and showed that most imines could be formed in as little as 10 minutes at room temperature when trimethyl orthoformate was used as the solvent. The formed imines were then derivatized to generate 4-thiazolidinones, B-lactams, and pyrrolidines.\nThe use of solid-phase supports greatly simplifies the synthesis of large combinatorial libraries of compounds. This is done by anchoring a starting material to a solid support and then running subsequent reactions until a sufficiently large library is built, after which the products are cleaved from the support. The use of solid-phase purification has also been demonstrated for use in solution-phase synthesis schemes in conjunction with standard liquid-liquid extraction purification techniques.\nDeconvolution and screening.\nCombinatorial libraries.\nCombinatorial libraries are special multi-component mixtures of small-molecule chemical compounds that are synthesized in a single stepwise process. They differ from collection of individual compounds as well as from series of compounds prepared by parallel synthesis.\nIt is an important feature that mixtures are used in their synthesis. The use of mixtures ensures the very high efficiency of the process. Both reactants can be mixtures and in this case the procedure would be even more efficient. For practical reasons however, it is advisable to use the split-mix method in which one of two mixtures is replaced by single building blocks (BBs). The mixtures are so important that there are no combinatorial libraries without using mixture in the synthesis, and if a mixture is used in a process inevitably combinatorial library forms. The split-mix synthesis is usually realized using solid support but it is possible to apply it in solution, too. Since he structures the components are unknown deconvolution methods need to be used in screening.\nOne of the most important features of combinatorial libraries is that the whole mixture can be screened in a single process. This makes these libraries very useful in pharmaceutical research.\nPartial libraries of full combinatorial libraries can also be synthesized. Some of them can be used in deconvolution\nDeconvolution of libraries cleaved from the solid support.\nIf the synthesized molecules of a combinatorial library are cleaved from the solid support a soluble mixture forms. In such solution, millions of different compounds may be found. When this synthetic method was developed, it first seemed impossible to identify the molecules, and to find molecules with useful properties. Strategies for identification of the useful components had been developed, however, to solve the problem. All these strategies are based on synthesis and testing of partial libraries. An early iterative strategy was devised by Furka in 1982. The method was later independently published by Erb et al. under the name \"Recursive deconvolution\"\nRecursive deconvolution.\nThe method is made understandable by the figure. A 27-member peptide library is synthesized from three amino acids. After the first (A) and second (B) cycles samples were set aside before mixing them. The products of the third cycle (C) are cleaved down before mixing then are tested for activity. Suppose the group labeled by + sign is active. All members have the red amino acid at the last coupling position (CP). Consequently, the active member also has the red amino acid at the last CP. Then the red amino acid is coupled to the three samples set aside after the second cycle (B) to get samples D. After cleaving, the three E samples are formed. If after testing the sample marked by + is the active one it shows that the blue amino acid occupies the second CP in the active component. Then to the three A samples first the blue then the red amino acid is coupled (F) then tested again after cleaving (G). If the + component proves to be active, the sequence of the active component is determined and shown in H.\nPositional scanning.\nPositional scanning was introduced independently by Furka et al. and Pinilla et al. The method is based on the synthesis and testing of series of sublibraries. in which a certain sequence position is occupied by the same amino acid. The figure shows the nine sublibraries (B1-D3) of a full peptide trimer library (A) made from three amino acids. In sublibraries there is a position which is occupied by the same amino acid in all components. In the synthesis of a sublibrary the support is not divided and only one amino acid is coupled to the whole sample. As a result, one position is really occupied by the same amino acid in all components. For example, in the B2 sublibrary position 2 is occupied by the \"yellow\" amino acid in all the nine components. If in a screening test this sublibrary gives positive answer it means that position 2 in the active peptide is also occupied by the \"yellow\" amino acid. The amino acid sequence can be determined by testing all the nine (or sometime less) sublibraries. \nOmission libraries.\nIn omission libraries a certain amino acid is missing from all peptides of the mixture. The figure shows the full library and the three omission libraries. At the top the omitted amino acids are shown. If the omission library gives a negative test the omitted amino acid is present in the active component.\nDeconvolution of tethered combinatorial libraries.\nIf the peptides are not cleaved from the solid support we deal with a mixture of beads, each bead containing a single peptide. Smith and his colleagues showed earlier that peptides could be tested in tethered form, too. This approach was also used in screening peptide libraries. The tethered peptide library was tested with a dissolved target protein. The beads to which the protein was attached were picked out, removed the protein from the bead then the tethered peptide was identified by sequencing. \nA somewhat different approach was followed by Taylor and Morken. They used infrared thermography to identify catalysts in non-peptide tethered libraries. The method is based on the heat that is evolved in the beads that contain a catalyst when the tethered library immersed into a solution of a substrate. When the beads are examined through an infrared microscope the catalyst containing beads appear as bright spots and can be picked out.\nEncoded combinatorial libraries.\nIf we deal with a non-peptide organic libraries library it is not as simple to determine the identity of the content of a bead as in the case of a peptide one. In order to circumvent this difficulty methods had been developed to attach to the beads, in parallel with the synthesis of the library, molecules that encode the structure of the compound formed in the bead. \nOhlmeyer and his colleagues published a binary encoding method They used mixtures of 18 tagging molecules that after cleaving them from the beads could be identified by Electron Capture Gas Chromatography. Sarkar et al. described chiral oligomers of pentenoic amides (COPAs) that can be used to construct mass encoded OBOC libraries. \nKerr et al. introduced an innovative encoding method An orthogonally protected removable bifunctional linker was attached to the beads. One end of the linker was used to attach the non-natural building blocks of the library while to the other end encoding amino acid triplets were linked. The building blocks were non-natural amino acids and the series of their encoding amino acid triplets could be determined by Edman degradation. The important aspect of this kind of encoding was the possibility to cleave down from the beads the library members together with their attached encoding tags forming a soluble library. The same approach was used by Nikolajev et al. for encoding with peptides. \nIn 1992 by Brenner and Lerner introduced DNA sequences to encode the beads of the solid support that proved to be the most successful encoding method. Nielsen, Brenner and Janda also used the Kerr approach for implementing the DNA encoding\nIn the latest period of time there were important advancements in DNA sequencing. The next generation techniques make it possible to sequence large number of samples in parallel that is very important in screening of DNA encoded libraries. There was another innovation that contributed to the success of DNA encoding. In 2000 Halpin and Harbury omitted the solid support in the split-mix synthesis of the DNA encoded combinatorial libraries and replaced it by the encoding DNA oligomers. In solid phase split and pool synthesis the number of components of libraries can't exceed the number of the beads of the support. By the novel approach of the authors, this restraint was eliminated and made it possible to prepare new compounds in practically unlimited number. The Danish company Nuevolution for example synthesized a DNA encoded library containing 40 trillion! components\nThe DNA encoded libraries are soluble that makes possible to apply the efficient affinity binding in screening. Some authors apply the DEL for acromim of DNA encoded combinatorial libraries others are using DECL. The latter seems better since in this name the combinatorial nature of these libraries is clearly expressed.\nSeveral types of DNA encoded combinatorial libraries had been introduced and described in the first decade of the present millennium. These libraries are very successfully applied in drug research.\nDetails are found about their synthesis and application in the page DNA-encoded chemical library.\nThe DNA encoded soluble combinatorial libraries have drawbacks, too. First of all the advantage coming from the use of solid support is completely lost. In addition, the polyionic character of DNA encoding chains limits the utility of non-aqueous solvents in the synthesis. For this reason many laboratories choose to develop DNA compatible reactions for use in the synthesis of DECLs. Quite a few of available ones are already described\nMaterials science.\nMaterials science has applied the techniques of combinatorial chemistry to the discovery of new materials. This work was pioneered by P.G. Schultz et al. in the mid-nineties in the context of luminescent materials obtained by co-deposition of elements on a silicon substrate. His work was preceded by J. J. Hanak in 1970 but the computer and robotics tools were not available for the method to spread at the time. Work has been continued by several academic groups as well as companies with large research and development programs (Symyx Technologies, GE, Dow Chemical etc.). The technique has been used extensively for catalysis, coatings, electronics, and many other fields. The application of appropriate informatics tools is critical to handle, administer, and store the vast volumes of data produced. New types of design of experiments methods have also been developed to efficiently address the large experimental spaces that can be tackled using combinatorial methods.\nDiversity-oriented libraries.\nEven though combinatorial chemistry has been an essential part of early drug discovery for more than two decades, so far only one de novo combinatorial chemistry-synthesized chemical has been approved for clinical use by FDA (sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor indicated for advanced renal cancer). The analysis of the poor success rate of the approach has been suggested to connect with the rather limited chemical space covered by products of combinatorial chemistry. When comparing the properties of compounds in combinatorial chemistry libraries to those of approved drugs and natural products, Feher and Schmidt noted that combinatorial chemistry libraries suffer particularly from the lack of chirality, as well as structure rigidity, both of which are widely regarded as drug-like properties. Even though natural product drug discovery has not probably been the most fashionable trend in the pharmaceutical industry in recent times, a large proportion of new chemical entities still are nature-derived compounds, and thus, it has been suggested that effectiveness of combinatorial chemistry could be improved by enhancing the chemical diversity of screening libraries. As chirality and rigidity are the two most important features distinguishing approved drugs and natural products from compounds in combinatorial chemistry libraries, these are the two issues emphasized in so-called diversity oriented libraries, i.e. compound collections that aim at coverage of the chemical space, instead of just huge numbers of compounds.\nPatent classification subclass.\nIn the 8th edition of the International Patent Classification (IPC), which entered into force on January 1, 2006, a special subclass has been created for patent applications and patents related to inventions in the domain of combinatorial chemistry: \"C40B\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36681", "revid": "244946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36681", "title": "Brave New World", "text": "1932 dystopian novel by Aldous Huxley\nBrave New World is a dystopian novel by English author Aldous Huxley, written in 1931, and published in 1932. Largely set in a futuristic World State, whose citizens are environmentally engineered into an intelligence-based social hierarchy, the novel anticipates huge scientific advancements in reproductive technology, sleep-learning, psychological manipulation and classical conditioning that are combined to make a dystopian society which is challenged by the story's protagonist. Huxley followed this book with a reassessment in essay form, \"Brave New World Revisited\" (1958), and with his final novel, \"Island\" (1962), the utopian counterpart. This novel is often used as a companion piece, or inversion counterpart to George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" (1949).\nIn 1998 and 1999, the Modern Library ranked \"Brave New World\" at number 5 on its list of the 100 Best Novels in English of the 20th century. In 2003, Robert McCrum, writing for \"The Observer\", included \"Brave New World\" chronologically at number 53 in \"the top 100 greatest novels of all time\", and the novel was listed at number 87 on The Big Read survey by the BBC. \"Brave New World\" has frequently been banned and challenged since its original publication. It has landed on the American Library Association list of top 100 banned and challenged books of the decade since the association began the list in 1990.\nTitle.\nThe title \"Brave New World\" derives from William Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\", Act V, Scene I, Miranda's speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a Shakespeare's use of the phrase is intended ironically, as the speaker is failing to recognise the evil nature of the island's visitors because of her innocence. Indeed, the next speaker\u2014Miranda's father Prospero\u2014replies to her innocent observation with the statement \"'Tis new to thee\".\nTranslations of the title often allude to similar expressions used in domestic works of literature: the French edition of the work is entitled \"Le Meilleur des mondes\" (\"The Best of All Worlds\"), an allusion to an expression used by the philosopher Gottfried Leibniz and satirised in \"Candide, Ou l'Optimisme\" by Voltaire (1759). The first Standard Chinese translation, done by novelist Lily Hsueh and Aaron Jen-wang Hsueh in 1974, is entitled \"\u7f8e\u9e97\u65b0\u4e16\u754c\" (Pinyin: \"M\u011bil\u00ec X\u012bn Sh\u00ecji\u00e8\", literally \"Beautiful New World\"), quoting the Chinese translation of \"Tempest\".\nHistory.\nHuxley wrote \"Brave New World\" while living in Sanary-sur-Mer, France, in the four months from May to August 1931. By this time, Huxley had established himself as a writer and social satirist. He was a contributor to \"Vanity Fair\" and \"Vogue\" magazines and had published a collection of his poetry (\"The Burning Wheel\", 1916) and four satirical novels, \"Crome Yellow\" (1921), \"Antic Hay\" (1923), \"Those Barren Leaves\" (1925) and \"Point Counter Point\" (1928). \"Brave New World\" was Huxley's fifth novel and first dystopian work.\nA short passage in \"Crome Yellow\" foreshadows \"Brave New World\", showing that Huxley had such a future in mind already in 1921. Mr Scogan, one of the earlier book's characters, describes an \"impersonal generation\" of the future that will \"take the place of Nature's hideous system. In vast state incubators, rows upon rows of gravid bottles will supply the world with the population it requires. The family system will disappear; society, sapped at its very base, will have to find new foundations; and Eros, beautifully and irresponsibly free, will flit like a gay butterfly from flower to flower through a sunlit world\".\nHuxley said that \"Brave New World\" was inspired by the utopian novels of H. G. Wells, including \"A Modern Utopia\" (1905), and as a parody of \"Men Like Gods\" (1923). Wells' hopeful vision of the future gave Huxley the idea to begin writing a parody of the novels, which became \"Brave New World\". He wrote in a letter to Mrs. Arthur Goldsmith, an American acquaintance, that he had \"been having a little fun pulling the leg of H. G. Wells\" but then he \"got caught up in the excitement of [his] own ideas\". Unlike the most popular optimistic utopian novels of the time, Huxley sought to provide a frightening vision of the future. Huxley referred to \"Brave New World\" as a \"negative utopia\", somewhat influenced by Wells's own \"The Sleeper Awakes\" (dealing with subjects like corporate tyranny and behavioural conditioning) and the works of D. H. Lawrence.\nFor his part, Wells published, two years after \"Brave New World\", his utopian \"Shape of Things to Come\". Seeking to rebut the argument of Huxley's Mustapha Mond\u2014that moronic underclasses were a necessary \"social gyroscope\" and that a society composed solely of intelligent, assertive \"Alphas\" would inevitably disintegrate in internecine struggle\u2014Wells depicted a stable egalitarian society emerging after several generations of a reforming elite having complete control of education throughout the world. In the future depicted in Wells's book, posterity remembers Huxley as \"a reactionary writer\". The scientific futurism in \"Brave New World\" is believed to be appropriated from \"Daedalus\" by J. B. S. Haldane.\nThe events of the Great Depression in Great Britain in 1931, with its mass unemployment and the abandonment of the gold standard, persuaded Huxley to assert that stability was the \"primal and ultimate need\" if civilisation was to survive the present crisis. The \"Brave New World\" character Mustapha Mond, Resident World Controller of Western Europe, is named after Sir Alfred Mond. Shortly before writing the novel, Huxley visited the Billingham Manufacturing Plant, Mond's technologically advanced factory near Billingham, north-east England, and it made a great impression on him.\nHuxley used the setting and characters in his science fiction novel to express widely felt anxieties, particularly the fear of losing individual identity in the fast-paced world of the future. An early trip to the United States gave \"Brave New World\" much of its character. Huxley was outraged by the culture of youth, commercial cheeriness, sexual promiscuity and the inward-looking nature of many Americans; he had also found the book \"My Life and Work\" by Henry Ford on the boat to North America and he saw the book's principles applied in everything he encountered after leaving San Francisco.\nPlot.\nThe novel opens in the World State city of London in AF (After Ford) 632 (AD 2540 in the Gregorian calendar), where citizens are engineered through artificial wombs and childhood indoctrination programmes into predetermined castes based on intelligence and labour. Embryos in different bottles are treated with chemicals to suit them for their planned roles; those for the higher classes get chemicals to optimise them, and those of the lower classes are made increasingly imperfect. The classes are Alpha (planned leaders), Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Epsilon (menial labourers of limited intelligence). Each caste is indoctrinated, largely by sleep-conditioning, to prefer their own class\u2014epsilons are happy that they do not have the intellectual burden of alphas\u2014and wears a uniform colour of clothing for easy identification.\nLenina Crowne, a hatchery worker, is popular and sexually desirable, but Bernard Marx, a psychologist, is not. He is shorter in stature than the average member of his high alpha caste, which gives him an inferiority complex. His work with sleep-learning allows him to understand, and disapprove of, his society's methods of keeping its citizens peaceful, which includes their constant consumption of a soothing, happiness-producing drug called \"soma.\" Courting disaster, Bernard is vocal and arrogant about his criticisms, and his boss contemplates exiling him to Iceland because of his nonconformity. His only friend is Helmholtz Watson, a gifted writer who finds it difficult to use his talents creatively in their pain-free society.\nBernard takes a holiday with Lenina outside the World State to a \"Savage Reservation\" in New Mexico, in which the two observe natural-born people, disease, the ageing process, other languages, and religious lifestyles for the first time. The culture of the village folk resembles the contemporary Native American groups of the region, descendants of the Anasazi, including the Puebloan peoples of Hopi and Zuni. Bernard and Lenina witness a violent public ritual and then encounter Linda, a woman originally from the World State who is living on the reservation with her son John, now a young man. She, too, visited the reservation on a holiday many years ago, but became separated from her group and was left behind. She had meanwhile become pregnant by a fellow holidaymaker (who is revealed to be Bernard's boss, the Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning). She did not try to return to the World State, because of her shame at her pregnancy. Despite spending his whole life in the reservation, John has never been accepted by the villagers, and his and Linda's lives have been hard and unpleasant. Linda has taught John to read, although from the only book in her possession\u2014a scientific manual\u2014and another book left behind by a local resident named Pop\u00e9: the complete works of Shakespeare. Ostracised by the villagers, John is able to articulate his feelings only in terms of Shakespearean drama, quoting often from \"The Tempest\", \"King Lear\", \"Othello\", \"Romeo and Juliet\" and \"Hamlet\". Linda now wants to return to London, and John, too, wants to see this \"brave new world\" that his mother so often praised. Bernard sees an opportunity to thwart plans to exile him, and gets permission to take Linda and John back. On their return to London, John meets the Director and calls him his \"father\", a vulgarity which causes a roar of laughter. The humiliated Director resigns in shame before he can follow through with exiling Bernard.\nBernard, as \"custodian\" of the \"savage\" John who is now treated as a celebrity, is fawned on by the highest members of society and revels in attention he once scorned. Bernard's popularity is fleeting, though, and he becomes envious that John only really bonds with the literary-minded Helmholtz. Considered hideous and friendless, Linda spends all her time using soma, which she craved for so long, while John refuses to attend social events organised by Bernard, appalled by what he perceives to be an empty society. Lenina and John are physically attracted to each other, but John's view of courtship and romance, based on Shakespeare's writings, is utterly incompatible with Lenina's freewheeling attitude to sex. She tries to seduce him, but he attacks her, before suddenly being informed that his mother is on her deathbed. He rushes to Linda's bedside, causing a scandal, as this is not the \"correct\" attitude to death. Some children who enter the ward for \"death-conditioning\" come across as disrespectful to John, and he attacks one physically. He then tries to break up a distribution of soma to a lower-caste group, telling them that he is freeing them. Helmholtz and Bernard rush in to stop the ensuing riot, which the police quell by spraying soma vapour into the crowd.\nBernard, Helmholtz, and John are all brought before Mustapha Mond, the \"Resident World Controller for Western Europe\", who tells Bernard and Helmholtz that they are to be exiled to islands for antisocial activity. Bernard pleads for a second chance, but Helmholtz welcomes the opportunity to be a true individual, and chooses the Falkland Islands as his destination, believing that their bad weather will inspire his writing. Mond tells Helmholtz that exile is actually a reward. The islands are full of the most interesting people in the world, individuals who did not fit into the social model of the World State. Mond outlines for John the events that led to the present society and his arguments for a caste system and social control. John rejects Mond's arguments, and Mond sums up John's views by claiming that John demands \"the right to be unhappy\". John asks if he may go to the islands as well, but Mond refuses, saying he wishes to see what happens to John next.\nJaded with his new life, John moves to an abandoned hilltop lighthouse, near the village of Puttenham, where he intends to adopt a solitary ascetic lifestyle in order to purify himself of civilisation, practising self-flagellation. This draws reporters and eventually hundreds of amazed sightseers, hoping to witness his bizarre behaviour.\nFor a while, it seems that John might be left alone, after the public's attention is drawn to other diversions, but a documentary-maker has secretly filmed John's self-flagellation from a distance, and when released, the documentary causes an international sensation. Helicopters arrive with more journalists. Crowds of people descend on John's retreat, demanding that he perform his whipping ritual for them. From one helicopter a young woman emerges who is implied to be Lenina. John, at the sight of a woman he both adores and loathes, whips at her in a fury and then turns the whip on himself, exciting the crowd, whose wild behaviour transforms into a soma-fuelled orgy. The next morning, John awakes on the ground and is consumed by remorse over his participation in the orgy.\nThat evening, a swarm of helicopters appear on the horizon, with the story of last night's orgy having been in all the newspapers. The first onlookers and reporters to arrive find that John is dead, having hanged himself.\nCharacters.\nBernard Marx, a sleep-learning specialist at the Central London Hatchery and Conditioning Centre. Although Bernard is an Alpha-Plus (the upper class of the society), he is a misfit. He is unusually short for an Alpha; an alleged accident with alcohol in Bernard's blood-surrogate before his decanting has left him slightly stunted. Unlike his fellow utopians, Bernard is often angry, resentful, and jealous. At times, he is also cowardly and hypocritical. His conditioning is clearly incomplete. He does not enjoy communal sports, solidarity services, or promiscuous sex. He does not particularly enjoy soma. Bernard is in love with Lenina and does not like her sleeping with other men, even though \"everyone belongs to everyone else\". Bernard's triumphant return to utopian civilisation with John the Savage from the Reservation precipitates the downfall of the Director, who had been planning to exile him. Bernard's triumph is short-lived; he is ultimately banished to an island for his non-conformist behaviour.\nJohn, the illicit son of the Director and Linda, born and reared on the Savage Reservation (\"Malpais\") after Linda was unwittingly left behind by her errant lover. John (\"the Savage\" or \"Mr Savage\", as he is often called) is an outsider both on the Reservation\u2014where the natives still practise marriage, natural birth, family life and religion\u2014and the ostensibly civilised World State, based on principles of stability and happiness. He has read nothing but the complete works of William Shakespeare, which he quotes extensively, and, for the most part, aptly, though his allusion to the \"Brave New World\" (Miranda's words in \"The Tempest\") takes on a darker and bitterly ironic resonance as the novel unfolds. John is intensely moral according to a code that he has been taught by Shakespeare and life in Malpais but is also na\u00efve: his views are as imported into his own consciousness as are the hypnopedic messages of World State citizens. The admonishments of the men of Malpais taught him to regard his mother as a whore; but he cannot grasp that these were the same men who continually sought her out despite their supposedly sacred pledges of monogamy. Because he is unwanted in Malpais, he accepts the invitation to travel back to London and is initially astonished by the comforts of the World State. He remains committed to values that exist only in his poetry. He first spurns Lenina for failing to live up to his Shakespearean ideal and then the entire utopian society: he asserts that its technological wonders and consumerism are poor substitutes for individual freedom, human dignity and personal integrity. After his mother's death, he becomes deeply distressed with grief, surprising onlookers in the hospital. He then withdraws himself from society and attempts to purify himself of \"sin\" (desire), but is unable to do so. His unusual behaviour eventually attracts the attention of reporters and, later, huge amounts of people, who arrive in helicopters and make John furious with their behaviour. Excited by his fury, people start an orgy, which he cannot resist joining. After waking up the next morning, John is horrified by his actions and hangs himself.\nHelmholtz Watson, a handsome and successful Alpha-Plus lecturer at the College of Emotional Engineering and a friend of Bernard. He feels unfulfilled writing endless propaganda doggerel, and the stifling conformism and philistinism of the World State make him restive. Helmholtz is ultimately exiled to the Falkland Islands\u2014a cold asylum for disaffected Alpha-Plus non-conformists\u2014after reading a heretical poem to his students on the virtues of solitude and helping John destroy some Deltas' rations of soma following Linda's death. Unlike Bernard, he takes his exile in his stride and comes to view it as an opportunity for inspiration in his writing. His first name derives from the German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz.\nLenina Crowne, a young, beautiful foetus technician at the Central London Hatchery and Conditioning Centre. Lenina Crowne is a Beta who enjoys being a Beta. She is a vaccination worker with beliefs and values that are in line with a citizen of the World State. She is part of the 30% of the female population that are not freemartins (sterile women). Lenina is promiscuous and popular but somewhat quirky in her society: she had a four-month relation with Henry Foster, choosing not to have sex with anyone but him for a period of time. She is basically happy and well-conditioned, using soma to suppress unwelcome emotions, as is expected. Lenina has a date with Bernard, to whom she feels ambivalently attracted, and she goes to the Reservation with him. On returning to civilisation, she tries and fails to seduce John the Savage. John loves and desires Lenina but he is repelled by her forwardness and the prospect of pre-marital sex, rejecting her as an \"\". Lenina visits John at the lighthouse but he attacks her with a whip, unwittingly inciting onlookers to do the same. Her exact fate is left unspecified.\nMustapha Mond, Resident World Controller of Western Europe, \"His Fordship\" Mustapha Mond presides over one of the ten zones of the World State, the global government set up after the cataclysmic Nine Years' War and great Economic Collapse. Sophisticated and good-natured, Mond is an urbane and hyperintelligent advocate of the World State and its ethos of \"Community, Identity, Stability\". Among the novel's characters, he is uniquely aware of the precise nature of the society he oversees and what it has given up to accomplish its gains. Mond argues that art, literature, and scientific freedom must be sacrificed to secure the ultimate utilitarian goal of maximising societal happiness. He defends the caste system, behavioural conditioning, and the lack of personal freedom in the World State: these, he says, are a price worth paying for achieving social stability, the highest social virtue because it leads to lasting happiness.\nFanny Crowne, Lenina Crowne's friend (they have the same last name because only ten thousand last names are in use in a World State comprising two billion people). Fanny voices the conventional values of her caste and society, particularly the importance of promiscuity: she advises Lenina that she should have more than one man in her life because it is unseemly to concentrate on just one. Fanny then warns Lenina away from a new lover whom she considers undeserving, yet she is ultimately supportive of the young woman's attraction to the savage John.\nHenry Foster, one of Lenina's many lovers, is a perfectly conventional Alpha male, casually discussing Lenina's body with his coworkers. His success with Lenina, and his casual attitude about it, infuriate the jealous Bernard. Henry ultimately proves himself every bit the ideal World State citizen, finding no courage to defend Lenina from John's assaults despite having maintained an uncommonly longstanding sexual relationship with her.\nBenito Hoover, another of Lenina's lovers. She remembers that he is particularly hairy when he takes his clothes off.\nThe Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning (DHC), also known as Thomas \"Tomakin\", is the administrator of the Central London Hatchery and Conditioning Centre, where he is a threatening figure who intends to exile Bernard to Iceland. His plans take an unexpected turn when Bernard returns from the Reservation with Linda (see below) and John, a child they both realise is actually his. This fact, scandalous and obscene in the World State, not because it was extramarital (which all sexual acts are), but because it was procreative, leads the Director to resign his post in shame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Linda, John's mother, decanted as a Beta-Minus in the World State, originally worked in the DHC's Fertilizing Room, and subsequently lost during a storm while visiting the New Mexico Savage Reservation with the Director many years before the events of the novel. Despite following her usual precautions, Linda became pregnant with the Director's son during their time together and was therefore unable to return to the World State by the time that she found her way to Malpais. Having been conditioned to the promiscuous social norms of the World State, Linda finds herself at once popular with every man in the pueblo (because she is open to all sexual advances) and also reviled for the same reason, seen as a whore by the wives of the men who visit her and by the men themselves (who come to her nonetheless). Her only comforts there are \"mescal\" brought by Pop\u00e9 as well as \"peyotl\". Linda is desperate to return to the World State and to soma, wanting nothing more from her remaining life than comfort until death.\nThe Arch-Community-Songster, the secular equivalent of the Archbishop of Canterbury in the World State society. He takes personal offense when John refuses to attend Bernard's party.\nThe Director of Crematoria and Phosphorus Reclamation, one of the many disappointed, important figures to attend Bernard's party.\nThe Warden, an Alpha-Minus, the talkative chief administrator for the New Mexico Savage Reservation. He is blond, short, broad-shouldered, and has a booming voice.\nDarwin Bonaparte, a \"big game photographer\" (i.e., filmmaker) who films John flogging himself. Darwin Bonaparte became known for two works: \"feely of the gorillas' wedding\", and \"Sperm Whale's Love-life\". He had already made a name for himself but still seeks more. He renews his fame by filming the savage, John, in his newest release \"The Savage of Surrey\". His name alludes to Charles Darwin and Napoleon Bonaparte.\nDr. Shaw, Bernard Marx's physician who consequently becomes the physician of both Linda and John. He prescribes a lethal dose of soma to Linda, which will stop her respiratory system from functioning in a span of one to two months, at her own behest but not without protest from John. Ultimately, they all agree that it is for the best, since denying her this request would cause more trouble for Society and Linda herself.\nDr. Gaffney, Provost of Eton, an Upper School for high-caste individuals. He shows Bernard and John around the classrooms, and the Hypnopaedic Control Room (used for behavioural conditioning through sleep learning). John asks if the students read Shakespeare but the Provost says the library contains only reference books because solitary activities, such as reading, are discouraged.\nMiss Keate, Head Mistress of Eton Upper School. Bernard fancies her, and arranges an assignation with her.\nBackground figures.\nThese are non-fictional and factual characters who lived before the events in this book, but are of note in the novel:\nSources of names and references.\nThe limited number of names that the World State assigned to its bottle-grown citizens can be traced to political and cultural figures who contributed to the bureaucratic, economic, and technological systems of Huxley's age, and presumably those systems in \"Brave New World\".\nReception.\nUpon its publication, Rebecca West praised \"Brave New World\" as \"The most accomplished novel Huxley has yet written\", Joseph Needham lauded it as \"Mr Huxley's remarkable book\", and Bertrand Russell also praised it, stating, \"Mr Aldous Huxley has shown his usual masterly skill in \"Brave New World.\"\" \"Brave New World\" also received negative responses from other contemporary critics, although his work was later embraced.\nIn an article in the 4 May 1935 issue of the \"Illustrated London News\", G. K. Chesterton explained that Huxley was revolting against the \"Age of Utopias\". Much of the discourse on man's future before 1914 was based on the thesis that humanity would solve all economic and social issues. In the decade following the war the discourse shifted to an examination of the causes of the catastrophe. The works of H. G. Wells and George Bernard Shaw on the promises of socialism and a World State were then viewed as the ideas of naive optimists. Chesterton wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After the Age of Utopias came what we may call the American Age, lasting as long as the Boom. Men like Ford or Mond seemed to many to have solved the social riddle and made capitalism the common good. But it was not native to us; it went with a buoyant, not to say blatant optimism, which is not our negligent or negative optimism. Much more than Victorian righteousness, or even Victorian self-righteousness, that optimism has driven people into pessimism. For the Slump brought even more disillusionment than the War. A new bitterness, and a new bewilderment, ran through all social life, and was reflected in all literature and art. It was contemptuous, not only of the old Capitalism, but of the old Socialism. \"Brave New World\" is more of a revolution against Utopia than against Victoria.\nSimilarly, in 1944 economist Ludwig von Mises described \"Brave New World\" as a satire of utopian predictions of socialism: \"Aldous Huxley was even courageous enough to make socialism's dreamed paradise the target of his sardonic irony.\"\nCommon misunderstandings.\nVarious authors assume that the book was first and foremost a cautionary tale regarding human genetic \"enhancement\", indeed about\u2013as a report of Bush associate Leon Kass states\u2013\"producing improved [...] perfect or post-human\" people. In fact, the title itself has become a mere stand-in used to \"evoke the general idea of a futuristic dystopia\".\nGeneticist Derek So suggests that this is a misunderstanding, however.318 According to him, a 'more careful reading of the text' shows that:\nthere does not seem to be any genetic testing in \"Brave New World\", and most of the methods described involve hormones and chemicals rather than heritable interventions. Although Huxley wrote that \"eugenics and dysgenics were practiced systematically\", this seems to refer only to selective breeding and not to any kind of direct manipulation on the genetic level. (The Bokanovsky process does represent a form of cloning, but this is not ethically equivalent to germline genome editing, and references to \"Brave New World\" may lead some readers to confuse the two technologies.) [...] While it's true that the upper castes in \"Brave New World\" are smarter than the others, this is more because of the deliberate impairment of the lower castes than because the upper castes are \"perfect\". Rather than reducing the number of individuals born with genetic disorders or handicaps, Huxley's dystopia involves dramatically increasing their number. [...] Quite the opposite: Huxley thought that \"Brave New World\" might come about if we \"didn't\" start selecting better children.318-9\nOverall, Derek So notes that \"Huxley was much more worried about totalitarianism than about the new biotechnologies per se that he alluded to in Brave New World.\"\nDespite claims to the contrary then, Huxley remained a committed eugenicist all throughout his life, much like his comparably famous brother Julian, and one just as keen on stressing its humanistic underpinnings.\nThe World State and Fordism.\nThe World State is built upon the principles of Henry Ford's assembly line: mass production, homogeneity, predictability, and consumption of disposable consumer goods. While the World State lacks any supernatural-based religions, Ford himself is revered as the creator of their society but not as a deity, and characters celebrate Ford Day and swear oaths by his name (e.g., \"By Ford!\"). In this sense, some fragments of traditional religion are present, such as Christian crosses, which had their tops cut off to be changed to a \"T\", representing the Ford Model T. In England, there is an Arch-Community-Songster of Canterbury, obviously continuing the Archbishop of Canterbury, and in America \"The Christian Science Monitor\" continues publication as \"The Fordian Science Monitor\". The World State calendar numbers years in the \"AF\" era\u2014\"After Ford\"\u2014with the calendar beginning in AD 1908, the year in which Ford's first Model T rolled off his assembly line. The novel's Gregorian calendar year is AD 2540, but it is referred to in the book as AF 632.\nFrom birth, members of every class are indoctrinated by recorded voices repeating slogans while they sleep (called \"hypnop\u00e6dia\" in the book) to believe that membership of their own class is preferable, but that the other classes perform needed functions. Any residual unhappiness is resolved by an antidepressant and hallucinogenic drug called soma. Hypnopedia is described in the book as having developed in this form when an experiment with a child (Reuben Rabinovitch) showed that social attitudes were more readily instilled than factual information via sleep-learning.\nThe biological techniques used to control the populace in \"Brave New World\" do not include genetic engineering; Huxley wrote the book before the structure of DNA was known. However, Gregor Mendel's work with inheritance patterns in peas had been rediscovered in 1900 and the eugenics movement, based on artificial selection, was well established. Huxley's family included a number of prominent biologists including Thomas Huxley, half-brother and Nobel Laureate Andrew Huxley, and his brother Julian Huxley who was a biologist and involved in the eugenics movement. Nonetheless, Huxley emphasises conditioning over breeding (nurture versus nature); human embryos and fetuses are conditioned through a carefully designed regimen of chemical (such as exposure to hormones and toxins), thermal (exposure to intense heat or cold, as one's future career would dictate), and other environmental stimuli, although there is an element of selective breeding as well.\nComparisons with George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\nIn a letter to George Orwell about \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", Huxley wrote \"Whether in actual fact the policy of the boot-on-the-face can go on indefinitely seems doubtful. My own belief is that the ruling oligarchy will find less arduous and wasteful ways of governing and of satisfying its lust for power, and these ways will resemble those which I described in Brave New World.\" He went on to write \"Within the next generation I believe that the world's rulers will discover that infant conditioning and narco-hypnosis are more efficient, as instruments of government, than clubs and prisons, and that the lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting people into loving their servitude as by flogging and kicking them into obedience.\"\nSocial critic Neil Postman contrasted the worlds of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" and \"Brave New World\" in the foreword of his 1985 book \"Amusing Ourselves to Death\". He writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What Orwell feared were those who would ban books. What Huxley feared was that there would be no reason to ban a book, for there would be no one who wanted to read one. Orwell feared those who would deprive us of information. Huxley feared those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity and egoism. Orwell feared that the truth would be concealed from us. Huxley feared the truth would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance. Orwell feared we would become a captive culture. Huxley feared we would become a trivial culture, preoccupied with some equivalent of the feelies, the orgy porgy, and the centrifugal bumblepuppy. As Huxley remarked in \"Brave New World Revisited\", the civil libertarians and rationalists who are ever on the alert to oppose tyranny \"failed to take into account man's almost infinite appetite for distractions.\" In \"1984\", Huxley added, people are controlled by inflicting pain. In \"Brave New World\", they are controlled by inflicting pleasure. In short, Orwell feared that what we hate will ruin us. Huxley feared that what we love will ruin us.\nThe writer Christopher Hitchens, who published several articles on Huxley and a book on Orwell, noted the difference between the two texts in the introduction to his 1999 article \"Why Americans Are Not Taught History\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We dwell in a present-tense culture that somehow, significantly, decided to employ the telling expression \"You're history\" as a choice reprobation or insult, and thus elected to speak forgotten volumes about itself. By that standard, the forbidding dystopia of George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" already belongs, both as a text and as a date, with Ur and Mycenae, while the hedonist nihilism of Huxley still beckons toward a painless, amusement-sodden, and stress-free consensus. Orwell's was a house of horrors. He seemed to strain credulity because he posited a regime that would go to any lengths to own and possess history, to rewrite and construct it, and to inculcate it by means of coercion. Whereas Huxley ... rightly foresaw that any such regime could break because it could not bend. In 1988, four years after 1984, the Soviet Union scrapped its official history curriculum and announced that a newly authorized version was somewhere in the works. This was the precise moment when the regime conceded its own extinction. For true blissed-out and vacant servitude, though, you need an otherwise sophisticated society where no serious history is taught.\n\"Brave New World Revisited\".\nIn 1946, Huxley wrote in the foreword of the new edition of \"Brave New World\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If I were now to rewrite the book, I would offer the Savage a third alternative. Between the Utopian and primitive horns of his dilemma would lie the possibility of sanity... In this community economics would be decentralist and Henry-Georgian, politics Kropotkinesque and co-operative. Science and technology would be used as though, like the Sabbath, they had been made for man, not (as at present and still more so in the Brave New World) as though man were to be adapted and enslaved to them. Religion would be the conscious and intelligent pursuit of man's Final End, the unitive knowledge of immanent Tao or Logos, the transcendent Godhead or Brahman. And the prevailing philosophy of life would be a kind of Higher Utilitarianism, in which the Greatest Happiness principle would be secondary to the Final End principle\u2014the first question to be asked and answered in every contingency of life being: \"How will this thought or action contribute to, or interfere with, the achievement, by me and the greatest possible number of other individuals, of man's Final End?\" \n\"Brave New World Revisited\" (Harper &amp; Brothers, US, 1958; Chatto &amp; Windus, UK, 1959), written by Huxley almost thirty years after \"Brave New World\", is a non-fiction work in which Huxley considered whether the world had moved toward or away from his vision of the future from the 1930s. He believed when he wrote the original novel that it was a reasonable guess as to where the world might go in the future. In \"Brave New World Revisited\", he concluded that the world was becoming like \"Brave New World\" much faster than he originally thought.\nHuxley analysed the causes of this, such as overpopulation, as well as all the means by which populations can be controlled. He was particularly interested in the effects of drugs and subliminal suggestion. \"Brave New World Revisited\" is different in tone because of Huxley's evolving thought, as well as his conversion to Hindu Vedanta in the interim between the two books.\nThe last chapter of the book aims to propose action which could be taken to prevent a democracy from turning into the totalitarian world described in \"Brave New World\". In Huxley's last novel, \"Island\", he again expounds similar ideas to describe a utopian nation, which is generally viewed as a counterpart to \"Brave New World\".\nCensorship.\nAccording to American Library Association, \"Brave New World\" has frequently been banned and challenged in the United States due to insensitivity, offensive language, nudity, racism, drug use, conflict with a religious viewpoint, and being sexually explicit. It landed on the list of the top ten most challenged books in 2010 (3) and 2011 (7). The book also secured a spot on the association's list of the top one hundred challenged books for 1990\u20131999 (54), 2000\u20132009 (36), and 2010\u20132019 (26).\nThe following include specific instances of when the book has been censored, banned, or challenged:\nInfluences and allegations of plagiarism.\nThe English writer Rose Macaulay published \"What Not: A Prophetic Comedy\" in 1918. \"What Not\" depicts a dystopian future where people are ranked by intelligence, the government mandates mind training for all citizens, and procreation is regulated by the state. Macaulay and Huxley shared the same literary circles and he attended her weekly literary salons.\nBertrand Russell felt \"Brave New World\" borrowed from his 1931 book \"The Scientific Outlook\", and wrote in a letter to his publisher that Huxley's novel was \"merely an expansion of the two penultimate chapters of 'The Scientific Outlook.'\"\nH. G. Wells' novel \"The First Men in the Moon\" (1901) used concepts that Huxley added to his story. Both novels introduce a society (in Wells' case, that of the Lunar natives) consisting of a specialized caste system, in which new generations are produced in vessels, where their designated caste is decided before birth by tampering with the fetus' development, and individuals are drugged down when they are not needed.\nGeorge Orwell believed that \"Brave New World\" must have been partly derived from the 1921 novel \"We\" by Russian author Yevgeny Zamyatin. However, in a 1962 letter to Christopher Collins, Huxley says that he wrote \"Brave New World\" long before he had heard of \"We\". According to \"We\" translator Natasha Randall, Orwell believed that Huxley was lying. Kurt Vonnegut said that in writing \"Player Piano\" (1952), he \"cheerfully ripped off the plot of \"Brave New World\", whose plot had been cheerfully ripped off from Yevgeny Zamyatin's \"We\"\".\nIn 1982, Polish author Antoni Smuszkiewicz, in his analysis of Polish science-fiction \"Zaczarowana gra\" (\"The Magic Game\"), presented accusations of plagiarism against Huxley. Smuszkiewicz showed similarities between \"Brave New World\" and two science fiction novels written earlier by Polish author Mieczys\u0142aw Smolarski, namely \"Miasto \u015bwiat\u0142o\u015bci\" (\"The City of Light\", 1924) and \"Podr\u00f3\u017c po\u015blubna pana Hamiltona\" (\"Mr Hamilton's Honeymoon Trip\", 1928). Smuszkiewicz wrote in his open letter to Huxley: \"This work of a great author, both in the general depiction of the world as well as countless details, is so similar to two of my novels that in my opinion there is no possibility of accidental analogy.\"\nKate Lohnes, writing for \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", notes similarities between \"Brave New World\" and other novels of the era could be seen as expressing \"common fears surrounding the rapid advancement of technology and of the shared feelings of many tech-skeptics during the early 20th century\". Other dystopian novels followed Huxley's work, including C.S. Lewis's \"That Hideous Strength\" (1945) and Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" (1949).\nLegacy.\nIn 1998\u20131999, the Modern Library ranked \"Brave New World\" fifth on its list of the 100 Best Novels in English of the 20th century. In 2003, Robert McCrum writing for \"The Observer\" included \"Brave New World\" chronologically at number 53 in \"the top 100 greatest novels of all time\", and the novel was listed at number 87 on the BBC's survey The Big Read.\nOn 5 November 2019, BBC News listed \"Brave New World\" on its list of the 100 Most Inspiring Novels. In 2021, \"Brave New World\" was one of six classic science fiction novels by British authors selected by Royal Mail to feature on a series of UK postage stamps.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36682", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36682", "title": "Linear predictive coding", "text": "Speech analysis and encoding technique\nLinear predictive coding (LPC) is a method used mostly in audio signal processing and speech processing for representing the spectral envelope of a digital signal of speech in compressed form, using the information of a linear predictive model.\nLPC is the most widely used method in speech coding and speech synthesis. It is a powerful speech analysis technique, and a useful method for encoding good quality speech at a low bit rate.\nOverview.\nLPC starts with the assumption that a speech signal is produced by a buzzer at the end of a tube (for voiced sounds), with occasional added hissing and popping sounds (for voiceless sounds such as sibilants and plosives). Although apparently crude, this Source\u2013filter model is actually a close approximation of the reality of speech production. The glottis (the space between the vocal folds) produces the buzz, which is characterized by its intensity (loudness) and frequency (pitch). The vocal tract (the throat and mouth) forms the tube, which is characterized by its resonances; these resonances give rise to formants, or enhanced frequency bands in the sound produced. Hisses and pops are generated by the action of the tongue, lips and throat during sibilants and plosives.\nLPC analyzes the speech signal by estimating the formants, removing their effects from the speech signal, and estimating the intensity and frequency of the remaining buzz. The process of removing the formants is called inverse filtering, and the remaining signal after the subtraction of the filtered modeled signal is called the residue.\nThe numbers which describe the intensity and frequency of the buzz, the formants, and the residue signal, can be stored or transmitted somewhere else. LPC synthesizes the speech signal by reversing the process: use the buzz parameters and the residue to create a source signal, use the formants to create a filter (which represents the tube), and run the source through the filter, resulting in speech.\nBecause speech signals vary with time, this process is done on short chunks of the speech signal, which are called frames; generally, 30 to 50 frames per second give an intelligible speech with good compression.\nEarly history.\nLinear prediction (signal estimation) goes back to at least the 1940s when Norbert Wiener developed a mathematical theory for calculating the best filters and predictors for detecting signals hidden in noise. Soon after Claude Shannon established a general theory of coding, work on predictive coding was done by C. Chapin Cutler, Bernard M. Oliver and Henry C. Harrison. Peter Elias in 1955 published two papers on predictive coding of signals.\nLinear predictors were applied to speech analysis independently by Fumitada Itakura of Nagoya University and Shuzo Saito of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone in 1966 and in 1967 by Bishnu S. Atal, Manfred R. Schroeder and John Burg. Itakura and Saito described a statistical approach based on maximum likelihood estimation; Atal and Schroeder described an adaptive linear predictor approach; Burg outlined an approach based on principle of maximum entropy.\nIn 1969, Itakura and Saito introduced method based on partial correlation (PARCOR), Glen Culler proposed real-time speech encoding, and Bishnu S. Atal presented an LPC speech coder at the Annual Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America. In 1971, realtime LPC using 16-bit LPC hardware was demonstrated by Philco-Ford; four units were sold. LPC technology was advanced by Bishnu Atal and Manfred Schroeder during the 1970s\u20131980s. In 1978, Atal and Vishwanath \"et al.\" of BBN developed the first variable-rate LPC algorithm. The same year, Atal and Manfred R. Schroeder at Bell Labs proposed an LPC speech codec called adaptive predictive coding, which used a psychoacoustic coding algorithm exploiting the masking properties of the human ear. This later became the basis for the perceptual coding technique used by the MP3 audio compression format, introduced in 1993. Code-excited linear prediction (CELP) was developed by Schroeder and Atal in 1985.\nLPC is the basis for voice-over-IP (VoIP) technology. In 1972, Bob Kahn of ARPA with Jim Forgie of Lincoln Laboratory (LL) and Dave Walden of BBN Technologies started the first developments in packetized speech, which would eventually lead to voice-over-IP technology. In 1973, according to Lincoln Laboratory informal history, the first real-time 2400\u00a0bit/s LPC was implemented by Ed Hofstetter. In 1974, the first real-time two-way LPC packet speech communication was accomplished over the ARPANET at 3500\u00a0bit/s between Culler-Harrison and Lincoln Laboratory.\nLPC coefficient representations.\nLPC is frequently used for transmitting spectral envelope information, and as such it has to be tolerant of transmission errors. Transmission of the filter coefficients directly (see linear prediction for a definition of coefficients) is undesirable, since they are very sensitive to errors. In other words, a very small error can distort the whole spectrum, or worse, a small error might make the prediction filter unstable.\nThere are more advanced representations such as log area ratios (LAR), line spectral pairs (LSP) decomposition and reflection coefficients. Of these, especially LSP decomposition has gained popularity since it ensures the stability of the predictor, and spectral errors are local for small coefficient deviations.\nApplications.\nLPC is the most widely used method in speech coding and speech synthesis. It is generally used for speech analysis and resynthesis. It is used as a form of voice compression by phone companies, such as in the GSM standard, for example. It is also used for secure wireless, where voice must be digitized, encrypted and sent over a narrow voice channel; an early example of this is the US government's Navajo I.\nLPC synthesis can be used to construct vocoders where musical instruments are used as an excitation signal to the time-varying filter estimated from a singer's speech. This is somewhat popular in electronic music.\nPaul Lansky made the well-known computer music piece notjustmoreidlechatter using linear predictive coding.\nA 10th-order LPC was used in the popular 1980s Speak &amp; Spell educational toy.\nLPC predictors are used in Shorten, MPEG-4 ALS, FLAC, SILK audio codec, and other lossless audio codecs.\nLPC has received some attention as a tool for use in the tonal analysis of violins and other stringed musical instruments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36684", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36684", "title": "David (Michelangelo)", "text": "Renaissance statue in Florence, Italy\nDavid is a masterpiece of Italian Renaissance sculpture in marble created from 1501 to 1504 by Michelangelo. With a height of , the \"David\" was the first colossal marble statue made in the High Renaissance, and since classical antiquity, a precedent for the 16th century and beyond. \"David\" was originally commissioned as one of a series of statues of twelve prophets to be positioned along the roofline of the east end of Florence Cathedral, but was instead placed in the public square in front of the Palazzo della Signoria, the seat of civic government in Florence, where it was unveiled on 8 September 1504. In 1873, the statue was moved to the Galleria dell'Accademia, Florence. In 1910 a replica was installed at the original site on the public square.\nThe biblical figure David was a favoured subject in the art of Florence. Because of the nature of the figure it represented, the statue soon came to symbolize the defence of civil liberties embodied in the 1494 constitution of the Republic of Florence, an independent city-state threatened on all sides by more powerful rival states and by the political aspirations of the Medici family.\nHistory.\nCommission.\nThe history of the statue of David begins before Michelangelo's work on it from 1501 to 1504. The commission was made during a decisive period in the history of the Florentine republic established after the expulsion of the Medici. The advantages of democratic government never materialized, and internal circumstances grew worse as dangers from without increased. Lorenzo de' Medici's successors and their supporters were a constant threat to the republic, and it was in defiance of the menace they represented that the project of a marble David was renewed.\nThe Overseers of the Office of Works, known as the \"Operai del Duomo\", were officers of the \"Opera di Santa Maria del Fiore\", the organization charged with the construction and maintenance of the new Cathedral of Florence. The \"Operai\" consisted of a 12-member committee that organized competitions, chose the best entries, commissioned the prevailing artists, and paid for the finished work. Most of them were members of the influential woolen cloth guild, the Arte della Lana. They had plans long before Michelangelo's involvement to commission a series of twelve large sculptures of Old Testament prophets for the twelve spurs, or protrusions, generated by the four diagonal buttresses that helped support the enormous weight of the cathedral dome.\nIn 1410, Donatello had made the first of the series of statues, a colossal figure of Joshua in terracotta, gessoed and painted white to give it the appearance of marble at a distance. Although Charles Seymour Jr says Donatello's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Agostino di Duccio was commissioned in 1463 to create a terracotta figure of Hercules for the series, almost certainly under the supervision of Donatello, Paoletti writes that \"The term 'hercules' may not be a specific indication of the subject of the figure but simply a synonym... used at the time for a 'giant' or very large figure.\"\nReady to continue their project, in 1464 the \"Operai\" contracted Agostino to create a marble sculpture of the young David, a symbol of Florence, to be mounted high on the eastern end of the \"Duomo\". This was to be formed in the Roman manner from several blocks of marble, but in 1465 Agostino himself went to Carrara, a town in the Apuan Alps, and acquired a very large block of \"bianco ordinario\" from the Fantiscritti quarry. He began work on the statue but got only as far as beginning to shape the torso, legs, and feet, roughing out drapery, and possibly hollowing a hole between the legs. For unknown reasons his work on the block of marble halted with the death of his master Donatello in 1466. Antonio Rossellino, also a Florentine, was commissioned in 1476 to resume the work, but the contract was apparently rescinded, and the block lay neglected and exposed to the weather in the yard of the cathedral workshop for another twenty-five years. This was of great concern to the \"Operai\" authorities, as such a large piece of marble was not only costly, but represented considerable labour and difficulty in its transportation to Florence.\nIn 1500, an inventory of the cathedral workshops described the piece as \"a certain figure of marble called David, badly blocked out and supine.\" A year later, documents showed that the \"Operai\" were determined to find an artist who could take this large piece of marble and turn it into a finished work of art. They ordered that the block of stone, which they called \"il gigante\" (the giant), be \"raised on its feet\" so that a master experienced in this kind of work might examine it and express an opinion. Though Leonardo da Vinci among others was consulted, and Andrea Sansovino was also keen to get the commission, it was Michelangelo, at 26 years of age, who convinced the \"Operai\" that he deserved the commission. On 16 August 1501, Michelangelo was given the official contract to undertake this task. It said (English translation of the Latin text):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the Consuls of the \"Arte della Lana\" and the Lords Overseers being met, have chosen as sculptor to the said Cathedral the worthy master, Michelangelo, the son of Lodovico Buonarrotti, a citizen of Florence, to the end that he may make, finish and bring to perfection the male figure known as the Giant, nine \"braccia\" in height, already blocked out in marble by Maestro Agostino \"grande\", of Florence, and badly blocked; and now stored in the workshops of the Cathedral. The work shall be completed within the period and term of two years next ensuing, beginning from the first day of September\u00a0...\nHe began carving the statue early in the morning on 13 September, a month after he was awarded the contract. The contract provided him a workspace in the \"Opera di Santa Maria del Fiore\" behind the \"Duomo\", paid him a salary of six \"fiorini\" per month, and allowed him two years to complete the sculpture.\nWhen the finished statue was moved from the Opera del Duomo to the Piazza della Signoria over the course of four days, as reported by two contemporary diarists, Luca Landucci and Pietro di Marco Parenti, a guard was placed to protect it from violence by other artists in Florence who had hoped for the commission. They were hostile to Michelangelo because of his bold request to the wardens of the Cathedral and the governor of the city, Piero Soderini. Despite the precaution, the sculpture was damaged by stones, leaving still visible marks on the upper part of its back. Four youths from prominent Florentine families were subsequently arrested by the Otto di Guardia and all but one were imprisoned for what may have been simple vandalism without a political motive.\nProcess.\nMichelangelo regarded a single block of stone as containing all the possible conceptions for a work of art, and believed that the artist's task is sculpting the marble block to reveal the ideal form within, an expression of his Neo-Platonic belief that body and mind are separate, and must work in concert and strive to attain union with one another and with the divine. In later years, speaking of his early commissions sculpting marble, he contended that he was merely liberating figures that were already existent in the stone, and that he could see them in his mind's eye.\nGiorgio Vasari wrote of Michelangelo sculpting the \"Prisoners\" that his method was to chisel the parts in highest relief first, then gradually revealing the lower parts. According to Franca Falletti, the passage describes Michelangelo's process of working marble in general. Lengthy preparatory work was done before the actual sculpting began \u2013 this included sketches, drawings and the making of small-scale terracotta or wax models. After these preliminary studies he went directly to sculpting the marble, using the method described by Vasari. He chiseled layer after layer from the main face of the stone, and then gradually more and more of the other sides. The unfinished state of the \"Prisoners\" demonstrates this process, and \"David\" must have been sculpted in the same manner.\nThe massive block of white marble that was to become the \"David\", measuring nine \"braccia\" in length, was of \"bianco ordinario\" grade stone, rather than the superior \"statuario\". It came from the old Roman Fantiscritti quarry at the centre of the Carrara marble basins, and had been transported by oxen-pulled carts to the sea, whence it was carried on barges dragged by oxen up the river Arno to Florence.\nThe Operai del Duomo had raised the block to an upright position prior to the first inspection of their purchase, but a scaffolding had to be built so that Michelangelo could reach every part. The artist, who made his steel chisels himself, began cutting the stone with the \"subbia\", a heavy, pointed iron tool used to rough out the main mass, before he employed the two-toothed shorter blade called the \"calcagnuolo\". By the time he began to use the three-toothed \"gradina\", a serrated claw chisel whose marks are seen in his unfinished sculptures, the basic form of the statue was emerging from the matrix. When he sculpted \"David\"'s hair and the pupils of his eyes, he used the \"trapano\", a drill worked with a bow, like the ancient sculptors.\nMichelangelo did without flat chisels in his sculpturing, and brought his pieces to the state of \"non finito\" almost entirely with toothed chisels. During the 2003 restoration of \"David\", Italian researchers observed marks of the \"subbia\", the sharpened \"subbia da taglio\", the slightly flattened \"unghietto\" (fingernail), and the \"gradina\", as well as marks from a smaller-toothed chisel, the \"dente di cane\" (dog's tooth). They found no evidence of Michelangelo using flat chisels in the work.\nA node of marble on the \"gigante\" that Michelangelo chiseled away before he began work on \"David\" in earnest has been interpreted by historians as a knot of drapery, based on the surmise that Agostino di Duccio's figure was intended to be clothed. Irving Lavin proposes that the node may have been a point, that is, a knob of marble left purposely by Agostino as a fixed reference for a mechanical transfer measuring off his statue from the model. Lavin suggests that Agostino's aborted attempt was the result of an error in his pointing system, and that if this conjecture is correct, it may illuminate a note added in the margin next to the passage in the commission giving \"il gigante\" to Michelangelo: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The said Michelangelo began to work on the said giant on the morning of 13 September 1501, although a few days earlier, on 9 September, he had with one or two blows of the chisel (\"uno vel duo ictibus\") removed a certain nodus (\"quoddam nodum\") that it had on its chest.\nPlacement.\nOn 25 January 1504, when the sculpture was nearing completion, Florentine authorities had to acknowledge there would be little possibility of raising the 5.17 metre high statue weighing approximately 8.5 tons to the roof of the cathedral. They convened a committee of 30 Florentine citizens that included many artists, including Leonardo da Vinci and Sandro Botticelli, to decide on an appropriate site for \"David\". While nine different locations for the statue were discussed, the majority of members seem to have been closely split between two sites.\nOne group, led by Giuliano da Sangallo and supported by Leonardo and Piero di Cosimo, among others, believed that, due to the imperfections in the marble, the sculpture should be placed under the roof of the Loggia dei Lanzi on Piazza della Signoria; the other group thought it should stand at the entrance to the Palazzo della Signoria, the city's town hall (now known as Palazzo Vecchio). Another opinion, shared by Botticelli and Cosimo Rosselli, was that the sculpture should be situated in front of the cathedral.\nIn June 1504, \"David\" was installed next to the entrance to the Palazzo della Signoria, replacing Donatello's bronze sculpture of \"Judith and Holofernes\", which also embodied a theme of heroic resistance. It took four days to move it the half mile from the cathedral's workshop into the Piazza della Signoria. The statue was suspended in a wooden frame and rolled on fourteen greased logs by more than 40 men. Later that summer, the sling and tree-stump support were gilded, and the figure was given a gilt loin-garland and victory wreath for its head.\nLater history.\nIn 1525 the block of marble intended to be the pendant for the \"David\" fell off a barge into the river Arno as it was being transported to Florence. Vasari wrote that it had jumped into the river in despair when it heard that Baccio Bandinelli would be carving it rather than Michelangelo, to whom the commission for a colossal statue of \"Hercules and Cacus\" at the entrance to the Palazzo della Signoria had originally been given.\nIn the mid-1800s, small cracks were noticed on the left leg on the \"David\", which can possibly be attributed to an uneven sinking of the ground under the massive statue. In 1873, it was removed from the piazza to protect it from damage, and was moved to the Accademia Gallery where it would attract many visitors. The sculpture was secured in a wheeled wooden crate, and moved slowly across the city from 30 July to 10 August that year. Its 16th-century base, said to be decrepit in contemporary reports, was lost when the crate was disassembled. A model of the crate is in the Museo di Casa Buonarroti, the house-museum in Florence's Via Ghibellina where Michelangelo lived. The statue was not placed in its permanent setting in the Accademia until 1882. The architect Emilio De Fabris, professor at the Accademia, designed a tribune to house the \"David\" in a vaulted interior exedra, towards the apse, where it was bathed in light that streamed in through windows in the dome above. A replica was placed in the Piazza della Signoria in 1910.\nIn 1991, Piero Cannata, an artist whom the police described as deranged, attacked the statue with a hammer he had concealed beneath his jacket and damaged the second toe of the left foot. He later said that a 16th-century Venetian painter's model ordered him to do so. Cannata was restrained by museum patrons until the police arrived. Fragments fell to the floor, and three tourists were caught by guards as they were trying to leave the gallery with pieces in their pockets.\nThe state of preservation of the \"David\" has been monitored and evaluated since 2000 using high-resolution 3D scanning, photogrammetry, finite element method (FEM) analyses, and \"in situ\" fracture monitoring through fibre optic Bragg gratings. These observations have shown that in its present vertical orientation, with the basal plinth horizontal, the centre of gravity of the base does not align with the \"David\"'s centre of gravity. Nevertheless, FEM analysis suggests that the statue is stable in its current position and indicates that its forward inclination of 1 degree to 3 degrees has played a major part in the development of cracks in the ankles.\nIn 2006, Borri and Grazini, using historical analysis and a finite element model of the \"David\", identified the probable cause of the cracks in its legs as a slight forward inclination of the statue that developed after the flood of 1844 in Florence. The statue being located outdoors in front of the Palazzo della Signoria (Palazzo Vecchio) from 1504 to 1873, this inclination likely occurred because of the \"uneven subsidence and rotation of the statue's foundations\". Further damage occurred with the additional weight placed on the statue when, in 1847, Clemente Papi made a plaster mould composed of more than 1,500 separate segments, some weighing as much as 680\u00a0kg. The sculpture was also inclined on other occasions, such as when it was moved in 1873 to its placement in the Galleria dell'Accademia, after which the tilt was corrected. Ultrasonic crack assessment tests carried out by Pascale and Lolli in 2014 determined that cracks in the \"broncone\", the tree trunk against which the \"David\"'s right leg rests, are the most worrisome of those in the statue. The left ankle and the area where the left heel and the base are attached also show cracks of critical concern.\nSome scholars have suggested that the relative weakness caused by the cracks in its legs could make the statue vulnerable to the vibrations of foot traffic from visitors to the gallery. Nearly a million and a half tourists (about four thousand people each day it is open) visit the Accademia Gallery annually to see the \"David\". In 2015, Pieraccini et al. measured its dynamic movements with interferometric radar. Measurements were made of such displacements on two days: Monday, 27 July and Tuesday, 28 July 2015; on Monday the Accademia is closed, while Tuesday is statistically the peak attendance day. Their results did not show a significant increase in the vibration amplitude on days the Accademia was open, compared to days it was closed.\nIn 2010, a dispute over the ownership of \"David\" arose when, based on a legal review of historical documents, the municipality of Florence claimed ownership of the statue in opposition to the Italian Culture Ministry, which disputes the municipal claim.\nInterpretation.\nThe pose of Michelangelo's \"David\" is unlike that of earlier Renaissance depictions of David. The bronze statues by Donatello and Verrocchio represented the hero standing victorious over the head of Goliath, and the painter Andrea del Castagno had shown the boy in mid-swing, even as Goliath's head rested between his legs, but no earlier Florentine artist had omitted the giant altogether. According to such scholars as Howard Hibbard, \"David\" is depicted \"before\" his battle with Goliath. Rather than being shown victorious over a foe much larger than he, \"David\" looks wary as he sizes up the giant Goliath before the battle has actually taken place. His brow is drawn, his neck tense, and the veins bulge out of his lowered right hand. His left hand holds a sling that is draped over his shoulder and down to his right hand, which holds the handle of the sling.\nThe twist of his body in \"contrapposto\", standing with most of its weight on his right foot and the other leg forward, effectively conveys to the viewer a sense of potential energy, the feeling that he is about to move. The statue is a Renaissance interpretation of a common ancient Greek theme of the standing heroic male nude. In the Renaissance, contrapposto poses were thought of as a distinctive feature of antique sculpture, initially manifested in the Doryphoros of Polykleitos (c. 440 BC). This is typified in \"David\"; this classic pose causes both hips and shoulders to rest at opposing angles, giving a slight s-curve to the entire torso. The contrapposto stance is emphasized by the left leg stepping forward, and by the contrasting positions of the arms: the left arm raised with its hand to the shoulder and the other hand touching the thigh.\nMichelangelo's \"David\" has become one of the most recognized works of Renaissance sculpture; a symbol of strength and youthful beauty. The colossal size of the statue alone impressed Michelangelo's contemporaries. Vasari described it as \"certainly a miracle that Michelangelo was able to raise up one who had died\", and then listed all of the largest and most grand of the ancient statues that he had ever seen, concluding that Michelangelo's work surpassed \"all ancient and modern statues, whether Greek or Latin, that have ever existed.\"\nThe proportions of the \"David\" are atypical of Michelangelo's work as well as of antique models; the figure has an unusually large head and hands (particularly apparent in the right hand). These enlargements may be due to the fact that the statue was originally intended to be placed on the cathedral roofline, where the important parts of the sculpture may have been accentuated in order to be visible from below. The small size of the genitals, though, is in line with his other works and with Renaissance conventions in general. The statue is unusually slender (front to back) in comparison to its height, which may be a result of the work done on the block before Michelangelo began carving it.\nA naturalistic rendition of the nude human body, if rendered successfully, has an erotic aspect. Vasari alludes to the statue's sexual locus when he acclaims the figure's \"very divine flanks\". The flanks (\"fianchi\") frame this part of the body, the nexus of its carnality. Antonio Forcellino calls the \"David\"'s sexual organs \"the most disquieting genitals of Renaissance sculpture\", referring to the manner in which the small bulge, typical of adolescence, frames a tuft of pubic hair that \"supports a penis full of energy and displays the testicles, also full of vigour\".\nCommentators have noted the presence of a foreskin on \"David\"'s penis, which may appear at odds with the Judaic practice of circumcision. An artistic deviation from what very likely would have been accurately portrayed as a circumcised penis, it is in keeping with the conventions of Renaissance art, in which the Christ Child, for example, is represented as being uncircumcised, although clearly older than the eight days compelled by Jewish scripture.\nPolitical implications.\nDavid the giant-killer had long been seen as a political symbol in Florence, and images of the biblical hero already carried political implications there. Donatello's bronze \"David,\" made for Cosimo de' Medici, perhaps c. 1440, had been appropriated by the Signoria in 1494, when the Medici were exiled from Florence, and the statue was installed in the courtyard of the Palazzo della Signoria, where it symbolized the Republican government of the city. According to Levine, by placing Michelangelo's statue in the same general location, it is likely that the \"David\" was conceived as politically controversial before Michelangelo began work on it, as well as an artistic response to that earlier work. While the originally intended location for the \"David\" was high up on the cathedral, its location was still in question. The commission, consisting of the most prominent artists of the day, debated in great detail the best placement for the colossal figure to be seen and appreciated, with consideration for its \"aria\", \"moda\", and \"qualit\u00e0\" (its aura, style, and excellence). The political overtones led to the statue being attacked twice in its early days. Protesters pelted it with stones the year it debuted, and, in 1527, an anti-Medici riot resulted in its left arm being broken into three pieces. Giorgio Vasari later claimed that he and his friend Francesco Silviati, although just boys, braved the violence and saved the pieces, storing them in Silviati's father's house.\nMachiavelli wrote of the long Florentine tradition that represented David as defender of the \"patria\", a convention most completely developed in the arts \u2013 especially in the series of statues, from Donatello's to Michelangelo's, depicting him as the protector of his people. Having returned the armour given him by King Saul, and choosing to fight Goliath with his own weapons \u2013 a sling and a knife \u2013 David personified the citizen soldier of Florence, and the city's ability to defend itself with its own arms.\nRather than placing Goliath's severed head between or underneath the \"David\"'s feet, Michelangelo carved the stump of a tree on the back of the right leg, a device conventionally employed by sculptors in ancient times to help support the weight of a statue. In a contemporary document the stump was called \"broncone\", the same Italian word used for Lorenzo de' Medici's personal emblem, or \"impresa\" \u2013 a dead branch of laurel sprouting new green growth. Soon after \"David's\" installation in front of the Palazzo della Signoria, certain adornments were added that have since disappeared: the stump and the strap of the sling were gilded, a vine of copper leaves was strung around the groin covering the genitals, and a laurel wreath of gilt bronze was added.\nThe gilt garland of leaves did not entirely negate the figure's erotic aura. Machiavelli penned a brief text in satirical vein describing the laws of an imaginary society devoted to seeking pleasure. Its people were required to violate all the normal rules of society and decorum, and were punished with even more pleasurable tasks if they failed to satisfy these demands. For example, women offenders would be forced to gaze at the \"David\" closely, \"with eyeglasses\" (a notable product of the city).\nAccording to Paoletti, a naked colossus situated in the primary public space of the city was necessarily politically charged, the \"David\"'s nakedness being more than merely a reference to the sculpture of antiquity that inspired the arts in the Italian Renaissance. Standing at the entrance to Florence's town hall, it had power as a political symbol, using an image of the sexualized human body to represent the corporality of the Florentine body politic. As a civic metaphor, it resonated with the everyday life experiences of 16th-century Florentine people among all the social classes.\nPedestal.\nKathleen Weil-Garris Brandt makes the case that pedestals are of great significance for Renaissance sculpture, and, following Rosalind Krauss, that it is the support, not the statue itself that decides the monumentality of a work of sculpture. She describes how the pedestal that supports the \"David\" has been neglected in the literature as a component of Michelangelo's extraordinary achievement with his completion of the statue, and is usually not seen in photographs. The bases of most Renaissance statues have historically suffered a similar fate. When Michelangelo was young, pedestals were seldom a matter of much consideration to the sculptor; free\u2011standing sculpture executed by contemporaries was rare and was made to surmount antique or new columns. \"Imbasamento\" is the Italian word generally used for the supports of sculpture; these and other kinds of pedestals were customarily made by \"scarpellini\", that is, professional carvers of architectural ornament, or ideally by other sculptors.\nOn 11 June 1504, the architects in charge of the transportation of the statue to the Palazzo della Signoria, Simone del Pollaiolo and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder, were ordered by the \"Operai\" of the Cathedral to make a marble base \"subtus et circum circa pedes gigantis\" (underneath and around the feet of the giant). Because the \"David\" was already situated, the pedestal apparently consisted of a sheath surrounding a core rather than a solid block of stone meant to support the weight of the statue. As it was architects who built and installed the pedestal, they have been credited entirely for its execution, but Brandt thinks it more likely to have been Michelangelo's idea.\nAccording to Brandt, the \"David\" marked a pivotal event in the history of pedestals: the first still existent use in the Renaissance of an antique architectural socle form to support a sculptural colossus. Practical considerations such as the support's ability to bear the weight and the difficulty of installation were necessarily taken into account, but otherwise its dimensions and form were a matter of free discretion. Nevertheless, the pedestal was not an arbitrary decorative element that could be exchanged for another. In one sense it was an extension of the architectural surroundings, but its form responded to the figure it supports. Thereafter, pedestals would become integral parts of sculptures.\nAlison Wright, drawing on the work of social historian Richard Trexler, calls the innovative installation of statues in the Piazza della Signoria in 16th-century Florence the \"greatest public forum for the display of modern freestanding sculpture in Renaissance Italy\", a reflection of the importance given in the city to upholding collective and personal honour. The pedestal created for Michelangelo's colossus was novel in this social context, installed as the terminus of the balustrade that stood before the town hall, the Palazzo della Signoria. Considered within this framing of the performative and ritual functions of the city's important sites, pedestals expressed the will to do honour in public and sacred spaces.\nConservation.\nOfficials responsible for the artistic heritage of Florence had become concerned about the \"David\"'s physical state by the middle of the 19th century. A cleaning of the statue had apparently occurred about 1746, and in 1813 the sculptor Stefano Ricci gave the statue a gentle cleaning and applied a thin coat of encaustic,\nconsisting of beeswax, possibly mixed with linseed oil, to its surface as a protective coating. The sculptor Lorenzo Bartolini recommended in 1842 that a thorough conservation of the statue should be performed, and, like most of the advisory committee formed in 1504, that the \"David\" be moved to the Loggia della Signoria for its protection. In 1843 the sculptor Aristodemo Costoli cleaned the statue with a 50 per cent hydrochloric acid solution that removed the encaustic coating and left the marble surface pitted and porous, damaging the statue far more than the weathering it had suffered in the previous 400 years.\nDuring World War II, \"David\", along with Michelangelo's other sculptures in the Accademia, was packed in sand and entombed in brick to protect it from being damaged.\nIn 1991, the left foot of the statue was damaged by an unemployed Italian man named Piero Cannata, who was carrying a hammer he had hidden under his jacket and broke off the tip of the second toe. The samples obtained from that incident allowed scientists, utilising spectroscopic, isotopic and petrographic analysis simultaneously, to determine that the marble used was obtained from the Fantiscritti quarries in Miseglia, the central of three small valleys in Carrara. The chemists and spectroscopists who conducted these tests say the marble of the \"David\" consists entirely of the mineral calcite.\nBecause of the marble's surface degradation, on the eve of the 500th anniversary of the sculpture's unveiling in 2004 the statue was given its first major cleaning since 1843. A scientific committee was formed to advise in the restoration. The committee was composed of university professors and scientists from the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (National Research Council) and the Opificio delle Pietre Dure, a government art-restoration department. They carried out tests and analyses and determined that the statue should be cleaned by poultices soaked in distilled water and applied to the sculpture's surface. Agnese Parronchi, the restorer originally selected by Florentine museums superintendent Antonio Paolucci, assessed the \"David\"'s condition herself by examining hundreds of photographs and performing a series of tests. Consequently, she opposed the committee's pre-specified method, fearing further deterioration, and insisted that it should be cleaned dry, with soft brushes and motorized erasers. Paolucci demanded that she use the wet pack method instead, but Parronchi refused. After Parronchi resigned, restorer Cinzia Parnigoni undertook the job of restoring the statue under the direction of Franca Falletti, director of the Accademia Gallery.\nResearchers at the University of Siena (Universit\u00e0 di Siena) performed an investigation of the small cavities, about a millimetre in diameter and of irregular distribution, with which the marble surface of the \"David\" is covered. Their macroscopic examination determined that the cavities have not resulted from deterioration of the stone, but rather that they can be attributed to the mineralogical structure of the marble taken from quarries in the Apuan Alps. The local quarrymen in their dialect call those less than a millimetre in size \"tar\u00f2li\" and those several millimetres or larger they call \"tarme\". Observation with optical fibres and magnifying lenses shows that the marble immediately surrounding the cavity may present milky white or greyish \"halos\" averaging a few millimetres wide. Many of them are completely or partly filled with various substances; this deposition is caused by the statue's exposure over centuries to atmospheric agents or to past restoration processes.\nAs of 2024 temporary scaffolding is erected around the statue every two months and in an operation that takes a half a day, dust and spider's webs are removed using soft-bristled brushes of various sizes and a bristle tipped vacuum cleaner.\nReplicas.\nMichelangelo's \"David\" has stood on display at Florence's Galleria dell'Accademia since 1873. On 29 August 1846, Grand Duke Leopold II of Tuscany commissioned Clemente Papi, a student of Stefano Ricci, to make a plaster cast of the \"David\". Papi, a master bronze caster, was experienced in making moulds and reproductions, and set about the project in the summer of 1847. He probably used wax to release the mould rather than oil or fat. This was less damaging than the encaustic wax used by Ricci in 1813, but residue from the gypsum of the plaster mould appears to be present in places where removing coatings is difficult, such as between the \"David\"'s toes.\nThis cast was to be moved to various locations in the city to determine their suitability for the statue. Papi first made two plaster replicas of the marble \"David\" from his moulds, one of which was given in 1857 by Leopold II to Queen Victoria of England. A decree by the Tuscan state on 2 October 1858 ordered the casting of the entire figure of the \"David\", which Papi completed in August 1866, sending the finished statue to the 1867 Paris Exposition the next year. His intention had always been to cast a bronze replica, and this cast was eventually raised on the Piazzale Michelangelo in 1875 to commemorate the fourth centenary of Michelangelo's birth.\nThe statue sent to Queen Victoria was intended as a diplomatic gesture by Duke Leopoldo II to assuage any ill feelings caused by his refusal to allow the sending of a notable Domenico Ghirlandaio painting from Florence to London. Apparently Queen Victoria was surprised to receive such a gift, and gave the statue to the newly opened South Kensington Museum, now the Victoria and Albert Museum. Papi's copy, which was sent to the Accademia di delle Belle Arti of Florence where it resides in the Gipsoteca (Gallery of Plaster Casts) of the Istituto Statale d'Arte, has been used to make all subsequent casts of the \"David\".\nThe plaster cast of \"David\" at the Victoria and Albert Museum has a detachable plaster fig leaf which is displayed nearby. The fig leaf was created in response to Queen Victoria's apparent shock upon first viewing the statue's nudity, and was hung on the figure by means of two strategically placed hooks prior to royal visits.\nOn 12 November 2010, a fibreglass replica of \"David\" was installed atop a buttress on a corner of the north tribune below the roofline of Florence Cathedral for a week. Photographs of the installation reveal the statue the way the \"Operai\" who commissioned the work originally expected it to be seen.\nMichelangelo's statue is the best known and the most often reproduced of all the artistic works created in Florence. Later reproductions have been made in plaster and in simulated marble fibreglass, signifying an attempt to lend an atmosphere of culture even in some unlikely settings such as beach resorts, gambling casinos and model railroads. Some parody reproductions feature uncharacteristic embellishments, such as a 1966 reproduction, called \"Leather David\", that captured attention in San Francisco for portraying David in leather attire.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36685", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36685", "title": "Emperor Go-Ichij\u014d", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 1016 to 1036\n was the 68th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nGo-Ichij\u014d's reign spanned the years from 1016 through 1036.\nThis 11th century sovereign was named after his father, Emperor Ichij\u014d, and \"go-\" (\u5f8c), translates literally as \"later\"; thus, he is sometimes called the \"Later Emperor Ichij\u014d\", or, in some older sources, may be identified as \"Emperor Ichij\u014d, the second\", or even \"Emperor Ichij\u014d II\".\nBiography.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was Atsuhira \"-shinn\u014d\" (\u6566\u6210\u89aa\u738b). He was also known as Atsunari\"-shinn\u014d\".\nAtsuhira was the second son of Emperor Ichij\u014d. His mother, Fujiwara no Akiko/Sh\u014dshi (\u85e4\u539f\u5f70\u5b50) (988\u20131074), was a daughter of Fujiwara no Michinaga. In her later years, Ichij\u014d's \"ch\u016bgo\" consort was known as J\u014dt\u014d-mon In (\u4e0a\u6771\u9580\u9662).\nEvents of Go-Ichij\u014d's life.\nAtsuhira\"-shinn\u014d\" was used as a pawn in Imperial court politics when he was only a child.\nAtsuhira became emperor at the age of 8, upon the abdication of his first cousin once removed, Emperor Sanj\u014d.\nDuring the initial years of Go-Ichij\u014d's reign, Fujiwara no Michinaga actually ruled from his position as \"sessh\u014d\" (regent).\nThe actual site of Go-Ichij\u014d's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Go-Ichij\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Bodaijuin no misasagi\".\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court's actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Go-Ichij\u014d's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Go-Ichij\u014d's reign.\nThe years of Go-Ichij\u014d's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsort and children.\nGo-Ichij\u014d had one Empress and two Imperial daughters.\nEmpress (C\"h\u016bg\u016b\"): \"Fujiwara no Ishi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u5a01\u5b50; 999\u20131036), Fujiwara no Michinaga\u2019s third daughter\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36686", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36686", "title": "1036", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1036 (MXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36687", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36687", "title": "2040s", "text": ""}
{"id": "36688", "revid": "45042592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36688", "title": "Emperor Go-Suzaku", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 1036 to 1045\n was the 69th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nGo-Suzaku's reign spanned the years from 1036 through 1045.\nThis 11th-century sovereign was named after the 10th-century Emperor Suzaku and \"go-\" (\u5f8c), translates literally as \"later;\" and thus, he is sometimes called the \"Later Emperor Suzaku\". The Japanese word \"go\" has also been translated to mean the \"second one;\" and in some older sources, this emperor may be identified as \"Suzaku, the second\" or as \"Suzaku II.\"\nBiography.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was Atsunaga\"-shinn\u014d\" (\u6566\u826f\u89aa\u738b).\nHis father was Emperor Ichij\u014d. His mother was Fujiwara no Akiko/Sh\u014dshi (\u85e4\u539f\u5f70\u5b50), the daughter of Fujiwara no Michinaga (\u85e4\u539f\u9053\u9577). He was the younger brother and heir to Emperor Go-Ichij\u014d.\nGo-Suzaku had five Empresses and seven Imperial children.\nEvents of Go-Suzaku's life.\nThe actual site of Go-Suzaku's grave is unknown. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Go-Suzaku's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Enj\u014d-ji no misasagi\".\nGo-Suzaku is buried amongst the \"Seven Imperial Tombs\" at Ry\u014dan-ji Temple in Kyoto.\nThe specific mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Go-Suzaku is today named \"Shu-zan.\"\nThe emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Go-Suzaku died.\nThese tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers (\"misasagi\") which were ordered by Emperor Meiji.\nThe final resting place of Emperor Go-Suzaku's consort, Teishi Nai-shinn\u014d (1013\u20131094), is here as well.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court's actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Go-Suzaku's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included: \nEras of Go-Suzaku's reign.\nThe years of Go-Suzaku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36689", "revid": "45902543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36689", "title": "1045", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1045 (MXLV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36691", "revid": "50657323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36691", "title": "Emperor Go-Reizei", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 1045 to 1068\n was the 70th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nGo-Reizei's reign spanned the years 1045\u20131068.\nThis 11th century sovereign was named after the 10th century Emperor Reizei and \"go-\" (\u5f8c), translates literally as \"later\"; and thus, he is sometimes called the \"Later Emperor Reizei\". The Japanese word \"go\" has also been translated to mean the \"second one\"; and in some older sources, this emperor may be identified as \"Reizei, the second\", or as \"Reizei II\".\nBiography.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was Chikahito\"-shinn\u014d\" (\u89aa\u4ec1\u89aa\u738b). He was the eldest son of Emperor Go-Suzaku. His mother was Fujiwara no Kishi (\u85e4\u539f\u5b09\u5b50), formerly Naishi-no kami, daughter of Fujiwara no Michinaga. Go-Reizei had three Empresses and no Imperial sons or daughters.\nEvents of Go-Reizei's life.\nWhen Emperor Go-Suzaku abdicated on February 5, 1045, his eldest son received the succession (\u2018\u2018senso\u2019\u2019) on the same day. Emperor Go-Reizei formally acceded to the throne (\u2018\u2018sokui\u2019\u2019) shortly after, and the era name was changed the following year to mark the beginning of his reign. His father Go-Suzaku died at the age of 37 on February 7, 1045, of unknown causes The one major event in Go-Reizei's life occurred in the year 1051, when Abe no Sadat\u014d and Munet\u014d instigated a rebellion that became known as the Zenkunen War (1051\u20131062). In response, Minamoto no Yoriyoshi is appointed governor of Mutsu and he is named \"chinjufu sh\u014dgun.\" He is given these titles and powers so that he will be able to restore peace in the north. Yoriyoshi would have been the first to receive this specific shogunal title, although his grandfather (Minamoto no Tsunemoto) had been \"seit\u014d fuku-sh\u014dgun\" (assistant commander for pacification of the east). Go-Reizei later died on May 22, 1068, at the age of 44 leaving no direct heirs to the throne. He was succeeded by his father's second son Takahito-shinn\u014d aka Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d.\nThe actual site of Go-Reizei's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") though at Kyoto. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Go-Reizei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Enkyo-ji no misasagi\". Go-Reizei is buried amongst the \"Seven Imperial Tombs\" at Ry\u014dan-ji Temple in Kyoto. The mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Go-Reizei is today named \"Shu-zan.\" The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Go-Reizei died. These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers (\"misasagi\") which were ordered by Emperor Meiji.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court's actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Go-Reizei's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Go-Reizei's reign.\nThe years of Go-Reizei's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36692", "revid": "1308544381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36692", "title": "1068", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1068 (MLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nGeology.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36693", "revid": "37031437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36693", "title": "1025", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1025 (MXXV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36695", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36695", "title": "1034", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1034 (MXXXIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAfrica.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36696", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36696", "title": "1073", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1073 (MLXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36697", "revid": "44342819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36697", "title": "Shirakawa", "text": " may refer to:\nPlaces.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36698", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36698", "title": "1053", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1053 (MLIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36699", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36699", "title": "1086", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1086 (MLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36701", "revid": "34669967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36701", "title": "Cloistered rule", "text": "Japanese system of imperial politics\n was a form of government in Japan during the Heian period. In this bifurcated system, an emperor abdicated, but retained power and influence. Those retired emperors who withdrew to live in monasteries (\"in\") continued to act in ways intended to counterbalance the influence of Fujiwara regents and the warrior class. Simultaneously, the titular emperor, the former emperor's chosen successor, fulfilled all the ceremonial roles and formal duties of the monarchy.\nRetired emperors were called \"Daij\u014d Tenn\u014d\" or \"J\u014dk\u014d\". A retired emperor who entered a Buddhist monastic community became a Cloistered Emperor (\"Japanese\" \u592a\u4e0a\u6cd5\u7687 Daij\u014d H\u014d\u014d).\nThere were retired emperors, including cloistered emperors, both before and after the Heian period, but the notion of cloistered rule as a system usually refers to the practice put in place by Emperor Shirakawa in 1086 and followed by his successors until the rise of the Kamakura shogunate in 1192.\nBackground.\nThe ritsury\u014d allowed retired emperors to exert some limited powers, and there are early examples such as Empress Jit\u014d, Emperor Sh\u014dmu and Emperor Uda in the 7th, 8th and 9th centuries respectively.\nBy the end of the 10th century, the Hokke family of the Fujiwara clan held political power in Japan through the office of the Imperial Regent, and the emperor increasingly became little more than a figurehead. In 1068, Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d became the first emperor in almost 200 years who was not related either by marriage or blood, or both, to the Hokke family. He exerted personal power while the Hokke family was dealing with internal conflicts between Fujiwara no Yorimichi and his brother Fujiwara no Norimichi, and was in a position to issue several laws and regulations, most notably the Enky\u016b Sh\u014den Regulation Decree, thus weakening the regency. In 1072, however, he fell ill and abdicated in favor of Emperor Shirakawa. He died the following year. Although he did not have time to exert power after his abdication, Sanj\u014d had weakened the regency and paved the way for the practice of cloistered rule.\nIn 1086, Emperor Shirakawa in his turn abdicated in favor of his son, Emperor Horikawa, who was four years old at the time. Shirakawa's objective appeared to be the protection of his son from his younger brother (Horikawa's uncle), who presented a serious threat of becoming a pretender to the throne, but after his retirement Shirakawa exerted his personal power to set the cloistered rule system in motion.\nEnd of the Heian period.\nSeparate imperial courts (\"In no Ch\u014d\" (\u9662\u5e81) evolved around the retired emperors, and their will was put into effect through offices known as \"Inzen\" (\u9662\u5ba3) and \"In no Ch\u014d Kudashi Bumi\" (\u9662\u5e81\u4e0b\u6587). Cloistered emperors also had their own troops, the \"Hokumen no Bushi\" (\u5317\u9762\u306e\u6b66\u58eb). The creation of these military units led eventually to the rise to power of the Taira clan, who used their membership of these units to gather political and economic power to themselves.\nThe end of the Heian period was marked by a rapid succession of cloistered emperors, to the point that there were several retired emperors living at the same time. The H\u014dgen Rebellion, following the death of the Emperor Toba, was an example of direct opposition between an emperor and an emperor emeritus. Finally, the end of the reign of Emperor Go-Shirakawa was marked by the Genpei War and the rise of Minamoto no Yoritomo as the first Kamakura \"sh\u014dgun\".\nTable.\nThe succession of power in the \"Insei\" system was complex.\nDuring the Shogunates.\nThe establishment of the Kamakura shogunate is taken to mark the beginning of the Kamakura period, but the Insei system was not immediately abandoned. Though the shogunate took over the police force and ruled eastern Japan, the authority of the emperors and retired emperors remained considerable. However, when Go-Toba, a grandson of Go-Shirakawa, sought to overthrow the Kamakura shogunate, his forces were defeated in the J\u014dky\u016b War, and the shogunate then took steps to reduce the power (and the finances) of the retired emperors. Even after the J\u014dky\u016b War, the cloistered rule system continued to exist, at least formally, for another 200 years. There were movements to take authority back into the hands of the imperial court, such as the Kenmu Restoration attempted by Emperor Go-Daigo, but in general a retired emperor presided as the head of the Kyoto court, with the approval of the shogunate.\nThere were also a few examples of retired emperors supervising their successors much later, during the Edo period. The last person to use the title \"Daij\u014d H\u014d\u014d\" was Emperor Reigen, in 1686.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36702", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36702", "title": "Animated cartoon", "text": ""}
{"id": "36703", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36703", "title": "Hex (board game)", "text": "Abstract strategy board game\nHex (also called Nash) is a two-player abstract strategy board game in which players attempt to connect opposite sides of a rhombus-shaped board made of hexagonal cells. Hex was invented by mathematician and poet Piet Hein in 1942 and later rediscovered and popularized by John Nash.\nIt is traditionally played on an 11\u00d711 rhombus board, although 13\u00d713 and 19\u00d719 boards are also popular. The board is composed of hexagons called \"cells\" or \"hexes\". Each player is assigned a pair of opposite sides of the board, which they must try to connect by alternately placing a stone of their color onto any empty hex. Once placed, the stones are never moved or removed. A player wins when they successfully connect their sides together through a chain of adjacent stones. Draws are impossible in Hex due to the topology of the game board.\nDespite the simplicity of its rules, the game has deep strategy and sharp tactics. It also has profound mathematical underpinnings related to the Brouwer fixed-point theorem, matroids and graph connectivity. The game was first published under the name Polygon in the Danish newspaper \"Politiken\" on December 26, 1942. It was later marketed as a board game in Denmark under the name Con-tac-tix, and Parker Brothers marketed a version of it in 1952 called Hex; they are no longer in production. Hex can also be played with paper and pencil on hexagonally ruled graph paper.\nGame type.\nHex is a finite, two-player perfect information game, and an abstract strategy game that belongs to the general category of \"connection games\". It can be classified as a Maker-Breaker game, a particular type of positional game. Since the game can never end in a draw, Hex is also a determined game.\nHex is a special case of the \"node\" version of the Shannon switching game. Hex can be played as a board game or as a paper-and-pencil game.\nRules.\nHex is played on a rhombic grid of hexagons, typically of size 11\u00d711, although other sizes are also possible. Each player has an allocated color, conventionally red and blue, or black and white. Each player is also assigned two opposite board edges. The hexagons on each of the four corners belong to both adjacent board edges.\nThe players take turns placing a stone of their color on a single cell on the board. The most common convention is for Red or Black to go first. Once placed, stones are not moved, replaced, or removed from the board. Each player's goal is to form a connected path of their own stones linking their two board edges. The player who completes such a connection wins the game.\nTo compensate for the first player's advantage, the swap rule (also called the pie rule) is normally used. This rule allows the second player to choose whether to switch positions with the first player after the first player makes the first move.\nWhen it is clear to both players who will win the game, it is customary, but not required, for the losing player to resign. In practice, most games of Hex end with one of the players resigning.\nHistory.\nInvention.\nThe game was invented by the Danish mathematician Piet Hein, who introduced it in 1942 at the Niels Bohr Institute. Although Hein later renamed it to Con-tac-tix, it became known in Denmark under the name \"Polygon\" due to an article by Hein in the 26 December 1942 edition of the Danish newspaper \"Politiken\", the first published description of the game, in which he used that name.\nNash's claim.\nThe game was rediscovered in 1948 or 1949 by the mathematician John Nash at Princeton University. According to Martin Gardner, who featured Hex in his July 1957 Mathematical Games column, Nash's fellow players called the game either Nash or John, with the latter name referring to the fact that the game could be played on hexagonal bathroom tiles. Nash insisted that he discovered the game independently of Hein, but there is some doubt about this, as it is known that there were Danish people, including Aage Bohr, who played Hex at Princeton in the 1940s, so that Nash may have subconsciously picked up the idea. Hein wrote to Gardner in 1957 expressing doubt that Nash discovered Hex independently. Gardner was unable to independently verify or refute Nash's claim. Gardner privately wrote to Hein: \"I discussed it with the editor, and we decided that the charitable thing to do was to give Nash the benefit of the doubt. ... The fact that you invented the game before anyone else is undisputed. Any number of people can come along later and say that they thought of the same thing at some later date, but this means little and nobody really cares.\" In a later letter to Hein, Gardner also wrote: \"Just between you and me, and off the record, I think you hit the nail on the head when you referred to a 'flash of a suggestion' which came to Mr. Nash from a Danish source, and which he later forgot about. It seems the most likely explanation.\"\nPublished games.\nInitially in 1942, Hein distributed the game, which was then called Polygon, in the form of 50-sheet game pads. Each sheet contained an 11\u00d711 empty board that could be played on with pencils or pens. In 1952, Parker Brothers marketed a version of the game under the name \"Hex\", and the name stuck. Parker Brothers also sold a version under the \"Con-tac-tix\" name in 1968. Hex was also issued as one of the games in the 1974 3M Paper Games Series; the game contained a 50-sheet pad of ruled Hex grids. Hex is currently published by Nestorgames in a 11\u00d711 size, a 14\u00d714, and a 19\u00d719 size.\nShannon's Hex machine.\nAbout 1950, Claude Shannon and E. F. Moore constructed an analog Hex playing machine, which was essentially a resistance network with resistors for edges and light bulbs for vertices. The move to be made corresponded to a certain specified saddle point in the network. The machine played a reasonably good game of Hex. Later, researchers attempting to solve the game and develop Hex-playing computer algorithms emulated Shannon's network to create strong computer players.\nResearch timeline.\nIt was known to Hein in 1942 that Hex cannot end in a draw; in fact, one of his design criteria for the game was that \"exactly one of the two players can connect their two sides\".\nIt was also known to Hein that the first player has a theoretical winning strategy.\nIn 1952, John Nash wrote up an existence proof that on symmetrical boards, the first player has a winning strategy.\nIn 1964, the mathematician Alfred Lehman showed that Hex cannot be represented as a binary matroid, so a determinate winning strategy like that for the Shannon switching game on a regular rectangular grid was unavailable.\nIn 1981, the Stefan Reisch showed that Hex is PSPACE-complete.\nIn 2002, the first explicit winning strategy (a reduction-type strategy) on a 7\u00d77 board was described.\nIn the 2000s, by using brute force search computer algorithms, Hex boards up to size 9\u00d79 (as of 2016) have been completely solved.\nStarting about 2006, the field of computer Hex came to be dominated by Monte Carlo tree search methods borrowed from successful computer implementations of Go. These replaced earlier implementations that combined Shannon's Hex-playing heuristic with alpha-beta search. On the subject of early Computer Hex, notable early implementations include Dolphin Microware's \"Hexmaster\", published in the early 1980s for Atari 8-bit computers.\nUntil 2019, humans remained better than computers at least on big boards such as 19x19, but on Oct 30, 2019 the program Mootwo won against the human player with the best Elo rank on LittleGolem, also winner of various tournaments (the game is available https://). This program was based on Polygames (an open-source project, initially developed by and several universities) using a mix of:\nStrategy.\nFrom the proof of a winning strategy for the first player, it is known that the Hex board must have a complex type of connectivity which has never been solved. Play consists of creating small patterns which have a simpler type of connectivity called \"safely connected\", and joining them into sequences that form a \"path\". Eventually, one of the players will succeed in forming a safely connected path of stones and spaces between their sides of the board and win. The final stage of the game, if necessary, consists of filling in the empty spaces in the path.\nA \"safely connected\" pattern is composed of stones of the player's color and open spaces which can be joined into a chain, an unbroken sequence of edge-wise adjacent stones, no matter how the opponent plays. One of the simplest such patterns is the bridge, which consists of a diamond of two stones of the same color and two empty spaces, where the two stones do not touch. If the opponent plays in either space, the player plays in the other, creating a contiguous chain. There are also safely connected patterns which connect stones to edges. There are many more safely connected patterns, some quite complex, built up of simpler ones like those shown. Patterns and paths can be disrupted by the opponent before they are complete, so the configuration of the board during an actual game often looks like a patchwork rather than something planned or designed.\nThere are weaker types of connectivity than \"safely connected\" which exist between stones or between safely connected patterns which have multiple spaces between them. The middle part of the game consists of creating a network of such weakly connected stones and patterns which hopefully will allow the player, by filling in the weak links, to construct just one safely connected path between sides as the game progresses.\nSuccess at Hex requires a particular ability to visualize synthesis of complex patterns in a heuristic way, and estimating whether such patterns are \"strongly enough\" connected to enable an eventual win. The skill is somewhat similar to the visualization of patterns, sequencing of moves, and evaluating of positions in chess.\nMathematical theory.\nDeterminacy.\nIt is not difficult to convince oneself by exposition, that hex cannot end in a draw, referred to as the \"hex theorem\". I.e., no matter how the board is filled with stones, there will always be one and only one player who has connected their edges. This fact was known to Piet Hein in 1942, who mentioned it as one of his design criteria for Hex in the original Politiken article.\nHein also stated this fact as \"a barrier for your opponent is a\nconnection for you\". John Nash wrote up a proof of this fact around 1949, but apparently did not publish the proof. Its first exposition appears in an in-house technical report in 1952, in which Nash states that \"connection and blocking the opponent are equivalent acts\". A more rigorous proof was published by John R. Pierce in his 1961 book \"Symbols, Signals, and Noise\". In 1979, David Gale published a proof that the determinacy of Hex is equivalent to the two-dimensional Brouwer fixed-point theorem, and that the determinacy of higher-dimensional \"n\"-player variants proves the fixed-point theorem in general. \nAn informal proof of the no-draw property of Hex can be sketched as follows: consider the connected component of one of the red edges. This component either includes the opposite red edge, in which case Red has a connection, or else it does not, in which case the blue stones along the boundary of the connected component form a winning path for Blue. The concept of a connected component is well-defined because in a hexagonal grid, two cells can only meet in an edge or not at all; it is not possible for cells to overlap in a single point.\nFirst-player win, informal existence proof.\nIn Hex without the swap rule on any board of size \"n\"x\"n\", the first player has a theoretical winning strategy. This fact was mentioned by Hein in his notes for a lecture he gave in 1943: \"in contrast to most other games, it can be proved that the first player in theory always can win, that is, if she could see to the end of all possible lines of play\". \nAll known proofs of this fact are non-constructive, i.e., the proof gives no indication of what the actual winning strategy is. Here is a condensed version of a proof that is attributed to John Nash c. 1949. The proof works for a number of games including Hex, and has come to be called the strategy-stealing argument.\nComputational complexity.\nIn 1976, Shimon Even and Robert Tarjan proved that determining whether a position in a game of generalized Hex played on arbitrary graphs is a winning position is PSPACE-complete.\nA strengthening of this result was proved by Reisch by reducing the quantified Boolean formula problem in conjunctive normal form to Hex. This result means that there is no efficient (polynomial time in board size) algorithm to solve an arbitrary Hex position unless there is an efficient algorithm for all PSPACE problems, which is widely believed not to be the case. However, it doesn't rule out the possibility of a simple winning strategy for the initial position (on boards of arbitrary size), or a simple winning strategy for all positions on a board of a particular size.\nIn 11\u00d711 Hex, the state space complexity is approximately 2.4\u00d71056; versus 4.6\u00d71046 for chess. The game tree complexity is approximately 1098 versus 10123 for chess.\nComputed strategies for smaller boards.\nIn 2002, Jing Yang, Simon Liao and Mirek Pawlak found an explicit winning strategy for the first player on Hex boards of size 7\u00d77 using a decomposition method with a set of reusable local patterns. They extended the method to weakly solve the center pair of topologically congruent openings on 8\u00d78 boards in 2002 and the center opening on 9\u00d79 boards in 2003. In 2009, Philip Henderson, Broderick Arneson and Ryan B. Hayward completed the analysis of the 8\u00d78 board with a computer search, solving all the possible openings. In 2013, Jakub Pawlewicz and Ryan B. Hayward solved all openings for 9\u00d79 boards, and one (the most-central) opening move on the 10\u00d710 board.\nSince Gardner first postulated in his column in Scientific American in 1957, albeit speciously, that any first play on the short diagonal is a winning play, for all solved game boards up to n=9, that has indeed been the case. In addition, for all boards except n=2 and n=4, there have been numerous additional winning first moves; the number of winning first moves generally is \u2265 n\u00b2/2.\nVariants.\nOther connection games with similar objectives but different structures include Shannon switching game (also known as Gale and Bridg-It) and TwixT. Both of these bear some degree of similarity to the ancient Chinese game of Go.\nRectangular grids and paper and pencil.\nThe game may be played on a rectangular grid like a chess, checker or go board, by considering that spaces (intersections in the case of go) are connected in one diagonal direction but not the other. The game may be played with paper and pencil on a rectangular array of dots or graph paper in the same way by using two different colored pencils.\nBoard sizes.\nPopular dimensions other than the standard 11\u00d711 are 13\u00d713 and 19\u00d719 as a result of the game's relationship to the older game of Go. According to the book \"A Beautiful Mind\", John Nash (one of the game's inventors) advocated 14\u00d714 as the optimal size.\nRex (Reverse Hex).\nThe mis\u00e8re variant of Hex is called \"Rex\", in which each player tries to force their opponent to make a chain. Rex is slower than Hex since, on any empty board with equal dimensions, the losing player can delay a loss until the entire board is full. On boards with unequal dimensions, the player whose sides are further apart can win regardless of who plays first. On boards with equal dimensions, the first player can win on a board with an even number of cells per side, and the second player can win on a board with an odd number. On boards with an even number, one of the first player's winning moves is always to place a stone in the acute corner.\n\"Blockbusters\".\nHex had an incarnation as the question board from the television game show \"Blockbusters\". In order to play a \"move\", contestants had to answer a question correctly. The board had 5 alternating columns of 4 hexagons; the solo player could connect top-to-bottom in 4 moves, while the team of two could connect left-to-right in 5 moves.\nY.\nThe game of Y is Hex played on a triangular grid of hexagons; the object is for either player to connect all three sides of the triangle. Y is a generalization of Hex to the extent that any position on a Hex board can be represented as an equivalent position on a larger Y board.\nHavannah.\nHavannah is a game based on Hex. It too has a board space composed of hexagonal tiles, however the board is itself in the shape of a large hexagon, and a win is achieved by forming one of three patterns.\nProjex.\nProjex is a variation of Hex played on a real projective plane, where the players have the goal of creating a noncontractible loop. Like in Hex, there are no ties, and there is no position in which both players have a winning connection.\nDark Hex.\nDark Hex (also known as Phantom Hex) is an imperfect information version of Hex. The players are not exposed to each other's stones at any point in the game unless they discover them first. The game is played in the presence of an umpire where each player first verifies the move if its a collision or not. Based on the continuation of this point the game has different versions.\nCompetition.\nAs of 2016, there were &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;over-the-board&lt;/dfn&gt; tournaments reported from Brazil, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, UK and the US. One of the largest Hex competitions is organized by the International Committee of Mathematical Games in Paris, France, which is annually held since 2013. Hex is also part of the Computer Olympiad. During this competition the pie rule is used.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36704", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36704", "title": "HP-UX", "text": "Operating system\nHP-UX (from \"Hewlett Packard Unix\") is a proprietary implementation of the Unix operating system developed by Hewlett Packard Enterprise; current versions support HPE Integrity Servers, based on Intel's Itanium architecture. It is based on Unix System V (initially System III) and first released in 1984.\nEarlier versions of HP-UX supported the HP Integral PC and HP 9000 Series 200, 300, and 400 computer systems based on the Motorola 68000 series of processors, the HP 9000 Series 500 computers based on HP's proprietary FOCUS architecture, and later HP 9000 Series models based on HP's PA-RISC instruction set architecture. HP-UX was the first Unix to offer access-control lists for file access permissions as an alternative to the standard Unix permissions system. HP-UX was also among the first Unix systems to include a built-in logical volume manager. \nHP has had a long partnership with Veritas Software, and uses VxFS as the primary file system. It is one of three commercial operating systems that have versions certified to The Open Group's UNIX 03 standard (the others are macOS and AIX).\nFollowing the discontinuation of Itanium processors, HP-UX is set to reach end-of-life by December 2025.\nCharacteristics.\nHP-UX 11i offers a common shared disks for its clustered file system. HP Serviceguard is the cluster solution for HP-UX. HP Global Workload Management adjusts workloads to optimize performance, and integrates with Instant Capacity on Demand so installed resources can be paid for in 30-minute increments as needed for peak workload demands.\nHP-UX offers operating system-level virtualization features such as hardware partitions, isolated OS virtual partitions on cell-based servers, and HP Integrity Virtual Machines (HPVM) on all Integrity servers. HPVM supports guests running on HP-UX 11i v3 hosts\u00a0\u2013 guests can run Linux, Windows Server, OpenVMS or HP-UX. HP supports online VM guest migration, where encryption can secure the guest contents during migration.\nHP-UX 11i v3 scales as follows (on a SuperDome 2 with 32 Intel Itanium 9560 processors):\nSecurity.\nThe 11i v2 release introduced kernel-based intrusion detection, strong random number generation, stack buffer overflow protection, security partitioning, role-based access management, and various open-source security tools.\nHP classifies the operating system's security features into three categories: data, system and identity:\nContext dependent files.\nRelease 6.x (together with 3.x) introduced the context dependent files (CDF) feature, a method of allowing a fileserver to serve different configurations and binaries (and even architectures) to different client machines in a heterogeneous environment. A directory containing such files had its suid bit set and was made hidden from both ordinary and root processes under normal use. Such a scheme was sometimes exploited by intruders to hide malicious programs or data. CDFs and the CDF filesystem were dropped with release 10.0.\nSupported hardware platforms.\nHP-UX operating systems supports a variety of PA-RISC systems. The 11.0 added support for Integrity-based servers for the transition from PA-RISC to Itanium. HP-UX 11i v1.5 is the first version that supported Itanium. On the introduction of HP-UX 11i v2 the operating system supported both of these architectures.\nBL series.\nHP-UX 11i supports HPE Integrity Servers of HP BL server blade family. These servers use the Intel Itanium architecture.\nCX series.\nHP-UX 11i v2 and 11i v3 support HP's CX series servers. CX stands for carrier grade and is used mainly for telco industry with -48V DC support and is NEBS certified. Both of these systems contain Itanium Mad6M processors and are discontinued.\nRX series.\nHP-UX supports HP's RX series of servers.\nRelease history.\nPrior to the release of HP-UX version 11.11, HP used a decimal version numbering scheme with the first number giving the major release and the number following the decimal showing the minor release. With 11.11, HP made a marketing decision to name their releases 11\"i\" followed by a v(\"decimal-number\") for the version. The \"i\" was intended to indicate the OS is Internet-enabled, but the effective result was a dual version-numbering scheme.\nHP-UX 11i operating environments.\nHP bundles HP-UX 11i with programs in packages they call Operating Environments (OEs).\nThe following lists the currently available HP-UX 11i v3 OEs:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36705", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36705", "title": "Circumsision", "text": ""}
{"id": "36706", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36706", "title": "Circumsission", "text": ""}
{"id": "36707", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36707", "title": "Circumsicion", "text": ""}
{"id": "36708", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36708", "title": "Simspons", "text": ""}
{"id": "36709", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36709", "title": "Lamberghini", "text": ""}
{"id": "36712", "revid": "2659644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36712", "title": "Phonetic algorithm", "text": "Algorithm for indexing of words by their pronunciation\nA phonetic algorithm is an algorithm for indexing of words by their pronunciation. If the algorithm is based on orthography, it depends crucially on the spelling system of the language it is designed for: as most phonetic algorithms were developed for English they are less useful for indexing words in other languages. Because English spelling varies significantly depending on multiple factors, such as the word's origin and usage over time and borrowings from other languages, phonetic algorithms necessarily take into account numerous rules and exceptions. More general phonetic matching algorithms take articulatory features into account \nPhonetic search has many applications, and one of the early use cases has been that of trademark search to ensure that newly registered trade marks do not risk infringing on existing trademarks by virtue of their pronunciation. \nAlgorithms.\nAmong the best-known phonetic algorithms are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36713", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36713", "title": "Metaphone", "text": "Phonetic algorithm for indexing words\nMetaphone is a phonetic algorithm, published by Lawrence Philips in 1990, for indexing words by their English pronunciation. It fundamentally improves on the Soundex algorithm by using information about variations and inconsistencies in English spelling and pronunciation to produce a more accurate encoding, which does a better job of matching words and names which sound similar. As with Soundex, similar-sounding words should share the same keys. Metaphone is available as a built-in operator in a number of systems.\nPhilips later produced a new version of the algorithm, which he named Double Metaphone. Contrary to the original algorithm whose application is limited to English only, this version takes into account spelling peculiarities of a number of other languages. In 2009 Philips released a third version, called Metaphone 3, which achieves an accuracy of approximately 99% for English words, non-English words familiar to Americans, and first names and family names commonly found in the United States, having been developed according to modern engineering standards against a test harness of prepared correct encodings.\nProcedure.\nOriginal Metaphone codes use the 16 consonant symbols 0BFHJKLMNPRSTWXY. The '0' represents \"th\" (as an ASCII approximation of \u0398), 'X' represents \"sh\" or \"ch\", and the others represent their usual English pronunciations. The vowels AEIOU are also used, but only at the beginning of the code. This table summarizes most of the rules in the original implementation:\nThis table does not constitute a complete description of the original Metaphone algorithm, and the algorithm cannot be coded correctly from it. Original Metaphone contained many errors and was superseded by Double Metaphone, and in turn Double Metaphone and original Metaphone were superseded by Metaphone 3, which corrects thousands of miscodings that will be produced by the first two versions.\nTo implement Metaphone without purchasing a (source code) copy of Metaphone 3, the reference implementation of Double Metaphone can be used. Alternatively, version 2.1.3 of Metaphone 3, an earlier 2009 version without a number of encoding corrections made in the current version, version 2.5.4, has been made available under the terms of the BSD License via the OpenRefine project.\nDouble Metaphone.\nThe Double Metaphone phonetic encoding algorithm is the second generation of this algorithm. Its implementation was described in the June 2000 issue of \"C/C++ Users Journal\". It makes a number of fundamental design improvements over the original Metaphone algorithm.\nIt is called \"Double\" because it can return both a primary and a secondary code for a string; this accounts for some ambiguous cases as well as for multiple variants of surnames with common ancestry. For example, encoding the name \"Smith\" yields a primary code of \"SM0\" and a secondary code of \"XMT\", while the name \"Schmidt\" yields a primary code of \"XMT\" and a secondary code of \"SMT\"\u2014both have \"XMT\" in common.\nDouble Metaphone tries to account for myriad irregularities in English of Slavic, Germanic, Celtic, Greek, French, Italian, Spanish, Chinese, and other origins. Thus it uses a much more complex ruleset for coding than its predecessor; for example, it tests for approximately 100 different contexts of the use of the letter C alone.\nMetaphone 3.\nA professional version was released in October 2009, developed by the same author, Lawrence Philips. It is a commercial product sold as source code. Metaphone 3 further improves phonetic encoding of words in the English language, non-English words familiar to Americans, and first names and family names commonly found in the United States. It improves encoding for proper names in particular to a considerable extent. The author claims that in general it improves accuracy for all words from the approximately 89% of Double Metaphone to 98%. Developers can also now set switches in code to cause the algorithm to encode Metaphone keys 1) taking non-initial vowels into account, as well as 2) encoding voiced and unvoiced consonants differently. This allows the result set to be more closely focused if the developer finds that the search results include too many words that don't resemble the search term closely enough. Metaphone 3 is sold as C++, Java, C#, PHP, Perl, and PL/SQL source, Ruby and Python wrappers accessing a Java jar, and also Metaphone 3 for Spanish and German pronunciation available as Java and C# source. The latest revision of the Metaphone 3 algorithm is v2.5.4, released March 2015. The Metaphone3 Java source code for an earlier version, 2.1.3, lacking a large number of encoding corrections made in the current version, version 2.5.4, was included as part of the OpenRefine project and is publicly viewable.\nCommon misconceptions.\nThere are some misconceptions about the Metaphone algorithms that should be addressed. The following statements are true:\n* words that start with a vowel sound will have an 'A', representing any vowel, as the first character of the encoding (in Double Metaphone and Metaphone 3 - original Metaphone just preserves the actual vowel), \n* vowels after an initial vowel sound will be disregarded and not encoded, and \n* voiced/unvoiced consonant pairs will be mapped to the same encoding. (Examples of voiced/unvoiced consonant pairs are D/T, B/P, Z/S, G/K, etc.).\nThis approximate encoding is necessary to account for the way English speakers vary their pronunciations and misspell or otherwise vary words and names they are trying to spell. Vowels, of course, are notoriously highly variable. British speakers often complain that Americans seem to pronounce 'T's the same as 'D'. Consider, also, that all English speakers often pronounce 'Z' where 'S' is spelled, almost always when a noun ending in a voiced consonant or a liquid is pluralized, for example \"seasons\", \"beams\", \"examples\", etc. Not encoding vowels after an initial vowel sound will help to group words where a vowel and a consonant may be transposed in the misspelling or alternative pronunciation.\nMetaphone of other languages.\nMetaphone is useful for English variants and other languages, having been preferred to Soundex in several Indo-European languages. On the other hand, rough phonetic encoding causes language dependency \u2014 or, in a language variant, average language-speaker dependency \u2014 mainly for non-English variants.\nPerhaps the first example of stable adaptation of non-English metaphone was Brazilian Portuguese: it https:// as a database solution in V\u00e1rzea Paulista municipality of Brazil, and it evolved to the https://."}
{"id": "36715", "revid": "43590020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36715", "title": "Audio Video Interleave", "text": "File format\nAudio Video Interleave (also Audio Video Interleaved and known by its initials and filename extension AVI, usually pronounced ) is a proprietary multimedia container format and Windows standard introduced by Microsoft in November 1992 as part of its Video for Windows software. AVI files can contain both audio and video data in an uncompressed file container that allows synchronous audio-with-video playback.\nLike the DVD video format, AVI files support multiple streaming audio and video, although these features are seldom used. A codec popularly used for AVI is MPEG-4 ASP, usually encoded by DivX or Xvid, although many other codecs can also be contained in an AVI file.\nMany AVI files use the file format extensions developed by the Matrox OpenDML group in February 1996. These files are supported by Microsoft, and are unofficially called AVI 2.0. In 2010 the US government's National Archives and Records Administration defined AVI as the official wrapper for preserving digital video.\nHistory.\nPublishers faced a predicament regarding how they should distribute videos on CD-ROMs. Thirty seconds of video displayed in 24-bit color and at thirty frames per second and Super VGA resolutions could take up 680 megabytes of space\u2014the storage capacity of most CD-ROMs in 1992. Lossily compressing the videos would save a lot of space, but not without degrading the quality of the videos. Publishers who were more concerned about video quality instead were searching for an ideal compression algorithm that would compress the video files while still preserving the quality.\nMicrosoft recognized the problem and sought to develop a standard that would losslessly compress the video files. They also recognized that because of the hardware requirements for playing the videos in uncompressed quality, which at the time were demanding, it needed to allow users of low-end computers to play the videos in compressed quality. They developed and published the Audio Video Interleave format on November 10, 1992, as part of their Video for Windows, and included support for codecs to satisfy those users.\nFormat.\nAVI is a subformat of the Resource Interchange File Format (RIFF), which divides a file's data into blocks, or \"chunks\". Each chunk is identified by a FourCC tag.\nAn AVI file takes the form of a RIFF header, which is then divided into two mandatory chunks and one optional chunk. The first chunk is identified by the \"hdrl\" tag, which stores the information required by the codec to decompress the AVI file for viewing. The second sub-chunk is identified by the \"movi\" tag, containing the actual audio and visual data that make up the AVI video. The third optional chunk is identified by the \"idx1\" tag, which indexes the offsets of the data chunks within the file.\nBy way of the RIFF format, the audio and visual data contained in the \"movi\" chunk can be encoded or decoded by software called a codec, which is an abbreviation for (en)coder/decoder. Upon creation of the file, the codec translates between raw data and the (compressed) data format used inside the chunk. An AVI file may carry audio and visual data inside the chunks in virtually any compression scheme, including Full Frame (Uncompressed), Indeo, run-length encoding, and Microsoft Video 1.\nSome programs, like VLC, complain when the \"idx1\" index sub-chunk is not found, as it is required for efficient moving among timestamps. They offer to \"fix\" the file by building an index temporarily or permanently.\nMetadata.\nAs a derivative of the Resource Interchange File Format (RIFF), AVI files are commonly tagged with metadata in the INFO chunk. In addition, AVI files can embed Extensible Metadata Platform. By design, any RIFF file can legally include additional chunks of data, each identified by a four-character code; software which does not understand that particular code should skip the chunk. As such, it is theoretically possible to expand any RIFF file format, including AVI, to support almost any conceivable metadata. Some of the limitations of AVI in modern use relate to a lack of standardization in this metadata (see Limitations below).\nLimitations.\nSince its introduction in the early 90s, new computer video techniques have been introduced which the original AVI specification did not anticipate.\nMore recent container formats (such as Matroska, Ogg and MP4) solve all these problems, although software is freely available to both create and correctly replay AVI files which use the techniques described here.\nDV AVI.\nDV AVI is a type of AVI file where the video has been compressed to conform with DV standards. There are two types of DV-AVI files:\nType 1 is actually the newer of the two types. Microsoft made the \"type\" designations, and decided to name their older VfW-compatible version \"Type 2\", which only furthered confusion about the two types. In the late 1990s through early 2000s, most professional-level DV software, including non-linear editing programs, only supported Type 1. One notable exception was Adobe Premiere, which only supported Type 2. High-end FireWire controllers usually captured to Type 1 only, while \"consumer\" level controllers usually captured to Type 2 only. Software is and was available for converting Type 1 AVIs to Type 2, and vice versa, but this is a time-consuming process.\nMany FireWire controllers only captured to one or the other type. However, almost all relevant software supports both Type 1 and Type 2 editing and rendering, including Adobe Premiere. Thus, many users are unaware of the fact that there are two types of DV AVI files.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36716", "revid": "15816808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36716", "title": "Buran programme", "text": "Soviet research project on spaceplanes\nThe \"Buran\" programme (, , \"Snowstorm\", \"Blizzard\"), also known as the \"VKK Space Orbiter programme\" (), was a Soviet and later Russian reusable spacecraft project that began in 1974 at the Central Aerohydrodynamic Institute in Moscow and was formally suspended in 1993. In addition to being the designation for the whole Soviet/Russian reusable spacecraft project, \"Buran\" was also the name given to orbiter 1K, which completed one uncrewed spaceflight in 1988 and was the only Soviet reusable spacecraft to be launched into space. The Buran-class orbiters used the expendable Energia rocket as a launch vehicle.\nThe \"Buran\" programme was started by the Soviet Union as a response to the United States Space Shuttle program. The latter's unclassified nature was a boon for the Soviets and resulted in many superficial and functional similarities between American and Soviet shuttle designs. Although the Buran class was similar in appearance to NASA's Space Shuttle orbiter, and could similarly operate as a re-entry spaceplane, its final internal and functional design was different. For example, the main engines during launch were on the Energia rocket and were not taken into orbit by the spacecraft. Smaller rocket engines on the craft's body provided propulsion in orbit and de-orbital burns, similar to the Space Shuttle's OMS pods. Unlike the Space Shuttle whose first orbital spaceflight was accomplished in April 1981, Buran, whose first and only spaceflight occurred in November 1988, had a capability of flying uncrewed missions, as well as performing fully automated landings. The project was the largest and the most expensive in the history of Soviet space exploration.\nBackground.\nThe Soviet reusable spacecraft programme has its roots in the late 1950s, at the very beginning of the space age. The idea of Soviet reusable space flight is very old, though it was neither continuous nor consistently organized. Before Buran, no project of the programme reached operational status.\nThe first step toward a reusable Soviet spacecraft was the 1954 Burya, a high-altitude prototype jet aircraft/cruise missile. Several test flights were made before it was cancelled by order of the Central Committee. The Burya had the goal of delivering a nuclear payload, presumably to the United States, and then returning to base. The Burya programme was cancelled by the USSR in favor of a decision to develop ICBMs instead. The next iteration of a reusable spacecraft was the Zvezda design, which also reached a prototype stage. Decades later, another project with the same name would be used as a service module for the International Space Station. After Zvezda, there was a hiatus in reusable projects until Buran.\nThe Buran orbital vehicle programme was developed in response to the U.S. Space Shuttle program, which raised considerable concerns among the Soviet military and especially Defense Minister Dmitry Ustinov. An authoritative chronicler of the Soviet and later Russian space programme, the academic Boris Chertok, recounts how the programme came into being. According to Chertok, after the U.S. developed its Space Shuttle program, the Soviet military became suspicious that it could be used for military purposes, due to its enormous payload, several times that of previous U.S. launch vehicles. Officially, the Buran orbital vehicle was designed for the delivery to orbit and return to Earth of spacecraft, cosmonauts, and supplies. Both Chertok and Gleb Lozino-Lozinskiy (General Designer and General Director of NPO Molniya) suggest that from the beginning, the programme was military in nature; however, the exact military capabilities, or intended capabilities, of the Buran programme remain classified.\nLike its American counterpart, the Buran orbital vehicle, when in transit from its landing sites back to the launch complex, was transported on the back of a large jet aeroplane \u2013 the Antonov An-225 Mriya transport aircraft, which was designed in part for this task and was the largest aircraft in the world to fly multiple times. Before the \"Mriya\" was ready (after the Buran had flown), the Myasishchev VM-T \"Atlant\", a variant on the Soviet Myasishchev M-4 \"Molot\" (Hammer) bomber (NATO code: Bison), fulfilled the same role.\nHistory of the Buran programme.\nProgramme development.\nThe development of the Buran began in the early 1970s as a response to the U.S. Space Shuttle program. Soviet officials were concerned about a perceived military threat posed by the U.S. Space Shuttle. In their opinion, the Shuttle's 30-ton payload-to-orbit capacity and, more significantly, its 15-ton payload return capacity, were a clear indication that one of its main objectives would be to place massive experimental laser weapons into orbit that could destroy enemy missiles from a distance of several thousands of kilometres. Their reasoning was that such weapons could only be effectively tested in actual space conditions and that to cut their development time and save costs it would be necessary to regularly bring them back to Earth for modifications and fine-tuning. Soviet officials were also concerned that the U.S. Space Shuttle could make a sudden dive into the atmosphere to drop nuclear bombs on Moscow.\nIn 1974, Valentin Glushko's design bureau, OKB-1 (later NPO Energiya), proposed a new family of heavy-lift rockets called RLA (). The RLA concept included the use of kerosene and liquid hydrogen as fuel, and liquid oxygen as oxidizer (both new technologies in the Soviet space programme), with the shuttle orbiter being one possible payload. While NPO Molniya conducted development under the lead of Gleb Lozino-Lozinskiy, the Soviet Union's Military-Industrial Commission, or VPK, was tasked with collecting all data it could on the U.S. Space Shuttle. Under the auspices of the KGB, the VPK was able to amass documentation on the American shuttle's airframe designs, design analysis software, materials, flight computer systems and propulsion systems. The KGB targeted many university research project documents and databases, including Caltech, MIT, Princeton, Stanford and others. The thoroughness of the acquisition of data was made much easier as the U.S. shuttle development was unclassified.\nBy 1975, NPO Energiya had come up with two competing designs for the orbiter vehicle: the MTKVP (), a 34-meter-long lifting body spaceplane launched on top of a stack of kerosene-fueled strap on boosters; and the OS-120 (), a close copy of the US Space Shuttle based on US Space Shuttle documentation and designs obtained through the VPK and KGB. The OS-120 was a delta-winged spaceplane based heavily on the US Space Shuttle design, equipped with three liquid hydrogen engines, strapped to a detachable external tank and four liquid fuel boosters (NPO Energiya even considered the use of solid propellant rocket boosters, further imitating the US Shuttle's configuration).\nA compromise between these two proposals was achieved by NPO Energiya in January 1976 with the OK-92 (), a delta-winged orbiter equipped with two Soloviev D-30 turbofan jet engines for autonomous atmospheric flight, launched to space from a rocket stack made of a core stage with three cryogenic engines, and four kerosene-fueled boosters, each with four engines. By 1978, the OK-92 design was further refined, with its final configuration completed in June 1979.\nSoviet engineers were initially reluctant to implement a spacecraft design with so many similarities to the US Space Shuttle. Although it has been commented that wind tunnel testing showed that NASA's design was already ideal, the shape requirements were mandated by its potential military capabilities to transport large payloads to low Earth orbit, themselves a counterpart to the Pentagon's initially projected missions for the Shuttle. Even though the Molniya Scientific Production Association proposed its Spiral programme design (halted 13 years earlier), it was rejected as being altogether dissimilar from the American shuttle design.\nThe construction of the shuttles began in 1980, and by 1984 the first full-scale Buran was rolled out. The first suborbital test flight of a scale-model (BOR-5) took place as early as July 1983. As the project progressed, five additional scale-model flights were performed. A test vehicle was constructed with four jet engines mounted at the rear; this vehicle is usually referred to as OK-GLI, or as the \"Buran aerodynamic analogue\". The jets were used to take off from a normal landing strip, and once it reached a designated point, the engines were cut and OK-GLI glided back to land. This provided invaluable information about the handling characteristics of the Buran design, and significantly differed from the carrier plane/air drop method used by the United States and the \"Enterprise\" test craft. Twenty-four test flights of OK-GLI were performed by the Gromov Flight Research Institute test pilots and researchers after which the shuttle was \"worn out\". The developers considered using a couple of Mil Mi-26 helicopters to \"bundle\" lift the Buran, but test flights with a mock-up showed how risky and impractical that was. The VM-T ferried components and the Antonov An-225 Mriya (the heaviest airplane ever) was designed and used to ferry the shuttle.\nThe flight and ground-testing software also required research. In 1983 the Buran developers estimated that the software development would require several thousand programmers if done with their existing methodology (in assembly language), and they appealed to Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics for assistance. It was decided to develop a new high-level \"problem-oriented\" programming language. Researchers at Keldysh developed two languages: PROL2 (used for real-time programming of onboard systems) and DIPOL (used for the ground-based test systems), as well as the development and debugging environment SAPO PROLOGUE. There was also an operating system known as Prolog Manager. Work on these languages continued beyond the end of the Buran programme, with PROL2 being extended into SIPROL, and eventually all three languages developed into DRAKON which is still in use in the Russian space industry. A declassified May 1990 CIA report citing open-source intelligence material states that the software for the Buran spacecraft was written in \"the French-developed programming language known as Prolog\", possibly due to confusion with the name PROLOGUE.\nFlight crew preparation.\nUntil the end of the Soviet Union in 1991, seven cosmonauts were allocated to the Buran programme and trained on the OK-GLI (\"Buran aerodynamic analogue\") test vehicle. All had experience as test pilots. They were: Ivan Ivanovich Bachurin, Alexei Sergeyevich Borodai, Anatoli Semyonovich Levchenko, Aleksandr Vladimirovich Shchukin, Rimantas Antanas Stankevi\u010dius, Igor Petrovich Volk, and Viktor Vasiliyevich Zabolotsky.\nA rule, set in place for cosmonauts after the failed Soyuz 25 mission of 1977, stipulated that all Soviet space missions must contain at least one crew member who has been to space before. In 1982, it was decided that all Buran commanders and their back-ups would occupy the third seat on a Soyuz mission, prior to their Buran spaceflight. Several people had been selected to potentially be in the first Buran crew. By 1985, it was decided that at least one of the two crew members would be a test pilot trained at the Gromov Flight Research Institute (known as \"LII\"), and potential crew lists were drawn up. Only two potential Buran crew members reached space: Igor Volk, who flew in Soyuz T-12 to the space station Salyut 7, and Anatoli Levchenko who visited Mir, launching with Soyuz TM-4 and landing with Soyuz TM-3. Both of these spaceflights lasted about a week.\nLevchenko died of a brain tumour the year after his orbital flight, Bachurin left the cosmonaut corps because of medical reasons, Shchukin was assigned to the back-up crew of Soyuz TM-4 and later died in a plane crash, Stankevi\u010dius was also killed in a plane crash, while Borodai and Zabolotsky remained unassigned to a Soyuz flight until the Buran programme ended.\nSpaceflight of I. P. Volk.\nIgor Volk was planned to be the commander of the first crewed Buran flight. There were two purposes of the Soyuz T-12 mission, one of which was to give Volk spaceflight experience. The other purpose, seen as the more important factor, was to beat the United States and have the first spacewalk by a woman. At the time of the Soyuz T-12 mission the Buran programme was still a state secret. The appearance of Volk as a crew member caused some, including the British Interplanetary Society magazine \"Spaceflight\", to ask why a test pilot was occupying a Soyuz seat usually reserved for researchers or foreign cosmonauts.\nSpaceflight of A. S. Levchenko.\nAnatoli Levchenko was planned to be the back-up commander of the first crewed Buran flight, and in March 1987 he began extensive training for his Soyuz spaceflight. In December 1987, he occupied the third seat aboard Soyuz TM-4 to Mir, and returned to Earth about a week later on Soyuz TM-3. His mission is sometimes called \"Mir LII-1\", after the Gromov Flight Research Institute shorthand. When Levchenko died the following year, it left the back-up crew of the first Buran mission again without spaceflight experience. A Soyuz spaceflight for another potential back-up commander was sought by the Gromov Flight Research Institute, but never occurred.\nGround facilities.\nMaintenance, launches and landings of the Buran-class orbiters were to take place at the Baikonur Cosmodrome in the Kazakh SSR. Several facilities at Baikonur were adapted or newly built for these purposes:\nMissions.\nAtmospheric test flights.\nAn aerodynamic testbed, OK-GLI, was constructed in 1984 to test the in-flight properties of the Buran design. Unlike the American prototype Space Shuttle \"Enterprise\", OK-GLI had four AL-31 turbofan engines fitted, meaning it was able to fly under its own power.\nOrbital flight of \"Buran\" in 1988.\nFollowing a series of atmospheric test flights using the jet-powered OK-GLI prototype, the first operational spacecraft (\"Buran\", orbiter 1K) flew one uncrewed test mission.\nAt 03:00\u00a0UTC on 15 November 1988, \"Buran\" and the Energia carrier rocket lifted off from pad 110/37 in Baikonur. The life support system was not installed for the flight and no data was displayed on the CRT displays in the Command Compartment.\nThe shuttle orbited the Earth twice, travelling in 3 hours and 25 minutes (0.14 flight days). On its return, it performed an automated landing on the shuttle runway (Site 251) at Baikonur Cosmodrome.\nPlanned flights.\nThe planned flights for the shuttles in 1989, before the downsizing of the project and eventual cancellation, were:\nThe planned uncrewed second flight of orbiter 2K was changed in 1991 to the following:\nCancellation of the programme 1993.\nAfter the first flight of a Buran shuttle, the project was suspended due to lack of funds and the political situation in the Soviet Union. The two subsequent orbiters, which were due in 1990 (Orbiter 2K) and 1992 (Orbiter 3K) were never completed with other articles being scrapped (see next section).\nThe project was officially terminated on 30 June 1993, by President Boris Yeltsin. At the time of its cancellation, 20 billion roubles had been spent on the Buran programme. Commenting on the discontinuation of the programme in his interview to \"New Scientist\", Russian cosmonaut Oleg Kotov described the project's end:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We had no civilian tasks for \"Buran\" and the military ones were no longer needed.\"\nThe programme was designed to boost national pride, carry out research, and meet technological objectives similar to those of the U.S. Space Shuttle program, including resupply of the Mir space station, which was launched in 1986 and remained in service until 2001. When Mir was finally visited by a spaceplane, the visitor was a Space Shuttle orbiter, not a Buran-class orbiter.\nThe Buran SO, a docking module that was to be used for rendezvous with the Mir space station, was refitted for use with the U.S. Space Shuttles during the Shuttle\u2013Mir missions.\nThe cost of a Buran launch carrying a 20-ton payload was estimated at 270 million roubles, vs 5.5 million roubles on the Proton rocket.\nBaikonur hangar collapse.\nOn 12 May 2002, a hangar roof at the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan collapsed because of a structural failure due to poor maintenance. The collapse killed eight workers and destroyed one of the Buran-class orbiters (\"Buran\", orbiter 1K), which flew the test flight in 1988, as well as a mock-up of an Energia booster rocket. It was not clear to outsiders at the time which orbiter was destroyed and the BBC reported that it was just \"a model\" of the orbiter. It occurred at the \"MIK RN/MIK 112\" building at Site 112 of the Baikonur Cosmodrome, 14 years after the only Buran flight. Work on the roof had begun for a maintenance project, whose equipment is thought to have contributed to the collapse, together with heavy rainfall in the days preceding the collapse.\nList of vehicles.\nFive orbiters were planned to be built (designated 1K-5K, K stands for ), with hull numbering starting with 1 or 2 (e.g. 1.01), two originally ordered in 1970s and three (\"second series\") additionally ordered in 1983.\nFor research and testing purposes, several test articles were produced, designated 1M-8M (M stands for ), with hull numbering starting with 0 (e.g. 0.02). The programme prefix OK stands for and carries the GRAU index number 11F35.\nBy 1991 two operational vehicles were delivered to Baikonur, three others were under construction at the Tushino Machine-Building Plant (TMZ) near Moscow.\nMost of the geo-locations below show the orbiter bodies on the ground; in some cases Google Earth's History facility is required to see the orbiter within the dates specified.\nRevival possibilities.\nOver time, several scientists looked into trying to revive the Buran programme, especially after the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" disaster.\nThe 2003 grounding of the U.S. Space Shuttles caused many to wonder whether the Energia launcher or Buran shuttle could be brought back into service. By then, however, all of the equipment for both (including the vehicles themselves) had fallen into disrepair or been repurposed after falling into disuse with the collapse of the Soviet Union.\nIn 2010 the director of Moscow's Central Machine Building Institute said the Buran programme would be reviewed in the hope of restarting a similar crewed spacecraft design, with rocket test launches as soon as 2015. Russia also continues work on the PPTS but has abandoned the Kliper program, due to differences in vision with its European partners.\nDue to the 2011 retirement of the American Space Shuttle and the need for STS-type craft in the meantime to complete the International Space Station, some American and Russian scientists had been mulling over plans to possibly revive the already-existing Buran shuttles in the Buran programme rather than spend money on an entirely new craft and wait for it to be fully developed but the plans did not come to fruition.\nOn the 25th anniversary of the Buran flight in November 2013, Oleg Ostapenko, the new head of Roscosmos, the Russian Federal Space Agency, proposed that a new heavy-lift launch vehicle be built for the Russian space programme. The rocket would be intended to place a payload of in a baseline low Earth orbit and is projected to be based on the Angara launch vehicle technology.\nEnergia-Buran and the US Space Shuttle.\nComparison to NASA's Space Shuttle.\nBecause Buran's debut followed that of Space Shuttle \"Columbia\"'s, and because there were striking visual similarities between the two shuttle systems\u2014a state of affairs which recalled the similarity between the Tupolev Tu-144 and Concorde supersonic airliners\u2014many speculated that Cold War espionage played a role in the development of the Soviet shuttle. Despite remarkable external similarities, many key differences existed, which suggests that, had espionage been a factor in Buran's development, it would likely have been in the form of external photography or early airframe designs. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher stated that Buran was based on a rejected NASA design. See the section above.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36717", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36717", "title": "Northumbria", "text": "Medieval kingdom of the Angles\nNorthumbria () was an early medieval kingdom in what is now Northern England and South Scotland.\nThe name derives from the Old English meaning \"the people or province north of the Humber\", as opposed to the people south of the Humber Estuary. What was to become Northumbria started as two kingdoms, Deira in the south and Bernicia in the north. Conflict in the first half of the seventh century ended with the murder of the last king of Deira in 651, and Northumbria was thereafter unified under Bernician kings. \nAt its height, the kingdom extended from the Humber, Peak District and the River Mersey on the south to the Firth of Forth on the north. Northumbria ceased to be an independent kingdom in the mid-tenth century when Deira was conquered by the Danes and formed into the Kingdom of York. The rump Earldom of Bamburgh maintained control of Bernicia for a period of time; however, the area north of the Tweed was eventually absorbed into the medieval Kingdom of Scotland while the portion south of the Tweed was absorbed into the Kingdom of England as the county of Northumberland and County Palatine of Durham.\nKingdom (654\u2013954).\nCommunities and divisions.\nPossible Celtic British origins.\nThe Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria was originally two kingdoms divided approximately around the River Tees: Bernicia was to the north of the river and Deira to the south. It is possible that both regions originated as native Celtic British kingdoms, which the Germanic settlers later conquered, although there is very little information about the infrastructure and culture of the British kingdoms themselves. Much of the evidence for them comes from regional names that are British rather than Anglo-Saxon in origin. The names Deira and Bernicia are likely British in origin, for example, indicating that some British place names retained currency after the Anglo-Saxon migrations to Northumbria. There is also some archeological evidence to support British origins for the polities of Bernicia and Deira. In what would have been southern Bernicia, in the Cheviot Hills, a hill fort at Yeavering Bell contains evidence that it was an important centre for first the British and later the Anglo-Saxons. The fort is originally pre-Roman, dating back to the Iron Age at around the first century. In addition to signs of Roman occupation, the site contains evidence of timber buildings that pre-date Germanic settlement in the area that are probably signs of British settlement. Moreover, Brian Hope-Taylor has traced the origins of the name Yeavering, which looks deceptively English, back to the British gafr from Bede's mention of a township called Gefrin in the same area. Yeavering continued to be an important political centre after the Anglo-Saxons began settling in the north, as King Edwin had a royal palace at Yeavering.\nOverall, English place-names dominate the Northumbrian landscape, suggesting the prevalence of an Anglo-Saxon elite culture by the time that Bede \u2014Anglo-Saxon England's most prominent historian \u2014was writing in the eighth century. According to Bede, the Angles were the predominant Germanic immigrants, who settled north of the Humber and gained political prominence during this period. While the British natives may have partially assimilated into the Northumbrian political structure, relatively contemporary textual sources such as Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" depict relations between Northumbrians and the British as fraught.\nUnification of Bernicia and Deira.\nThe Anglo-Saxon states of Bernicia and Deira were often in conflict before their eventual semi-permanent unification in 651. Political power in Deira was concentrated in the East Riding of Yorkshire, which included York, the North York Moors, and the Vale of York. The political heartlands of Bernicia were the areas around Bamburgh and Lindisfarne, Monkwearmouth and Jarrow, and in Cumbria, west of the Pennines in the area around Carlisle. The name that these two states eventually united under, Northumbria, might have been coined by Bede and made popular through his \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\".\nInformation on the early royal genealogies for Bernicia and Deira comes from Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" and Nennius' \"Historia Brittonum\". According to Nennius, the Bernician royal line begins with Ida, son of Eoppa. Ida reigned for twelve years (beginning in 547) and was able to annex Bamburgh to Bernicia. In Nennius' genealogy of Deira, a king named Soemil was the first to separate Bernicia and Deira, which could mean that he wrested the kingdom of Deira from the native British. The date of this supposed separation is unknown. The first Deiran king to make an appearance in Bede's is \u00c6lla, the father of the first Christian Northumbrian king Edwin.\nA king of Bernicia, Ida's grandson \u00c6thelfrith, was the first ruler to unite the two polities under his rule. He exiled the Deiran Edwin to the court of King R\u00e6dwald of East Anglia to claim both kingdoms, but Edwin returned in approximately 616 to conquer Northumbria with R\u00e6dwald's aid. Edwin, who ruled from approximately 616 to 633, was one of the last kings of the Deiran line to reign over all of Northumbria. Oswald's brother Oswiu eventually succeeded him to the Northumbrian throne despite initial attempts on Deira's part to pull away again. The last independent king of Deira was Oswine. He was murdered by Oswiu in 651, and Northumbria was thereafter united under Bernician rule.\nWhile violent conflicts between Bernicia and Deira played a significant part in determining which line ultimately gained supremacy in Northumbria, marriage alliances also helped bind these two territories together. \u00c6thelfrith married Edwin's sister Acha, although this marriage did little to prevent future squabbles between the brothers-in-law and their descendants. The second intermarriage was more successful, with Oswiu marrying Edwin's daughter and his own cousin Eanfl\u00e6d to produce Ecgfrith, the beginning of the Northumbrian line. However, Oswiu had another relationship with an Irish woman named Fina which produced the problematic Aldfrith. In his \"Life and Miracles of St. Cuthbert,\" Bede declares that Aldfrith, known as Fland among the Irish, was illegitimate and therefore unfit to rule.\nNorthumbria and Norse settlement.\nThe Viking invasions of the ninth century and the establishment of the Danelaw once again divided Northumbria. Although primarily recorded in the southern provinces of England, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles (particularly the D and E recensions) provide some information on Northumbria's conflicts with Vikings in the late eighth and early ninth centuries. According to these chronicles, Viking raids began to affect Northumbria when a band attacked Lindisfarne in 793. After this initial catastrophic blow, Viking raids in Northumbria were either sporadic for much of the early ninth century or evidence of them was lost. However, in 865 the so-called Great Heathen Army landed in East Anglia and began a sustained campaign of conquest. The Great Army fought in Northumbria in 866\u2013867, striking York twice in less than one year. After the initial attack the Norse left to go north, leaving Kings \u00c6lle and Osberht to recapture the city. The E recension of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle suggests that Northumbria was particularly vulnerable at this time because the Northumbrians were once again fighting amongst themselves, deposing Osberht in favour of \u00c6lle. In the second raid, the Vikings killed Kings \u00c6lle and Osberht whilst recapturing the city.\nAfter King Alfred re-established his control of southern England, the Norse invaders settled into what came to be known as the Danelaw in the Midlands, East Anglia, and the southern part of Northumbria. In Northumbria, the Norse established the Kingdom of York whose boundaries were roughly the River Tees and the Humber, giving it approximately the same dimensions as Deira. Although this kingdom fell to Hiberno-Norse colonisers in the 920s and was in constant conflict with the West-Saxon expansionists from the south, it survived until 954 when the last Scandinavian king Eric, who is usually identified as Eric Bloodaxe, was driven out and eventually killed.\nIn contrast, the Great Army was not as successful in conquering territory north of the River Tees. Some raids extended into that area, but no sources mention lasting Norse occupation and there are very few Scandinavian place names to indicate significant Norse settlement in northern regions of Northumbria. The political landscape of the area north of the Tees during the Viking conquest of Northumbria consisted of the Community of St. Cuthbert and the remnants of the English Northumbrian elites. While the religious Community of St. Cuthbert \"wandered\" for a hundred years after Halfdan Ragnarsson attacked their original home of Lindisfarne in 875, The History of St. Cuthbert indicates that they settled temporarily at Chester-le-Street between the years 875\u2013883 on land granted to them by the Viking King of York, Guthred. According to the twelfth-century account \"Historia Regum\", Guthred granted them this land in exchange for establishing him as king. The land extended from the Tees to the Tyne and anyone who fled there from either the north or the south would receive sanctuary for thirty-seven days, indicating that the Community of St. Cuthbert had some juridical autonomy. Based on their positioning and this right of sanctuary, this community probably acted as a buffer between the Norse in southern Northumbria and the Anglo-Saxons who continued to hold the north.\nNorth of the Tyne, Northumbrians maintained partial political control in Bamburgh. The rule of kings continued in that area with Ecgberht I acting as regent around 867 and the kings Ricsige and Ecgberht II immediately following him. According to twelfth-century historian Symeon of Durham, Ecgberht I was a client-king for the Norse. The Northumbrians revolted against him in 872, deposing him in favour of Ricsige. Although the A and E recensions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" report that Halfdan was able to take control of Deira and take a raiding party north of the River Tyne to impose his rule on Bernicia in 874, after Halfdan's death (c.\u2009877) the Norse had difficulty holding on to territory in northern Bernicia. Ricsige and his successor Ecgberht were able to maintain an English presence in Northumbria. After the reign of Ecgberht II, Eadwulf \"King of the North Saxons\" (r. 890\u2013912) succeeded him for control of Bamburgh, but after Eadwulf's death, rulership of this area switched over to earls who were possible kinsmen or direct descendants of the royal Northumbrian house.\nKings.\n\u00c6thelfrith (r. 593\u2013616).\n\u00c6thelfrith was the first Anglo-Saxon leader to hold the thrones of both Deira and Bernicia, and so he ruled over all the people north of the Humber. His rule was notable for his numerous victories over the Britons and the Gaels.\nEdwin (r. 616\u2013633).\nEdwin, like \u00c6thelfrith, was king of both Deira and Bernicia and ruled them from 616 to 633. Under his reign, the Isle of Man and the lands of Gwynedd in Northern Wales were incorporated into Northumbria. Edwin married \u00c6thelburh, a Christian Princess from Kent in 625. He converted to Christianity two years later, after a period of heavy consideration and after consulting numerous advisors. Edwin fell in battle in 633 against Cadwallon of Gwynedd and the pagan Penda of Mercia. He was venerated as a saint and martyr after his death.\nOswald (r. 634\u2013642).\nOswald was a king of Bernicia, who regained the kingdom of Deira after defeating Cadwallon in 634. Oswald then ruled Northumbria until he died in 642. A devout Christian, Oswald worked tirelessly to spread the faith in his traditionally pagan lands. It was during his reign that the monastery at Lindisfarne was created. Oswald fell in the Battle of Maserfield against Penda of Mercia in 642, but his influence endured because, like Edwin, Oswald was venerated as a saint after his death.\nOswiu (r. 642\u2013670).\nOswiu was the brother of Oswald and succeeded him after the latter's defeat in Maserfield. Oswiu succeeded where Edwin and Oswald failed as, in 655, he slew Penda during the Battle of the Winwaed, making him the first Northumbrian King also to control the kingdom of Mercia. During his reign, he presided over the Synod of Whitby, an attempt to reconcile religious differences between Roman and Celtic Christianity, in which he eventually backed Rome. Oswiu died from illness in 670 and divided Deira and Bernicia between two of his sons. His son Aldfrith of Northumbria took over the throne upon his death.\nEadberht (r. 738\u2013758).\nEadberht of Northumbria, the brother of Ecgbert, Archbishop of York, is seen by some historians as a return to the imperial ambitions of seventh-century Northumbria, and his reign may represent a period of economic prosperity. He faced internal opposition from rival dynasties, and at least two actual or potential rivals were killed during his reign. In 758, he abdicated in favour of his son Oswulf and became a monk at York. Oswulf was murdered the next year and \u00c6thelwald Moll of Northumbria seized the throne, which he occupied for seven years until he was deposed by Alhred. \u00c6thelred I of Northumbria, son of \u00c6thelwald, reigned for 10 interrupted years to 796.\nHalfdan Ragnarsson (r. 876\u2013877).\nHalfdan Ragnarsson was a Viking leader of the Great Heathen Army which invaded England in 865. He allegedly wanted revenge against Northumbria for the death of his father, who was supposedly killed by \u00c6lla of Northumbria. While he himself only ruled Northumbria directly for about a year in 876, he placed Ecgberht on the throne as a client-king, who ruled from 867 to 872. Halfdan was killed in Ireland in 877 whilst trying to regain control over Dyflin (Dublin), a land he had ruled since 875. There were no further Viking kings in Northumbria until Guthfrith took over in 883.\n\u00c6thelstan of Wessex (r. 927\u2013939).\n\u00c6thelstan ruled as King of the Anglo-Saxons from 924 to 927 and King of the English from 927 to 939. The shift in his title reflects that in 927, \u00c6thelstan conquered the Viking Kingdom of York, previously part of the Northumbrian Kingdom. His reign was quite prosperous and saw great strides in many fields such as law and economics, but was also characterized by frequent clashes with the Scots and the Vikings. \u00c6thelstan died in 939, which led to the Vikings' retaking of York. \u00c6thelstan is widely considered one of the greatest Anglo-Saxon kings for his efforts to consolidate the English kingdom and the prosperity his reign brought.\nEric of York (r. 947\u2013948, 952\u2013954).\nIn the early twentieth century, historians identified Eric of York with the Norwegian king Eric Bloodaxe, although more recent scholarship has challenged this association. He held two short terms as King of Northumbria, from 947 to 948 and 952 to 954. Historical documentation on his reign is scarce, but it seems Eric pushed out the joint English-Viking rulers of Northumbria in 947, who then regained the land in 948 or 949. Eric took back the throne in 952, only to be deposed again in 954. Eric was the last Viking king of Northumbria, and his authority only extended to the southern kingdom of York. In 954, he was murdered, allegedly with the connivance of Oswulf, the Anglo-Saxon ruler of the northern Northumbrian territory of Bamburgh.\nEadred of Wessex (r. 946\u2013954).\nKing Eadred was the half-brother of \u00c6thelstan and full brother of Edmund, all of whom were sons of King Edward the Elder. Eadred inherited the rule of Northumbria, but like Edmund, lost it soon afterwards. When Eadred finally regained control in 954, he appointed Oswulf earl of the whole of Northumbria.\nPolitics and war.\nBetween 737\u00a0and 806, Northumbria had ten kings, all of whom were murdered, deposed, or exiled or became monks. Between Oswiu, the first king of Northumbria in 651, and Eric Bloodaxe, the last king of Northumbria in 954, there were forty-five kings, meaning that the average length of reign during the entire history of Northumbria is only six and a half years. Of the twenty-five kings before the Danish rule of Northumbria, only four died of natural causes. Of those that did not abdicate for a holy life, the rest were either deposed, exiled, or murdered. Kings during the Danish rule of Northumbria (see Danelaw) were often either kings of a larger North Sea or Danish empire, or were installed rulers.\nSuccession in Northumbria was hereditary, which left princes whose fathers died before they could come of age particularly susceptible to assassination and usurpation. A noteworthy example of this phenomenon is Osred, whose father Aldfrith died in 705, leaving the young boy to rule. He survived one assassination attempt early in his rule, but fell victim to another assassin at the age of nineteen. During his reign, he was adopted by Wilfrid, a powerful bishop. Ecclesiastical influence in the royal court was not an unusual phenomenon in Northumbria, and usually was most visible during the rule of a young or inexperienced king. Similarly, ealdormen, or royal advisors, had periods of increased or decreased power in Northumbria, depending on who was ruling at the time.\nWarfare in Northumbria before the Danish period largely consisted of rivalries with the Picts to the north. The Northumbrians were successful against the Picts until the Battle of Dun Nechtain in 685, which halted their expansion north and established a border between the two kingdoms. Warfare during the Danish period was dominated by warfare between the Northumbrians and other English Kingdoms.\nEaldormen and earldoms of Northumbria.\nAfter the English from Wessex absorbed the Danish-ruled territories south of the Tees, Scots invasions reduced the rump Northumbria to an earldom stretching from the Tyne to the Tweed. The surviving Earldom of Northumbria, alongside the Haliwerfolk between the Tyne and Tees, were then disputed between the emerging kingdoms of England and Scotland, with the Earldom being split roughly in half along the River Tweed.\nReligion.\nRoman and post-Roman Britain.\nUnder Roman rule, some Britons north of the Humber practised Christianity. York had a bishop as early as the fourth century. After the Romans left Britain in the early fifth century, Christianity did not disappear, but it existed alongside Celtic paganism, and possibly many other cults. Anglo-Saxons brought their own Germanic pagan beliefs and practices when they settled there. At Yeavering, in Bernicia, excavations have uncovered evidence of a pagan shrine, animal sacrifice, and ritual burials.\nConversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity.\nThe first King of Northumbria to convert to Christianity was King Edwin. He was baptised by Paulinus in 627. Shortly thereafter, many of his people followed his conversion to the new religion, only to return to paganism when Edwin was killed in 633. Paulinus was Bishop of York, but only for a year.\nThe lasting conversion of Northumbria took place under the guidance of the Irish cleric Aidan. He converted King Oswald of Northumbria in 635, and then worked to convert the people of Northumbria. King Oswald moved the bishopric from York to Lindisfarne.\nMonasteries and figures of note.\nThe monastery at Lindisfarne was founded by Aidan in 635 and was based on the practices of the Columban monastery in Iona, Scotland. The location of the bishopric shifted to Lindisfarne, and it became the centre for religion in Northumbria. The bishopric would not leave Lindisfarne and shift back to its original location at York until 664. Throughout the eighth century, Lindisfarne was associated with important figures. Aidan, the founder, Wilfrid, a student, and Cuthbert, a member of the order and a hermit, all became bishops and later Saints. Aidan assisted Hieu to found her double monastery at Hartlepool. She too came to be venerated as a saint.\nThe Christian culture of Northumbria was influenced by the continent as well as Ireland. In particular, Wilfrid travelled to Rome and abandoned the traditions of the Celtic church in favour of Roman practices. When he returned to England, he became abbot of a new monastery at Ripon in 660. Wilfrid advocated acceptance of the authority of Rome at the Synod of Whitby. The two halves of the double monastery Monkwearmouth\u2013Jarrow were founded by the nobleman Benedict Biscop in 673 and 681. Biscop became the first abbot of the monastery and travelled to Rome six times to buy books for the library. His successor, Abbot Ceolfrith, continued to add to the library until, by one estimate, the library at Monkwearmouth\u2013Jarrow had over two hundred volumes. One who benefited from this library was Bede.\nIn the early seventh century in York, Paulinus founded a school and a minster, but not a monastery. The School at York Minster is one of the oldest in England. By the late eighth century, the school had a noteworthy library, estimated at one hundred volumes. Alcuin was a student and teacher at York before he left for the court of Charlemagne in 782.\nSynod of Whitby.\nIn 664, King Oswiu called the Synod of Whitby to determine whether to follow Roman or Irish customs. Since Northumbria was converted to Christianity by the Celtic clergy, the Celtic tradition for determining the date of Easter and Irish tonsure were supported by many, particularly by the Abbey of Lindisfarne. Roman Christianity was also represented in Northumbria by Wilfrid, Abbot of Ripon. By the year 620, both sides were associating the other's Easter observance with the Pelagian Heresy. The King decided at Whitby that Roman practice would be adopted throughout Northumbria, thereby bringing Northumbria in line with Southern England and Western Europe. Members of the clergy who refused to conform, including the Celtic Bishop Colman of Lindisfarne, returned to Iona. The episcopal seat of Northumbria transferred from Lindisfarne to York, which later became an archbishopric in 735.\nImpact of Scandinavian raiding, settlement and culture.\nThe Viking attack on Lindisfarne in 793 was the first of many raids on monasteries of Northumbria. The Lindisfarne Gospels survived, but monastic culture in Northumbria went into a period of decline in the early ninth century. Repeated Viking assaults on religious centres were one reason for the decrease in the production of manuscripts and communal monastic culture.\nAfter 867, Northumbria came under the control of the Scandinavian forces, and there was an influx of Scandinavian immigrants. Their religion was pagan and had a rich mythology. Within the Kingdom of York, once the raids and war were over, there is no evidence that the presence of Scandinavian settlers interrupted Christian practice. It appears that they gradually adopted Christianity and blended their Scandinavian culture with their new religion. This can be seen in carved stone monuments and ring-headed crosses, such as the Gosforth Cross. During the ninth and tenth centuries, there was an increase in the number of parish churches, often including stone sculptures incorporating Scandinavian designs.\nCulture.\nGolden Age of Northumbria.\nThe Christian culture of Northumbria, fuelled by influences from the continent and Ireland, promoted a broad range of literary and artistic works.\nInsular art.\nThe Irish monks who converted Northumbria to Christianity, and established monasteries such as Lindisfarne, brought a style of artistic and literary production. Eadfrith of Lindisfarne produced the Lindisfarne Gospels in an Insular style.\nThe Irish monks brought with them an ancient Celtic decorative tradition of curvilinear forms of spirals, scrolls, and doubles curves. This style was integrated with the abstract ornamentation of the native pagan Anglo-Saxon metalwork tradition, characterised by its bright colouring and zoomorphic interlace patterns.\nInsular art, rich in symbolism and meaning, is characterised by its concern for geometric design rather than naturalistic representation, love of flat areas of colour, and use of complicated interlace patterns. All of these elements appear in the Lindisfarne Gospels (early eighth century). The Insular style was eventually imported to the European continent, exercising great influence on the art of the Carolingian empire.\nUsage of the Insular style was not limited to manuscript production and metalwork. It can be seen in sculpture, such as the Ruthwell Cross and Bewcastle Cross. The devastating Viking raid on Lindisfarne in 793 marked the beginning of a century of Viking invasions that severely limited the production and survival of Anglo-Saxon material culture. It heralded the end of Northumbria's position as a centre of influence, although in the years immediately following, visually rich works like the Easby Cross were still being produced.\nLiterature.\nThe Venerable Bede (673\u2013735) is the most famous author of the Anglo-Saxon Period, and a native of Northumbria. His (\"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", completed in 731) has become both a template for later historians and a crucial historical account in its own right, and much of it focuses on Northumbria. He's also famous for his theological works, and verse and prose accounts of holy lives. After the Synod of Whitby, the role of the European continent gained importance in Northumbrian culture. During the end of the eighth century, the scriptorium at Monkwearmouth\u2013Jarrow was producing manuscripts of his works for high demand on the Continent.\nNorthumbria was also home to several Anglo-Saxon Christian poets. C\u00e6dmon lived at the double monastery of Streon\u00e6shalch (Whitby Abbey) during the abbacy (657\u2013680) of St. Hilda (614\u2013680). According to Bede, he \"was wont to make religious verses, so that whatever was interpreted to him out of scripture, he soon after put the same into poetical expressions of much sweetness and humility in English, which was his native language. By his verse the minds of many were often excited to despise the world, and to aspire to heaven.\" His sole surviving work is C\u00e6dmon's Hymn. Cynewulf, prolific author of \"The Fates of the Apostles\", \"Juliana\", \"Elene\", and \"Christ II\", is believed to have been either Northumbrian or Mercian.\nScandinavians and the Danelaw.\nFrom around 800, there had been waves of Danish raids on the coastlines of the British Isles. These raids terrorized the populace, but exposure to Danish society brought new opportunities for wealth and trade. In 865, instead of raiding, the Danes landed a large army in East Anglia, and had conquered a territory known as the Danelaw, including Northumbria, by 867. At first, the Scandinavian minority, while politically powerful, remained culturally distinct from the English populace. For example, only a few Scandinavian words, mostly military and technical, became part of Old English. By the early 900s, however, Scandinavian-style names for both people and places became increasingly popular, as did Scandinavian ornamentation on works of art, featuring aspects of Norse mythology, and figures of animals and warriors. Nevertheless, sporadic references to \"Danes\" in charters, chronicles, and laws indicate that during the lifetime of the Kingdom of Northumbria, most inhabitants of northeast England did not consider themselves Danish, and were not perceived as such by other Anglo-Saxons.\nThe synthesis of Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian and Christian and Pagan visual motifs within the Danelaw can be illustrated by an examination of stone sculpture. However, the tradition of mixing pagan and Christian motifs is not unique to the Danelaw, and examples of such synthesis can be seen in previous examples, such as the Franks Casket. The Franks Casket, believed to have been produced in Northumbria, includes depictions of Germanic legends and stories of the founding Roman and the Roman Church and is dated to the early eighth century. The Gosforth Cross, dated to the early tenth century, stands at and is richly decorated with carvings of mythical beasts, Norse gods, and Christian symbolism. Stone sculpture was not a practice of native Scandinavian culture, and the proliferation of stone monuments within the Danelaw shows the influence that the English had on Viking settlers. On one side of the Gosforth Cross is a depiction of the Crucifixion; whilst on the other are scenes from Ragnarok. The melding of these distinctive religious cultures can further be seen in the depiction of Mary Magdalene as a valkyrie, with a trailing dress and long pigtail. Although one can read the iconography as the triumph of Christianity over paganism, it is possible that in the process of gradual conversion the Vikings might have initially accepted the Christian god as an addition to the broad pantheon of pagan gods. The inclusion of pagan traditions in visual culture reflects the creation of a distinctive Anglo-Scandinavian culture. Consequently, this indicates that conversion not only required a change in belief, but also necessitated its assimilation, integration, and modification into existing cultural structures.\nEconomy.\nNorthumbria's economy centred around agriculture, with livestock and land being popular units of value in local trade. By the mid 800s, the Open field system was likely the pre-eminent mode of farming. Like much of eastern England, Northumbria exported grain, silver, hides, and slaves. Imports from Frankia included oil, luxury goods, and clerical supplies in the 700s. Especially after 793, raids, gifts, and trade with Scandinavians resulted in substantial economic ties across the North Sea.\nWhen coinage (as opposed to bartering) regained popularity in the late 600s, Northumbrian coins featured kings' names, indicating royal control of currency. Royal currency was unique in Britain for a long time. King Aldfrith (685\u2013705) minted Northumbria's earliest silver coins, likely in York. Later royal coinage bears the name of King Eadberht (738\u2013758), as well as his brother, Archbishop Ecgbert of York. These coins were primarily small silver sceattas, more suitable to small, everyday transactions than larger gold Frankish or Roman coins. During the reign of King Eanred the silver content of the coins declined until they were produced in copper alloy, these coins are commonly known as stycas, but the term is an antiquarian invention. Stycas remains in use throughout the kingdom until at least the 860s and possibly later. Larger bullion values can be seen in the silver ingots found in the Bedale Hoard, along with sword fittings and necklaces in gold and silver.\nLanguage.\nIn the time of Bede, there were five languages in Britain: English, British, Irish, Pictish, and Latin. Northumbrian was one of four distinct dialects of Old English, along with Mercian, West Saxon, and Kentish. Analysis of written texts, brooches, runes and other available sources shows that Northumbrian vowel pronunciation differed from West Saxon. \nAlthough loans borrowed from the Celtic Languages, such as the Common Brittonic language of the Britons, and the Old Irish of the Irish missionaries, into Old English were few, some place-names such as Deira and Bernicia derive their names from Celtic tribal origins.\nIn addition to the five languages present in Bede's day, Old Norse was added during the ninth century. This was due to the settlements of the Norse in the north and east of England, an area that became the Danelaw. This language had a strong influence on the dialect of Northumbria. These settlers gave the region many place-names from their language, as well as contributing to the vocabulary, syntax, and grammar of Old English. Similarities in basic vocabulary between Old English and Old Norse may have led to the dropping of their different inflectional endings. The number of borrowed words is conservatively estimated to be around nine hundred in standard English but rises to the thousands in some dialects.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36720", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36720", "title": "250s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 250s (pronounced two-fifties or two-hundred and fifties) was a decade that ran from January 1, 250, to December 31, 259.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36721", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36721", "title": "260s", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 260s decade ran from January 1, 260, to December 31, 269.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36722", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36722", "title": "280s", "text": "Decade\nThe 280's decade ran from January 1, 280, to December 31, 289.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36728", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36728", "title": "San Juan Islands", "text": "Archipelago in the Salish Sea in Washington, US\nThe San Juan Islands are part of an archipelago in the Pacific Northwest of the United States between the U.S. state of Washington and Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada. The San Juan Islands are part of Washington state, and form the core of San Juan County.\nIn the archipelago, four islands are accessible to vehicular and foot traffic via the Washington State Ferries system.\nHistory.\nThe Gulf of Georgia Culture Area encompasses the San Juan and Gulf Islands, which share many archaeological similarities. These islands were home to various Coast Salish peoples, including the Nooksack and Northern Straits groups (consisting of the Lummi, Klallam, Saanich, Samish, and Songhees dialects). European exploration in the area introduced smallpox in the 1770s.\nThe Spanish explorer Francisco de Eliza named the San Juan Islands \"Isla y Archipi\u00e9lago de San Juan\" in 1791 while sailing under the authority of Juan Vicente de G\u00fcemes Padilla Horcasitas y Aguayo, 2nd Count of Revillagigedo, the Viceroy of Mexico. Eliza named several places for the Viceroy, including Orcas Island (short for \"Horcasitas\") and Guemes Island. San Juan Island's first European discoverer was Gonzalo L\u00f3pez de Haro, one of Eliza's officers, for whom Haro Strait is named. The Spanish had previously encountered the islands during Manuel Quimper's exploring voyage on the \"Princesa Real\" in 1790, but they were not recognized as islands until Eliza's expedition. Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Narv\u00e1ez, one of Eliza's pilots, also helped explore the San Juans in 1791 and became the first European to explore the Strait of Georgia.\nThe Vancouver Expedition, led by George Vancouver, explored the area in 1792 while a Spanish expedition led by Dionisio Alcal\u00e1 Galiano and Cayetano Vald\u00e9s y Flores was also exploring. The British and Spanish ships met and cooperated in exploring the north. Vancouver encountered other Spanish ships and traded information, so he was aware of the names given by the Spanish expedition and kept them, although he renamed some features, such as the Strait of Georgia.\nThe United States Exploring Expedition, led by Charles Wilkes, explored the region in 1841. Wilkes named many coastal features after American heroes of the War of 1812 or members of his crew, possibly unaware of the already existing Spanish names and charts.\nHenry Kellett led a project in 1847 to reorganize the official charts of the region for the British Admiralty. The project only applied to British territory, which at the time included the San Juan Islands but not Puget Sound. Kellett removed most of the names given by Wilkes and kept British and Spanish names, sometimes moving Spanish names to replace those given by Wilkes. As a result, Wilkes' names are common in Puget Sound and Spanish names are rare, while the opposite is true for the San Juan and Gulf Islands. Wilkes had named the San Juan Islands the \"Navy Archipelago\" and individual islands after U.S. naval officers, such as \"Rodgers Island\" for San Juan Island, \"Chauncey\" for Lopez Island, and \"Hull Island\" for Orcas Island. Some of Wilkes' names, such as Shaw, Decatur, Jones, Blakely, and Sinclair, named after American naval officers, survived Kellett's editing.\nBorder dispute.\nIn 1843, the Hudson's Bay Company established Fort Victoria on Vancouver Island. The 1846 Oregon Treaty established the 49th parallel as the border between Canada and the US, with Vancouver Island remaining British. The treaty did not specify which channel the border should follow between the Strait of Georgia and the Strait of Juan de Fuca, leading to a boundary dispute. In 1852, the Territory of Oregon created Island County, including the San Juan Islands. In 1853, Island County became part of the Washington Territory, which created Whatcom County out of parts of Island County in 1854. The San Juan Islands were finally split off into present-day San Juan County in 1873.\nIn 1855, Washington Territory levied a property tax on properties of the Hudson's Bay Company on San Juan Island, which the HBC refused to pay. This led to a dispute with the Colony of Vancouver Island over the ownership of the San Juan Islands, with the US claiming Haro Strait as the border and Britain claiming Rosario Strait. The resulting Pig War and San Juan Dispute were a diplomatic stalemate until the boundary issue was placed in the hands of Emperor Wilhelm I of Germany for arbitration in 1871. The border through Haro Strait was established in 1872.\nPost-border dispute.\nThe surrounding bodies of water, including Puget Sound and the Straits of Georgia and Juan de Fuca, were recognized collectively as the Salish Sea, by the United States in 2009 and by Canada in 2010.\nOn the 7th of June 2024, a T-34 plane flown by former astronaut and air force pilot, Bill Anders, crashed on the San Juan Islands. Anders did not survive the crash.\nEcology.\nThe islands were heavily logged in the nineteenth century, but now have an extensive second-growth coast Douglas fir (\"Pseudotsuga menziesii var. menziesii\"), Pacific madrone (\"Arbutus menziesii\"), red alder (\"Alnus rubra\") and bigleaf maple (\"Acer macrophyllum\") forest. There are small strands of old-growth Douglas fir and western redcedar (\"Thuja plicata\"), mostly within long standing privately held property. In the highlands one also finds grand fir (\"Abies grandis\"), western hemlock (\"Tsuga heterophylla\") and other subalpine trees.\nThe San Juan Islands host the greatest concentration of bald eagles (\"Haliaeetus leucocephalus\") in the contiguous United States. Great blue herons (\"Ardea herodias\"), black oystercatchers (\"Haematopus bachman\"), and numerous shorebirds are found along the shore and in winter, the islands are home to trumpeter swans (\"Cygnus buccinator\"), Canada geese (\"Branta canadensis\") and other waterfowl. Peregrine falcons (\"Falco peregrinus\"), northern harriers (\"Circus cyaneus\"), barred owls (\"Strix varia\") and other birds of prey are found. In addition diving birds such as rhinoceros auklets (\"Cerorhinca monocerata\"), pigeon guillemots (\"Cepphus columba\") and endangered marbled murrelets (\"Brachyramphus marmoratus\") frequent the surrounding seas. Western bluebirds (\"Sialia mexicana\"), which were eliminated from the islands 50 years ago because of competition for nesting sites by non-native European starlings (\"Sturnus vulgaris\"), were recently restored to San Juan Island thanks to the efforts of volunteers and conservation organizations.\nThe islands are famous for their resident pods of orcas (\"Orcinus orca\"). There are three resident pods that eat salmon, but also some transient orcas that come to take harbor seals (\"Phoca vitulina\"). Other marine mammals include river otters (\"Lontra canadensis\"), Steller sea lions (\"Eumetopias jubatus\"), common minke whales (\"Balaenoptera acutorostrata\"), Dall's porpoises (\"Phocoenoides dalli\") and other cetaceans.\nColumbia black-tailed deer (\"Odocoileus hemionus columbianus\") are the largest mammals on the San Juan Islands, which are unusual in their historic absence of large carnivores, except for wolves (\"Canis lupus\") which were extirpated in the 1860s. Dr. Caleb B. R. Kennerly, surgeon and naturalist, collected a wolf specimen on Lopez Island, which is now in the National Museum of Natural History, probably during the Northwest Boundary Survey from 1857 to 1861. Also, there is a specimen of elk in the Slater Museum of Natural History at the University of Puget Sound that was collected on Orcas Island, and old-timers report finding elk antlers on both Lopez and Orcas Islands.\nBefore 1850, most of the freshwater on the islands was held in beaver (\"Castor canadensis\") ponds, although the aquatic mammal was extirpated by Hudson's Bay Company fur stations at Fort Langley and San Juan Island. Remnants of beaver dams number in the hundreds across the archipelago. Gnawed stumps and beaver sign are now seen on Orcas and other islands, and recolonization by this keystone species is likely to lead to increased abundance and diversity of birds, amphibians, reptiles and plants. In spring 2011 a pair of beaver appeared at Killebrew Lake on Orcas Island, but were killed to avoid flooding a phone company switch box buried under Dolphin Bay Road. These beaver likely swam from the mainland and could have recolonized the islands.\nNorthern sea otter (\"Enhydra lutis kenyoni\") remains are documented on Sucia Island in the San Juan Islands archipelago. In 1790, Spanish explorer Manuel Quimper traded copper sheets for sea otter pelts at Discovery Bay, for live sea otters captured north of the bay in the \"interior\" of the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Although historical records of sea otter in the San Juan Islands are sparse, there is a sea otter specimen collected in 1897 in the \"Strait of Fuca\" in the National Museum of Natural History. When the sea otter finally received federal protection in 1911, Washington's sea otter had been hunted to extinction, and although a small remnant population still existed in British Columbia, it soon died out. Fifty-nine sea otters were re-introduced to the Washington coast from Amchitka Island, Alaska, in the summers of 1969 and 1970, and these have expanded by 8% per year, mainly along the outer west and northwest coast of the Olympic Peninsula. Professional marine mammal biologists verified a single sea otter observed near Cattle Point, San Juan Island, in October 1996. Although the historical numbers of sea otter in the San Juan Islands is not known, the habitat for them may have once been ideal.\nIn the 1890s non-native European rabbits, an exotic invasive species, began to infest the islands as the result of the release of domestic rabbits on Smith Island. Rabbits from the San Juan Islands were used later for several introductions of European rabbits into other, usually Midwestern, states. The rabbits are pursued by Eurasian red fox (\"Vulpes vulpes\"), another non-native species introduced intermittently through the twentieth century.\nOn the islands is the San Juan Islands National Monument with 75 sections.\nGeography.\nThe United States Geological Survey (USGS) defines the San Juan Islands as the archipelago north of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, west of Rosario Strait, east of Haro Strait, and south of Boundary Pass. To the north lie the open waters of the Strait of Georgia. All these waters are within the Salish Sea. The USGS definition of the San Juan archipelago coincides with San Juan County. Islands not in San Juan County are not part of the San Juan Islands, according to the USGS. NOAA notes that, while geopolitically divided, the San Juan Islands and Canadian Gulf Islands geologically form part of a larger Gulf Archipelago.\nAt mean high tide, the San Juan Islands comprise over 400 islands and rocks, 128 of which are named, and over of shoreline.\nThe majority of the San Juan Islands are quite hilly, with some flat areas and valleys in between, often quite fertile. The tallest peak is Mount Constitution, on Orcas Island, at an elevation of . The coastlines are a mix of sandy and rocky beaches, shallow inlets and deep harbors, placid coves and reef-studded bays. Gnarled, ochre-colored madrona trees (\"Arbutus\") grace much of the shorelines, while evergreen fir and pine forests cover large inland areas.\nThe San Juan Islands get substantially less rainfall than Seattle, about to the south, due to their location in the rain shadow of the Olympic Mountains to the southwest. Summertime high temperatures are around , while average wintertime lows are in the high 30s and low 40s Fahrenheit (around 5 degrees Celsius). Snow is infrequent in winter, except for the higher elevations, but the islands are subject to high winds at times; those from the northeast sometimes bring brief periods of freezing.\nPresent.\nIn the present, the San Juan Islands are an important tourist destination, with sea kayaking and orca whale-watching (by boat or air tours) being two of the primary attractions. San Juan Island's Lime Kiln Point State Park is a prime whale-watching site, with knowledgeable interpreters often on site.\nPolitically, the San Juan Islands comprise by definition, San Juan County, Washington.\nMedia based in and/or concerning the islands includes the \"Journal of the San Juan Islands\" and the \"Islands' Sounder\".\nGenerally speaking, the resident population of San Juan County is well educated. In the period 2016 to 2020, 51.7 percent of the resident population aged 25 and up have earned a bachelor\u2019s degree or attained a higher level of formal education. Statewide, 36.7 percent of the adult population have a bachelor\u2019s degree or higher.\nTransportation.\nThere are no bridges to the San Juan Islands; therefore, all travel from the mainland is either by water or by air.\nWater.\nFour ferry systems serve some of the San Juan Islands.\nPassenger-only ferries serve more islands. Passenger-only ferry service is usually seasonal and offered by private business.\nAir.\nThere are a number of public and private airports and seaplane bases throughout the San Juan Islands.\nAirports:\nSeaplane bases:\nScheduled and on demand service to the San Juan Islands is provided by:\nShipping.\nThe San Juan Islands are surrounded by major shipping channels. Haro Strait, along with Boundary Pass, is the westernmost and most heavily used channel connecting the Strait of Juan de Fuca and the Strait of Georgia. It is the main route connecting the Port of Vancouver and other ports around the Strait of Georgia with the Pacific Ocean. Haro Strait joins Boundary Pass at Turn Point on Stuart Island, where a major navigation beacon, Turn Point Light, is located. Strong, dangerous rip tides occur near Turn Point, as well as near the northern end of Boundary Pass, between Patos Island Light on Patos Island and East Point on Saturna Island.\nRosario Strait is also a major shipping channel. More than 500 oil tankers pass through the strait each year, to and from the Cherry Point Refinery and refineries near Anacortes. The strait is in constant use by vessels bound for Cherry Point, Bellingham, Anacortes, and the San Juan Islands. Vessels bound for British Columbia or Alaska also frequently use it in preference to the passages farther west, when greater advantage can be taken of the tidal currents.\nList of islands.\nThis list includes only those islands that are part of San Juan County as defined by the USGS, bounded by the Strait of Juan de Fuca, Haro Strait, Rosario Strait, Boundary Pass, and the Strait of Georgia. 2016 populations estimates for inhabited islands are in parentheses, though some have major seasonal changes. Islands protected as state parks are marked with an asterisk. Additional small rocks are listed at San Juan Islands National Monument.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36729", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36729", "title": "SCUMM", "text": "Game engine developed by LucasArts\nScript Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion (SCUMM) is a video game engine developed at Lucasfilm Games, later renamed LucasArts, to ease development on their graphic adventure game \"Maniac Mansion\" (1987). It was subsequently used as the engine for later LucasArts adventure games and Humongous Entertainment games.\nIt falls somewhere between a game engine and a programming language, allowing designers to create locations, items and dialogue sequences without writing code in the language in which the game source code ends up. This also allowed the game's script and data files to be cross-platform, i.e., re-used across various platforms. SCUMM is also a host for embedded game engines such as the \"Interactive MUsic Streaming Engine\" (iMUSE), the \"INteractive Streaming ANimation Engine\" (INSANE), CYST (in-game animation engine), FLEM (places and names object inside a room), and MMUCAS. SCUMM has been released on these platforms: 3DO, Amiga, Apple II, Atari ST, CDTV, Commodore 64, FM Towns &amp; Marty, Macintosh, Nintendo Entertainment System, MS-DOS, Microsoft Windows, Sega CD (Mega-CD), and TurboGrafx-16/PC Engine. Several SCUMM games have been officially and unofficially ported to other systems through use of the open-source ScummVM software.\nHistory.\nThe original version was coded by Ron Gilbert (with some initial help by Chip Morningstar a.k.a. UnXman) in 1987,34:21 with later versions enhanced by Aric Wilmunder (a.k.a., the \"SCUMM Lord\") and Brad P. Taylor. This is a token language that provided groundbreaking coding techniques. Tokens like P.R.I.N.E. were the first to be utilized.\nThe nature of SCUMM emerged from the background of most of the early programmers at LucasArts, including Wilmunder, who had been programmers for minicomputers and Unix workstations. At the time, personal computers (PC) did not have large enough abilities or speed to edit and compile programs, so often the LucasArts coders would write code as cleanly as possible on a Sun workstation to remove all errors so that, while compiling on a PC would be slow, it would be less error-prone. This concept informed the idea of a scripting language that would be cross-platform.\nSCUMM was developed to be a tool that converted human-readable commands into byte-sized tokens that then would be read by an executable interpreter program that presented the game to the player. For example, the SCUMM command codice_1 would be tokenized to a 4-byte command. They did not want to have specific details about a game hard-coded into the script, so the tokenizer would be able to recognize actors by their name from the script instead of by internal numbers. The only exception was to display a character's dialog in a different text color for \"Maniac Mansion\" in which they had to include the number, but this was subsequently revised by the time \"Zak McKracken\" was released. The scripts included the ability to multitask, such as having background actors enact behavior while waiting for foreground actions to complete. The combined tools enabled for rapid prototyping of a game. Scripters could work with preliminary character and background art drawn by the artists to hone their scripts while providing feedback to the artists.\nThe SCUMM program was responsible for tokenizing the scripts and gathering all other assets (such as art and sound) as a package. The reusable interpreter was called SPUTM, the \"SCUMM Presentation Utility (TM)\" which was renamed on shipment of the game to the name of the game's executable. SPUTM would interpret the scripts, load assets from disc, and handle the other user interactions with the game. SPUTM was not actually trademarked, but according to Wilmunder, they wanted \"to name it after another bodily fluid\". SCUMM was subsequently reused in many later LucasArts adventure games being both updated and rewritten several times. According to Wilmunder, the version of SCUMM for \"Maniac Mansion\" had about 80% of the commands that would end up being used in the later versions of the engine, with most key commands requiring no modification. Other tools and engines were developed alongside SCUMM to aid in development, and named for other body fluids. SPIT was used to manage text fonts on different parts of the screen. FLEM was used to define a specific room, track objects within it, and specify clipping planes for character animation. MMUCAS was used with FLEM to compile a room and its objects into one file that would enable the scripters to make rapid changes without having to recompile the room's description. BYLE and subsequently CYST were used for character animations and scaling, the latter used for the more complex art in LucasArts' later games.\nFollowing his departure from LucasArts and co-founding of Humongous Entertainment in 1992, Gilbert struck a deal with LucasArts which would grant Humongous a license to use the SCUMM engine in the development of their games, on the condition that he continue to develop improvements to the engine for use by both companies. For the game \"Full Throttle\", the team worked to integrate SCUMM with the INSANE animation engine that had formerly been developed for \"\". Though Wilmunder had gotten the two systems to work for shipment of \"Full Throttle\", the interaction between the two was not always stable, and spent time before \"The Curse of Monkey Island\" to have SCUMM work atop the INSANE engine, replacing some of the SCUMM engine parts to use that were native to INSANE.\nInternally, much of the workings of SCUMM were undocumented, as Wilmunder believed that it was relatively simple to learn, but he changed this approach before \"The Secret of Monkey Island\". To train new hires on the engine, Gilbert put them through \"SCUMM University\", a week-long period where they were taught how to use the SCUMM engine. These new hires, called \"scummlets\", then were given the opportunity to explore and expand on example work to help identify where they would best fit into the development team.\nLucasArts finally abandoned the SCUMM engine in 1998 when they switched to GrimE, using the free software scripting language Lua, for the games \"Grim Fandango\" and \"Escape from Monkey Island\". Humongous Entertainment continued to use the engine for all its PC games, including the \"Backyard Sports\" series, until the release of \"Backyard Soccer 2004\" in 2003.3:34:00 Subsequent games would be developed on the Python-based YAGA engine, including ' and ', the only Humongous adventure games to not be developed using the SCUMM engine.\nIn March 2016, Wilmunder revealed that he would share design documents for many of LucasArts' adventure games and the source code for the SCUMM engine, which he plans to provide in digital format via GitHub.\nDesign.\nMost SCUMM games feature a verb\u2013object design paradigm. The player-controlled character has an inventory, and the game world is littered with objects with which the player can interact, using a variety of verbs. A large set of these were often featured at the bottom of the screen in the early games, but by \"Full Throttle\" (1995) and \"The Curse of Monkey Island\" (1997) these had been reduced to a \"verb coin\" appearing at the mouse cursor with the option to use character's eyes (to \"look\"), hands (to \"use\", \"pick up\", \"push\", \"pull\", etc.), or mouth (to \"talk\", \"consume\", \"inhale\"). Humongous Entertainment's games simplified this interface, with a transparent mouse cursor graphic that would become filled in when the player could interact with an object, or transform to an arrow to indicate a clickpoint that will take the player to a new screen.\nPuzzles generally involve using the right verb action with the appropriate object\u2014\"use biscuit cutter with rubber tree\", for example. \"Talk to\" commonly produces dialogue sequences, in which the player selects from a list of predefined questions or comments, and the character they are talking to replies with a predefined response. The notable exception to this general paradigm is \"Loom\" (1990), which does not use the standard verb\u2013object interface, but replaces most actions with a selection of spells played on an instrument.\nReimplementation.\nCompiler.\nScummC is a set of tools (including a script and a costume compiler, a walkboxes editor, charset, graphics, audio and MIDI tools), able to compile its own JavaScript-like language into SCUMM v6 bytecode, runnable as is in ScummVM. It allows anyone with the needed skills to create new and original SCUMM games, with features on par with \"Day of the Tentacle\" and \"Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road\".\nA similar project named ScummGEN aims to achieve the same thing, with user-friendly tools.\nScummbler is a compiler for SCUMM bytecode, for versions 3 to 5 of the SCUMM engine. It uses scripts decompiled from the original game files, retrieved using a combination of an unpacking tool like ScummPacker (also by the author of Scummbler), and the \"descumm\" tool from ScummVM. These scripts can be re-inserted into the original game files, making it useful for modifying existing games, such as for translation. Also available are an image encoder-decoder, and a tool to assist in mapping speech files to text.\nInterpreters.\nScummVM is a free and open source software project to make a portable, Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL) library-based SCUMM-engine client which allows many of the SCUMM-engine games to be played on systems where the original versions will not work or have trouble operating, including modern Windows and Macintosh systems, Linux (including portable handhelds\u2014Android, GP2X, GP2X Wiz, Maemo, etc.), BeOS-Haiku, AmigaOS (3.x, 4.0, and its clones MorphOS and AROS), Atari TOS (including its successors\u2014EmuTOS, MagiC, FreeMiNT etc.), Palm OS, Windows Mobile (Pocket PC), Dreamcast, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS, Wii, Symbian (SeriesXX and UIQ), iOS (iPad, iPhone, iPod Touch), webOS and QNX-Playbook platforms.\nscvm is a SCUMM interpreter developed by the ScummC author. As of April 2008, it is in a prototype state, and is meant to become a script debugger for ScummC development. hiscumm is an attempt to port scvm and some bits of ScummVM to the Haxe platform, to produce an interpreter with an Adobe Flash backend.\nReferences and in-jokes.\nIn-joke references were a common feature of LucasArts adventure games. Developers used the name of their engine for comic effect in several games.\n\"Razor and the Scummettes\", a punk band mentioned in \"Maniac Mansion\", and the \"SCUMM bar\" in the \"Monkey Island\" series are both named after the scripting language. In \"Escape from Monkey Island\", victim of a hostile takeover, the \"SCUMM bar\" becomes the \"Lua bar\", a reference to the programming language which replaced the engine used for the prior games. SCUMM is also listed in the ingredients of grog in \"The Secret of Monkey Island\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36732", "revid": "50347001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36732", "title": "Bruce Schneier", "text": "American computer scientist (born 1963)\nBruce Schneier (; born January 15, 1963) is an American cryptographer, computer security professional, privacy specialist, and writer. Schneier is an Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and a Fellow at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet &amp; Society as of November, 2013. He is a board member of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Access Now, and The Tor Project; and an advisory board member of Electronic Privacy Information Center and VerifiedVoting.org. He is the author of several books on general security topics, computer security and cryptography and is a squid enthusiast.\nEarly life and education.\nBruce Schneier is the son of Martin Schneier, a Brooklyn Supreme Court judge. He grew up in the Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York, attending P.S. 139 and Hunter College High School.\nAfter receiving a physics bachelor's degree from the University of Rochester in 1984, he went to American University in Washington, D.C., and got his master's degree in computer science in 1988. \nCareer.\nIn 1991, Schneier was laid off from his job and started writing for computer magazines. Later he decided to write a book on applied cryptography \"since no such book existed\". He took his articles, wrote a proposal to John Wiley and they bought the proposal.\nIn 1994, Schneier published \"Applied Cryptography\", which details the design, use, and implementation of cryptographic algorithms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1999, Schneier was a founder and Chief technology officer of Counterpane Internet Security (now BT Managed Security Solutions). \nIn 2000, Schneier published \"Secrets and Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World\"; in 2003, \"\" and in 2012, \"Liars and Outliers: Enabling the Trust that Society Needs to Thrive\".\nAs a Fellow of Berkman Center for Internet &amp; Society at Harvard University since 2013, Schneier has been exploring the intersection of security, technology, and people, with an emphasis on power.\nHe worked for IBM when they acquired Resilient Systems in 2016, where he was CTO. until he left at the end of June 2019.\nSchneier has been an Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy at the Harvard Kennedy School.\nPersonal life.\nSchneier was married to Karen Cooper in 1997 and lived in Minneapolis; they published restaurant reviews in the Pulse of the Twin Cities. The couple divorced in 2022.\nViewpoints.\nBlockchains.\nSchneier has warned about misplaced trust in blockchain and the lack of use cases, calling blockchain a solution in search of a problem.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe goes on to say that cryptocurrencies are useless and are only used by speculators looking for quick riches.\nCryptography.\nTo Schneier, peer review and expert analysis are important for the security of cryptographic systems. Mathematical cryptography is usually not the weakest link in a security chain; effective security requires that cryptography be combined with other things.\nThe term \"Schneier's law\" was coined by Cory Doctorow in a 2004 speech. The law is phrased as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any person can invent a security system so clever that she or he can't think of how to break it.\nHe attributes this to Bruce Schneier, who wrote in 1998: \"Anyone, from the most clueless amateur to the best cryptographer, can create an algorithm that he himself can't break. It's not even hard. What is hard is creating an algorithm that no one else can break, even after years of analysis.\"\nSimilar sentiments had been expressed by others before. In \"The Codebreakers\", David Kahn states: \"Few false ideas have more firmly gripped the minds of so many intelligent men than the one that, if they just tried, they could invent a cipher that no one could break\", and in \"A Few Words On Secret Writing\", in July 1841, Edgar Allan Poe had stated: \"Few persons can be made to believe that it is not quite an easy thing to invent a method of secret writing which shall baffle investigation. Yet it may be roundly asserted that human ingenuity cannot concoct a cipher which human ingenuity cannot resolve.\"\nSchneier also coined the term \"kid sister cryptography\", writing in the Preface to \"Applied Cryptography\" that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are two kinds of cryptography in this world: cryptography that will stop your kid sister from reading your files, and cryptography that will stop major governments from reading your files. This book is about the latter.\nDigital rights management.\nSchneier is critical of digital rights management (DRM) and has said that it allows a vendor to increase lock-in. Proper implementation of control-based security for the user via trusted computing is very difficult, and security is not the same thing as control.\nSchneier insists that \"owning your data is a different way of thinking about data.\"\nFull disclosure.\nSchneier is a proponent of full disclosure, i.e. making security issues public.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If researchers don't go public, things don\u2019t get fixed. Companies don't see it as a security problem; they see it as a PR problem.\nHomeland security.\nSchneier has said that homeland security money should be spent on intelligence, investigation, and emergency response. Defending against the broad threat of terrorism is generally better than focusing on specific potential terrorist plots. According to Schneier, analysis of intelligence data is difficult but is one of the better ways to deal with global terrorism. Human intelligence has advantages over automated and computerized analysis, and increasing the amount of intelligence data that is gathered does not help to improve the analysis process. Agencies that were designed around fighting the Cold War may have a culture that inhibits the sharing of information; the practice of sharing information is more important and less of a security threat in itself when dealing with more decentralized and poorly funded adversaries such as al Qaeda.\nRegarding PETN\u2014the explosive that has become terrorists' weapon of choice\u2014Schneier has written that only swabs and dogs can detect it. He also believes that changes to airport security since 11 September 2001 have done more harm than good and he defeated Kip Hawley, former head of the Transportation Security Administration, in an \"Economist\" online debate by 87% to 13% regarding the issue. He is widely credited with coining the term \"security theater\" to describe some such changes.\nMovie plot threat.\n\"Movie-plot threat\" is a term Schneier coined that refers to very specific and dramatic terrorist attack scenarios, reminiscent of the behavior of terrorists in movies, rather than what terrorists actually do in the real world. Security measures created to protect against movie plot threats do not provide a higher level of real security, because such preparation only pays off if terrorists choose that one particular avenue of attack, which may not even be feasible. Real-world terrorists would also be likely to notice the highly specific security measures, and simply attack in some other way. The specificity of movie plot threats gives them power in the public imagination, however, so even extremely unrealistic security theater countermeasures may receive strong support from the public and legislators. Among many other examples of movie plot threats, Schneier described banning baby carriers from subways, for fear that they may contain explosives. Starting in April 2006, Schneier has had an annual contest to create the most fantastic movie-plot threat. In 2015, during the 8th and as of 2022[ [update]] the last one, he mentioned that the contest may have run its course.\nSystem design.\nSchneier has criticized security approaches that try to prevent any malicious incursion, instead arguing that designing systems to fail well is more important. The designer of a system should not underestimate the capabilities of an attacker, as technology may make it possible in the future to do things that are not possible at the present. Under Kerckhoffs's Principle, the need for one or more parts of a cryptographic system to remain secret increases the fragility of the system; whether details about a system should be obscured depends upon the availability of persons who can make use of the information for beneficial uses versus the potential for attackers to misuse the information.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Secrecy and security aren't the same, even though it may seem that way. Only bad security relies on secrecy; good security works even if all the details of it are public.\nService and awards.\nSchneier is a board member of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Access Now, and The Tor Project; and an advisory board member of Electronic Privacy Information Center and VerifiedVoting.org.\nIn 2015, Schneier received the EPIC Lifetime Achievement Award from Electronic Privacy Information Center.\nIn 2011, he was awarded an honorary Ph.D from the University of Westminster in London, England, by the Department of Electronics and Computer Science in recognition of Schneier's 'hard work and contribution to industry and public life'.\nWork.\nCryptographic algorithms.\nSchneier has been involved in the creation of many cryptographic algorithms.\nHash functions:\nStream ciphers:\nPseudo-random number generators:\nBlock ciphers:\nPublications.\nSchneier writes a freely available monthly Internet newsletter on computer and other security issues, \"Crypto-Gram\", as well as a security weblog, \"Schneier on Security\". The blog focuses on the latest threats, and his own thoughts. The weblog started out as a way to publish essays before they appeared in Crypto-Gram, making it possible for others to comment on them while the stories were still current, but over time the newsletter became a monthly email version of the blog, re-edited and re-organized. \nSchneier is frequently quoted in the press on computer and other security issues, pointing out flaws in security and cryptographic implementations ranging from biometrics to airline security after the September 11 attacks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36739", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36739", "title": "Columbia Business School", "text": "Business school of Columbia University\nColumbia Business School (CBS) is the business school of Columbia University, a private research university in New York City. Established in 1916, Columbia Business School is one of six Ivy League business schools and one of the oldest business schools in the world.\nHistory.\nThe school was founded in 1916 with 11 full-time faculty members and an inaugural class of 61 students, including 8 women. Banking executive Emerson McMillin provided initial funding in 1916, while A. Barton Hepburn, then president of Chase National Bank, provided funding for the school's endowment in 1919. The school expanded rapidly, enrolling 420 students by 1920, and in 1924 added a PhD program to the existing BS and MS degree programs.\nIn 1945, Columbia Business School authorized the awarding of the MBA degree. Shortly thereafter, in the 1950s, the school adopted the Hermes emblem as its symbol, reflecting the entrepreneurial nature of the Greek god Hermes and his association with business, commerce, and communication.\nIn 1952, CBS admitted its last class of undergraduates. The school currently offers executive education programs that culminate in a Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE) and full alumni status, and several degree programs for the MBA and PhD degrees. In addition to the full-time MBA, the school offers four Executive MBA programs: the NY-EMBA Friday/Saturday program, the EMBA-Global program (launched in 2001 in conjunction with the London Business School), the EMBA-Americas program launched in 2012, and the EMBA-Global Asia program (launched in 2009 in conjunction with the London Business School and the University of Hong Kong Business School). Students in jointly run programs earn an MBA degree from each of the cooperating institutions.\nIn 2004, economist R. Glenn Hubbard became Columbia Business School's eleventh dean. He was succeeded in 2019 by Costis Maglaras.\nCampus.\nFrom 1961, Columbia Business School was primarily located housed in Uris Hall, at the center of Columbia's Morningside Heights campus.\nIn October 2010, Columbia Business School announced that alumnus Henry Kravis, the billionaire co-founder of private-equity firm KKR, pledged $100\u00a0million to fund an expansion of Columbia Business School, the largest gift in its history. The donation went toward construction of the business school's new site on Columbia's Manhattanville campus. In December 2012, Ronald Perelman also donated $100\u00a0million to the construction of the second business school building. In September 2021, David Geffen pledged $75 million to support the new campus' construction. The buildings are designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro, and are named Henry R. Kravis Hall and David Geffen Hall, respectively. Columbia Business School officially moved to Manhattanville in January 2022.\nThe cost of the new campus, which stands at $600 million, makes it the most expensive business school ever built.\nMBA program.\nThe Columbia MBA Program is one of the most competitive in the world with an admission rate of 13.6% for the Class of 2021. Students in the class that entered in 2009 come from 61 countries and speak more than 50 languages.\nThe revised core curriculum, launched in the fall of 2008, represents about 40% of the degree requirement. It consists of 2 full courses and 12 half-term courses including Corporate Finance, Financial Accounting, Managerial Statistics, Managerial Economics, Leadership, Operations Management, and Marketing Strategy. While the first year of the program is usually devoted to completing the requirements of the core curriculum, the second year provides students with the opportunity to choose from the more than 130 elective courses available at the school and supplement them with more than 4,000 graduate-level classes from the university's other graduate and professional schools. Among the most popular electives at Columbia Business School are the Economics of Strategic Behavior, Financial Statement Analysis and Earnings Quality, Launching New Ventures, Modern Political Economy, and the Seminar in Value Investing.\nColumbia Business School has a firm grade non-disclosure policy, which states that students may refrain from disclosing specific class grades, GPAs, or transcripts until they accept full-time, post graduation positions.\nStudents enter Columbia's MBA program in two tracks. The traditional fall term is approximately 550 students, while the January term \"J-Term\" is approximately 200 students. Students entering in the fall are divided into eight clusters of approximately 65 students that take all first year core classes together. J-Term students are broken into three clusters.\nThe January-entry is similar to the August-entry option. January-entry students attend orientation in the spring, while August-entry students are beginning their second terms, and finish their core courses over the summer, while August-entry students participate in summer internships. In the fall of the second year, the two tracks become one, and all MBA students choose from the same pool of electives, gain access to the same career management resources, lead the same clubs, and graduate as a single class.\nThe average starting base salary and bonus for Columbia MBAs in 2020 was $171,436, a sum that places it as the 6th highest among business schools. According to \"Forbes\" magazine, 90% of billionaires with MBAs who derived their fortunes from finance obtained their master's degree from one of three schools: Harvard Business School, Columbia Business School, or The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.\nAcademic divisions.\nThe school's faculty are divided into six academic units:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMBA rankings.\nRecent national rankings of Columbia's MBA program include 7th by \"Forbes\", 5th by \"Bloomberg Businessweek\", and 6th by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". In global rankings, Columbia was ranked No. 4 by \"The Economist\" in 2022 and No. 1 by the \"Financial Times\" in 2023.\nDual-degree programs.\nColumbia Business School students can combine an MBA with one of ten other professional degrees. In general, a dual degree requires one less year than it would take to complete the two degrees separately. Candidates must apply separately to Columbia Business School and the other degree program.\nDual degrees offered with the following schools include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStudent life.\nThe Columbia Business School Follies is a student club that works throughout each semester to put together a production in which students write, choreograph, and perform comedy skits. It achieved notoriety in 2006 for \"Every Breath Bernanke Takes\", its video parody of the Police song \"Every Breath You Take\". It purports to be from Glenn Hubbard, Dean of the Business School, in response to Hubbard's being a runner-up to the Fed Chairmanship assumed by Ben Bernanke.\nExecutive MBA programs.\nColumbia offers various executive MBA programs.\nThe Executive MBA (EMBA) Friday/Saturday Program is a 20-month graduate program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education without interrupting their careers. The EMBA program is taught on campus at Columbia University by full-time faculty. The first year of classes consists of the same core curriculum as the Full-Time MBA program. Executive education is the focus of the second year. This Friday/Saturday program is targeted at individuals with approximately 10 years of work experience.\nThe Executive MBA (EMBA) Saturday Program is a 24-month graduate degree program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education, but cannot take any time away from work. This program is the same as the Friday/Saturday program, with the exception that classes only meet on Saturdays over a longer period of time.\nIn addition to the New York-based EMBA Program, Columbia offers three partner programs to meet the differing needs and geographical distribution of prospective students. Because students in the partner EMBA programs must satisfy the separate requirements of each school, they earn an MBA degree from each participating university. Likewise, they become alumni of each university and business school and may avail themselves of all programs and privileges afforded to alumni.\nMS Programs.\nColumbia Business School offers three separate Master of Science degrees in Accounting and Fundamental Analysis, Financial Economics and Marketing Science. Admission to the programs is extremely competitive: in 2021, there were 837 applicants to the Financial Economics program and only 20 students were accepted.\nDoctoral program.\nThe degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) is offered by the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and is administered by the Business School. Admission is highly competitive with 894 applicants in 2010 for positions in an entering class of 18 students (2%). In 2021, the Finance division received over 500 applications and admitted 3 students (Acceptance rate of 0.6%) A PhD in Management or Business is a common precursor to an academic career in business schools.\nExecutive education.\nColumbia Business School Executive Education offers custom non-degree programs for organizations and open-enrollment non-degree programs for individuals in topics including management, finance, leadership, marketing, social enterprise, and strategy. The school also offers executive certification programs, including the Advanced Management Program, the Certificate in Business Excellence and the Senior Leaders Program for Nonprofit Professionals.\nCIBE.\nThe Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE) is awarded to students who complete a total of 18 program days of executive education within a four-year period. Any executive education program at Columbia Business School can be applied toward the completion of the certificate.\nResearch centers, programs, and institutes.\nResearch centers, special programs, institutes, and cross-disciplinary areas at Columbia Business School include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeople.\nFaculty.\nColumbia Business School employs 136 full-time faculty members, including Joseph Stiglitz, the 2001 Nobel laureate in economics who also teaches at the university's School of International and Public Affairs; and Bernd Schmitt, the Robert D. Calkins Professor of International Business. The current Dean is the former Presidential Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Glenn Hubbard. Hedge fund gurus Joel Greenblatt and Ken Shubin Stein are currently adjunct professors. Bruce Greenwald teaches Value Investing and Economics of Strategic Behavior electives. Adam Dell, brother of Dell Inc. CEO Michael Dell, is a venture capitalist who teaches Business Innovation and Technology. Jonathan Knee teaches Media, Mergers, and Acquisitions and is the author of a book titled \"The Accidental Investment Banker\". Frederic Mishkin, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, returned to teach at CBS starting fall 2008. Rita Gunther McGrath is a well known member of the strategy faculty and the author of four books on the subject, most recently \"The End of Competitive Advantage: How to Keep Your Strategy Moving as Fast As Your Business\" (2013, Harvard Business Review Publishing) Steve Blank created the Lean Launchpad class that he teaches a scientific method for teaching entrepreneurship that combines experiential learning with the three building blocks of a successful Lean Startup.\nAlumni.\nColumbia Business School has over 44,000 living alumni. Some of the more notable alumni include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36741", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36741", "title": "Bristol", "text": "City and county in England\nBristol () is a city and ceremonial county in South West England. It is located on the River Avon, and bordered by Gloucestershire to the north and Somerset to the south with a short coastline on the Bristol Channel to the west. The county includes the majority of the Bristol conurbation, however, the urban area of the city extends into the neighbouring districts of South Gloucestershire, Bath and North East Somerset, and North Somerset.\nThe county is almost entirely urbanised and had an estimated population of 494,399 in 2024, making Bristol the most populous city in the region. For local government purposes the county is a unitary authority area governed by Bristol City Council. The council is a member of the West of England Combined Authority, which allows it to collaborate with South Gloucestershire Council and Bath and North East Somerset Council.\nIron Age hillforts and Roman villas were built near the confluence of the rivers Frome and Avon. Bristol received a royal charter in 1155, but was historically divided between Gloucestershire and Somerset until it became a county corporate in 1373. From the 13th to the 18th century, Bristol was among the top three English cities, after London, in tax receipts. A major port, Bristol was a starting place for early voyages of exploration to the New World. At the height of the Bristol slave trade, from 1700 to 1807, more than 2,000 slave ships carried an estimated 500,000 people from Africa to slavery in the Americas. The Port of Bristol has since moved from Bristol Harbour in the city centre to the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth and Royal Portbury Dock.\nThe city's modern economy is built on the creative media, electronics, and aerospace industries; the city-centre docks have been redeveloped as cultural and heritage centres. There are a variety of artistic and sporting organisations and venues, including the Royal West of England Academy, the Arnolfini, Ashton Gate and the Memorial Ground. The city has two universities: the University of Bristol and the University of the West of England (UWE Bristol). It is connected to the world by Bristol Airport; to the rest of the Great Britain via Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway mainline rail stations; by road by both the south-west to West Midlands M5 and the London to South Wales M4 (which connect to the city centre by the Portway and M32).\nToponymy.\nThe name derives from the Old English , meaning \"assembly place by the bridge\" or simply \"site of the bridge\", presumably in reference to a crossing over the Avon. The final 'L\u2019 is an unetymological addition that first appears in the 12th century, which may be due to the unique \"Terminal L\" found in the Bristol dialect. An older form of the name survives as the surname Bristow, which is derived from the city.\nHistory.\nArchaeological finds, including flint tools believed to be between 300,000 and 126,000years old made with the Levallois technique, indicate the presence of Neanderthals in the Shirehampton and St Annes areas of Bristol during the Middle Palaeolithic. Iron Age hill forts near the city are at Leigh Woods and Clifton Down, on the side of the Avon Gorge, and on Kings Weston Hill near Henbury. A Roman port, \"Portus Abonae\" (Avonport) \u2013 abbreviated to \"Abona\" in the Antonine Itinerary, existed at what is now Sea Mills (connected to Bath and Gloucester by Roman roads); another settlement was at the present-day Inns Court. Isolated Roman villas and small forts and settlements were also scattered throughout the area.\nMiddle Ages.\nBristol was founded by 1000; by about 1020, it was a trading centre with a mint producing silver pennies bearing its name. By 1067, Brycgstow was a well-fortified \"burh\", and that year the townsmen beat back a raiding party from Ireland led by three of Harold Godwinson's sons. Under Norman rule, the town had one of the strongest castles in southern England. Bristol was the place of exile for Diarmait Mac Murchada, the Irish king of Leinster, after being overthrown. The Bristol merchants subsequently played a prominent role in funding Richard Strongbow de Clare and the Norman invasion of Ireland.\nThe port developed in the 11th century around the confluence of the Rivers Frome and Avon, adjacent to Bristol Bridge just outside the town walls. By the 12th century, there was an important Jewish community in Bristol which survived through to the late 13th century when all Jews were expelled from England. The stone bridge built in 1247 was replaced by the current bridge during the 1760s. The town incorporated neighbouring suburbs and became a county in 1373, the first town in England to be given this status. During this period, Bristol became a shipbuilding and manufacturing centre. By the 14th century, Bristol, York and Norwich were England's largest medieval towns after London. One-third to one-half of the population died in the Black Death of 1348\u201349, which checked population growth, and its population remained between 10,000 and 12,000 for most of the 15th and 16th centuries.\n15th and 16th centuries.\nDuring the 15th century, Bristol was the second most important port in the country, trading with Ireland, Iceland and Gascony. It was the starting point for many voyages, including Robert Sturmy's (1457\u201358) unsuccessful attempt to break the Italian monopoly of Eastern Mediterranean trade. New exploration voyages were launched by Venetian John Cabot, who in 1497 made landfall in North America. A 1499 voyage, led by merchant William Weston of Bristol, was the first expedition commanded by an Englishman to North America. During the first decade of the 16th century, Bristol's merchants undertook a series of exploration voyages to North America and even founded a commercial organisation, 'The Company Adventurers to the New Found Land', to assist their endeavours. However, they seem to have lost interest in North America after 1509, having incurred great expenses and made little profit.\nDuring the 16th century, Bristol merchants concentrated on developing trade with Spain and its American colonies. This included the smuggling of prohibited goods, such as food and guns, to Iberia during the Anglo-Spanish War (1585\u20131604). Bristol's illicit trade grew enormously after 1558, becoming integral to its economy.\nThe original Diocese of Bristol was founded in 1542, when the former Abbey of St. Augustine (founded by Robert Fitzharding four hundred years earlier) became Bristol Cathedral. Bristol also gained city status that year.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nIn the 1640s, during the English Civil War, the city was occupied by Royalists, who built the Royal Fort House on the site of an earlier Parliamentarian stronghold.\nFishermen from Bristol, who had fished the Grand Banks of Newfoundland since the 16th century, began settling Newfoundland permanently in larger numbers during the 17th century, establishing colonies at Bristol's Hope and Cuper's Cove. Growth of the city and trade came with the rise of England's American colonies in the 17th century. Bristol's location on the west side of Great Britain gave its ships an advantage in sailing to and from the New World, and the city's merchants made the most of it, with the city becoming one of the two leading outports in all of England by the middle of the 18th century. Bristol was the slave capital of England: In 1755, it had the largest number of slave traders in the country with 237, as against London's 147. It was a major supplier of slaves to South Carolina before 1750.\nThe 18th century saw an expansion of Bristol's population (45,000 in 1750) and its role in the Atlantic trade in Africans taken for slavery to the Americas. Bristol and later Liverpool became centres of the Triangular Trade. Manufactured goods were shipped to West Africa and exchanged for Africans; the enslaved captives were transported across the Atlantic to the Americas in the Middle Passage under brutal conditions. Plantation goods such as sugar, tobacco, rum, rice, cotton and a few slaves (sold to the aristocracy as house servants) returned across the Atlantic to England. Some household slaves were baptised in the hope this would lead them to be freed. The Somersett Case of 1772 clarified that slavery was illegal in England. At the height of the Bristol slave trade from 1700 to 1807, more than 2,000 slave ships carried a conservatively estimated 500,000 people from Africa to slavery in the Americas.\nIn 1739, John Wesley founded the first Methodist chapel, the New Room, in Bristol. Wesley, along with his brother Charles Wesley and George Whitefield, preached to large congregations in Bristol and the neighbouring village of Kingswood, often in the open air.\nWesley published a pamphlet on slavery, titled \"Thoughts Upon Slavery,\" in 1774 and the Society of Friends began lobbying against slavery in Bristol in 1783. The city's scions remained nonetheless strongly anti-abolitionist. Thomas Clarkson came to Bristol to study the slave trade and gained access to the Society of Merchant Venturers records. One of his contacts was the owner of the Seven Stars public house, who boarded sailors Clarkson sought to meet. Through these sailors he was able to observe how slaver captains and first mates \"plied and stupefied seamen with drink\" to sign them up. Other informants included ship surgeons and seamen seeking redress. When William Wilberforce began his parliamentary abolition campaign on 12 May 1788, he recalled the history of the Irish slave trade from Bristol, which he provocatively claimed continued into the reign of Henry VII. Hannah More, originally from Bristol, and a good friend of both Wilberforce and Clarkson, published \"Slavery, A Poem\" in 1788, just as Wilberforce began his parliamentary campaign. His major speech on 2 April 1792 likewise described the Bristol slave trade specifically, and led to the arrest, trial and subsequent acquittal of a local slaver captain named Kimber.\n19th century.\nThe city was associated with Victorian engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel, who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London Paddington, two pioneering Bristol-built oceangoing steamships ( and ), and the Clifton Suspension Bridge. The new railway replaced the Kennet and Avon Canal, which had fully opened in 1810 as the main route for the transport of goods between Bristol and London. Competition from Liverpool (beginning around 1760), disruptions of maritime commerce due to war with France (1793) and the abolition of the slave trade (1807) contributed to Bristol's failure to keep pace with the newer manufacturing centres of Northern England and the West Midlands. The tidal Avon Gorge, which had secured the port during the Middle Ages, had become a liability. An 1804\u201309 plan to improve the city's port with a floating harbour designed by William Jessop was a costly error, requiring high harbour fees.\nDuring the 19th century, Samuel Plimsoll, known as \"the sailor's friend\", campaigned to make the seas safer; shocked by overloaded vessels, he successfully fought for a compulsory load line on ships.\nBy 1867, ships were getting larger and the meanders in the river Avon prevented boats over from reaching the harbour, resulting in falling trade. The port facilities were migrating downstream to Avonmouth and new industrial complexes were founded there. Some of the traditional industries including copper and brass manufacture went into decline, but the import and processing of tobacco flourished with the expansion of the W.D. &amp; H.O. Wills business.\nSupported by new industry and growing commerce, Bristol's population (66,000 in 1801), quintupled during the 19th century, resulting in the creation of new suburbs such as Clifton and Cotham. These provide architectural examples from the Georgian to the Regency style, with many fine terraces and villas facing the road, and at right angles to it. In the early 19th century, the romantic medieval gothic style appeared, partially as a reaction against the symmetry of Palladianism, and can be seen in buildings such as the Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery, the Royal West of England Academy, and The Victoria Rooms. Riots broke out in 1793 and 1831; the first over the renewal of tolls on Bristol Bridge, and the second against the rejection of the second Reform Bill by the House of Lords. The population by 1841 had reached 140,158.\nThe Diocese of Bristol had undergone several boundary changes by 1897 when it was \"reconstituted\" into the configuration which has lasted into the 21st century.\n20th century.\nFrom a population of about 330,000 in 1901, Bristol grew steadily during the 20th century, peaking at 428,089 in 1971. Its Avonmouth docklands were enlarged during the early 1900s by the Royal Edward Dock. Another new dock, the Royal Portbury Dock, opened across the river from Avonmouth during the 1970s. As air travel grew in the first half of the century, aircraft manufacturers built factories. The unsuccessful Bristol International Exhibition was held on Ashton Meadows in the Bower Ashton area in 1914. After the premature closure of the exhibition the site was used, until 1919, as barracks for the Gloucestershire Regiment during World War I.\nBristol was heavily damaged by Luftwaffe raids during World War II; about 1,300 people living or working in the city were killed, and nearly 100,000 buildings were damaged, at least 3,000 beyond repair. The original central shopping area, near the bridge and castle, is now a park containing two bombed churches and fragments of the castle. A third bomb-damaged church nearby, St Nicholas, was restored and, after a period as a museum, has now re-opened as a church. It houses a 1756 William Hogarth triptych painted for the high altar of St Mary Redcliffe. The church also has statues of King Edward I (moved from Arno's Court Triumphal Arch) and King Edward III (taken from Lawfords' Gate in the city walls when they were demolished about 1760), and 13th-century statues of Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester (builder of Bristol Castle) and Geoffrey de Montbray (who built the city's walls) from Bristol's Newgate.\nThe rebuilding of Bristol city centre was characterised by 1960s and 1970s skyscrapers, mid-century modern architecture and road building. Beginning in the 1980s some main roads were closed, the Georgian-era Queen Square and Portland Square were restored, the Broadmead shopping area regenerated, and one of the city centre's tallest mid-century towers was demolished. Bristol's road infrastructure changed dramatically during the 1960s and 1970s with the development of the M4 and M5 motorways, which meet at the Almondsbury Interchange just north of the city and link Bristol with London (M4 eastbound), Swansea (M4 westbound across the Severn Estuary), Exeter (M5 southbound) and Birmingham (M5 northbound). Bristol was bombed twice by the IRA, in 1974 and again in 1978.\nThe 20th-century relocation of the docks to Avonmouth Docks and Royal Portbury Dock, downstream from the city centre, has allowed the redevelopment of the old dock area (the Floating Harbour). Although the docks' existence was once in jeopardy (since the area was seen as a derelict industrial site), the inaugural 1996 International Festival of the Sea held in and around the docks affirmed the area as a leisure asset of the city.\n21st century.\nOn 7 June 2020 a Statue of Edward Colston was pulled down from its city centre plinth by protestors and pushed into the harbour. The statue was recovered on 11 June and has become a museum exhibit. The action followed more than a decade of debate over the statue and the wording of its plaque, which commemorated Colston's philanthropic work in the city while making no reference to his role in the Royal African Company and the Bristol Slave Trade.\nGovernment.\nBristol City council consists of 70 councillors representing 34 wards, with between one and three per ward serving four-year terms. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], no party has an overall controlling majority, but the Green Party are the largest group on the council.\nBetween 2012 and 2024, the council was led by a directly elected mayor, the Mayor of Bristol. The post was abolished following a 2022 referendum, in which voters chose to replace it with a council committee system.\nThe lord mayor of Bristol is a figurehead elected each May by the city council. The lord mayor (2025) is Henry Michallat.\nIn the House of Commons, Bristol is represented by five constituencies, East, North East, North West, South, and Central.\nThe city has a tradition of political activism. Edmund Burke, MP for the Bristol constituency for six years beginning in 1774, insisted that he was a Member of Parliament first and a representative of his constituents' interests second. Women's-rights advocate Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence (1867\u20131954) was born in Bristol, and the left-winger Tony Benn served as MP for Bristol South East from 1950 to 1960 and again from 1963 to 1983. In 1963 the Bristol Bus Boycott, following the Bristol Omnibus Company's refusal to hire black drivers and conductors, drove the passage of the UK's 1965 Race Relations Act. The 1980 St Pauls riot protested against racism and police harassment and showed mounting dissatisfaction with the socioeconomic circumstances of the city's Afro-Caribbean residents. Local support of fair trade was recognised in 2005, when Bristol became a fairtrade zone.\nBristol is both a city and a county, since King Edward III granted it a county charter in 1373. The county was expanded in 1835 to include suburbs such as Clifton, and it was named a county borough in 1889 when that designation was introduced.\nFormer county of Avon.\nOn 1 April 1974, Bristol became a local government district of the administrative county of Avon. On 1 April 1996, Avon was abolished and Bristol became a unitary authority.\nThe former Avon area, called Greater Bristol by the Government Office of the South West (now abolished) and others, refers to the city and the three neighbouring local authorities\u200d\u2014\u200cBath and North East Somerset, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire previously in Avon.\nThe North Fringe of Bristol, a developed area between the Bristol city boundary and the M4, M5 and M32 motorways (now in South Gloucestershire) was so named as part of a 1987 plan prepared by the Northavon District Council of Avon county.\nWest of England Combined Authority.\nThe West of England Combined Authority was created on 9 February 2017. Covering Bristol and the rest of the old Avon county with the exception of North Somerset, the new combined authority has responsibility for regional planning, roads, and local transport, and to a lesser extent, education and business investment. The authority is led by the Mayor of the West of England, Helen Godwin.\nGeography.\nBoundaries.\nBristol's boundaries can be defined in several ways, including those of the city itself, the developed area, or Greater Bristol.\nThe city council boundary is the narrowest definition of the city itself. However, it unusually includes a large, roughly rectangular section of the western Severn Estuary ending at (but not including) the islands of Flat Holm (in Cardiff, Wales) and Steep Holm. This \"seaward extension\" can be traced back to the original boundary of the County of Bristol laid out in the charter granted to the city by Edward III in 1373.\nThe Office for National Statistics (ONS) has defined a Bristol Urban Area, which includes developed areas adjoining Bristol but outside the city-council boundary, such as Kingswood, Mangotsfield, Stoke Gifford, Winterbourne, Almondsbury, Easton in Gordano, Whitchurch village, Filton, Patchway and Bradley Stoke, but excludes undeveloped areas within that boundary.\nGeography.\nBristol lies within a limestone area running from the Mendip Hills in the south to the Cotswolds in the northeast. The rivers Avon and Frome cut through the limestone to the underlying clay, creating Bristol's characteristically hilly landscape. The Avon flows from Bath in the east, through flood plains and areas which were marshes before the city's growth. To the west, the Avon cuts through the limestone to form the Avon Gorge, formed largely by glacial meltwater after the last ice age.&lt;ref name=\"10.1144/GSL\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe gorge, which helped protect Bristol Harbour, has been quarried for stone to build the city, and its surrounding land has been protected from development as The Downs and Leigh Woods. The Avon estuary and the gorge form the county boundary with North Somerset, and the river flows into the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth. A smaller gorge, cut by the Hazel Brook which flows into the River Trym, crosses the Blaise Castle estate in northern Bristol.\nBristol is sometimes described, by its inhabitants, as being built on seven hills, like Rome. From 18th-century guidebooks, these 7 hills were known as simply Bristol (the Old Town), Castle Hill, College Green, Kingsdown, St Michael's Hill, Brandon Hill and Redcliffe Hill. Other local hills include Red Lion Hill, Barton Hill, Lawrence Hill, Black Boy Hill, Constitution Hill, Staple Hill, Windmill Hill, Malborough Hill, Nine Tree Hill, Talbot, Brook Hill and Granby Hill.\nBristol is west of London, south-southwest of Birmingham and east of the Welsh capital Cardiff. Areas adjoining the city fall within a loosely defined area known as Greater Bristol. Bath is located south east of the city centre, Weston-super-Mare is to the south west and the Welsh city of Newport is to the north west.\nClimate.\nThe climate is oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb)\", milder than most places in England and United Kingdom. Located in southern England, Bristol is one of the warmest cities in the UK with a mean annual temperature of approximately . It is among the sunniest, with more than 1,600hours of sunshine per year. Although the city is partially sheltered by the Mendip Hills, it is exposed to the Severn Estuary and the Bristol Channel. Rain is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, with autumn and winter the wetter seasons. The Atlantic Ocean influences Bristol's weather, keeping its average temperature above freezing throughout the year, but winter frosts are frequent and snow occasionally falls from early November to late April. Summers are warm and drier, with variable sunshine, rain and clouds, and spring weather is unsettled.\nThe weather stations nearest Bristol for which long-term climate data are available are Long Ashton (about south west of the city centre) and Bristol Weather Station, in the city centre. Data collection at these locations ended in 2002 and 2001, respectively, and following the closure of Filton Airfield, Almondsbury is the nearest weather station to the city. Temperatures at Long Ashton from 1959 to 2002 ranged from in July 1976 to in January 1982. Monthly high temperatures since 2002 at Filton exceeding those recorded at Long Ashton include in April 2003, in July 2006 and in October 2011. The lowest recent temperature at Filton was in December 2010. Although large cities in general experience an urban heat island effect, with warmer temperatures than their surrounding rural areas, this phenomenon is minimal in Bristol.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnvironment.\nBristol was ranked as Britain's most sustainable city (based on its environmental performance, quality of life, future-proofing and approaches to climate change, recycling and biodiversity), topping environmental charity Forum for the Future's 2008 Sustainable Cities Index. Local initiatives include Sustrans (creators of the National Cycle Network, founded as Cyclebag in 1977) and Resourcesaver, a non-profit business established in 1988 by Avon Friends of the Earth. The city regularly features in the annual \"Sunday Times\" lists of best places in Britain in which to live, topping the list of cities in 2014 and 2017. The city received the 2015 European Green Capital Award, becoming the first UK city to receive this award.\nIn 2019 Bristol City Council voted in favour of banning all privately owned diesel cars from the city centre. Since then, the plans have been revised in favour of a clean air zone whereby older and more polluting vehicles will be charged to drive through the city centre. The Clean Air Zone came into effect in November 2022.\nGreen belt.\nThe city has a green belt mainly along its southern fringes, taking in small areas within the Ashton Court Estate, South Bristol crematorium and cemetery, High Ridge common and Whitchurch, with a further area around Frenchay Farm. The belt extends outside the city boundaries into surrounding counties and districts, for several miles in places, to afford protection from urban sprawl to surrounding villages and towns.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity.\nThe population of the city of Bristol was historically ethnically homogeneous, White British, but is now polyethnic, with the largest ethnic group, White British, constituting 71.6% of the population in the 2021 census. This proportion has consistently declined in each modern census, down from 88.0% in the 2001 census.\nIn the 2021 census, the ethnic composition of the city of Bristol comprised 81.1% White, 6.6% Asian, 5.9% Black, 4.5% mixed, and 1.9% other.\n \nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, the religious composition of the city of Bristol comprised: 32.2% Christian, 51.4% no religion, 6.7% Muslim, 0.8% Hindu, 0.6% Buddhist, 0.5% Sikh, 0.3% Jewish, 0.8% Other religion, and 6.9% not stated.\nAmong the notable Christian churches are the Anglican Bristol Cathedral and St Mary Redcliffe and the Roman Catholic Clifton Cathedral. Nonconformist chapels include Buckingham Baptist Chapel and John Wesley's New Room in Broadmead. After St James' Presbyterian Church was bombed on 24 November 1940, it was never again used as a church; although its bell tower remains, its nave was converted into offices. The city has eleven mosques, several Buddhist meditation centres, a Hindu temple, Reform and Orthodox-Jewish synagogues and four Sikh temples.\nBristol conurbation.\nThe population of Bristol's contiguous urban area was put at 551,066 by the ONS based on Census 2001 data. In 2006 the ONS estimated Bristol's urban-area population at 587,400, making it England's sixth-most populous city and tenth-most populous urban area.\nAt it has the seventh-highest population density of any English district. According to data from 2019, the urban area has the 11th-largest population in the UK, with a population of 670,000.\nIn 2007 the European Spatial Planning Observation Network (ESPON) defined Bristol's functional urban area as including Weston-super-Mare, Bath and Clevedon with a total population of 1.04\u00a0million, the twelfth largest of the UK.\nEconomy.\nBristol has a long history of trade, originally exporting wool cloth and importing fish, wine, grain and dairy products; later imports were tobacco, tropical fruits and plantation goods. Major imports are motor vehicles, grain, timber, produce and petroleum products.\nThe city's economy also relies on the aerospace, defence, media, information technology, financial services and tourism industries. The Ministry of Defence (MoD)'s Procurement Executive, later known as the Defence Procurement Agency and Defence Equipment and Support, moved to its headquarters to Abbey Wood, Filton, in 1995. This organisation, with a staff of 12,000 to 13,000, procures and supports MoD equipment. One of the UK's most popular tourist destinations, Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world's top-ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their \"Eyewitness\" guides for young adults.\nBristol is one of the eight-largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group, and is ranked as a Gamma level global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, the fourth-highest-ranked English city. In 2017 Bristol's gross domestic product was \u00a388.448billion. Its per capita GDP was \u00a346,000 ($65,106, \u20ac57,794), which was some 65% above the national average, the third-highest of any English city (after London and Nottingham) and the sixth-highest of any city in the United Kingdom (behind London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Belfast and Nottingham). According to the 2011 census, Bristol's unemployment rate (claiming Jobseeker's Allowance) was three per cent, compared with two per cent for South West England and the national average of four per cent.\nAlthough Bristol's economy no longer relies upon its port, which was moved to docks at Avonmouth during the 1870s and to the Royal Portbury Dock in 1977 as ship size increased, it is the largest importer of cars to the UK. Until 1991, the port was publicly owned; it is leased, with \u00a3330million invested and its annual tonnage increasing from 3.9million long tons (4million tonnes) to 11.8million (12million). Tobacco importing and cigarette manufacturing have ceased, but the importation of wine and spirits continues.\nThe financial services sector employs 59,000 in the city, and 50 micro-electronics and silicon design companies employ about 5,000. In 1983, Hewlett-Packard opened its national research laboratory in Bristol. In 2014 the city was ranked seventh in the \"top 10 UK destinations\" by TripAdvisor.\nDuring the 20th century, Bristol's manufacturing activities expanded to include aircraft production at Filton by the Bristol Aeroplane Company and aircraft-engine manufacturing by Bristol Aero Engines (later Rolls-Royce) at Patchway. Bristol Aeroplane was known for their World War I Bristol Fighter and World War II Blenheim and Beaufighter planes. During the 1950s, they were a major English manufacturer of civilian aircraft, known for the Freighter, Britannia and Brabazon. The company diversified into automobile manufacturing during the 1940s, producing hand-built luxury Bristol Cars at their factory in Filton, and the Bristol Cars company was spun off in 1960. The city also gave its name to Bristol buses, which were manufactured in the city from 1908 to 1983: by Bristol Tramways until 1955, and from 1955 to 1983 by Bristol Commercial Vehicles.\nFilton played a key role in the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner project during the 1960s. The British Concorde prototype made its maiden flight from Filton to RAF Fairford on 9 April 1969, five weeks after the French test flight. In 2003 British Airways and Air France decided to discontinue Concorde flights, retiring the aircraft to locations (primarily museums) worldwide. On 26 November 2003 Concorde 216 made the final Concorde flight, returning to Bristol Filton Airport as the centrepiece of a proposed air museum which is planned to include the existing Bristol Aero collection (including a Bristol Britannia).\nThe aerospace industry remains a major sector of the local economy. Major aerospace companies in Bristol include BAE Systems, a merger of Marconi Electronic Systems and BAe (the latter a merger of BAC, Hawker Siddeley and Scottish Aviation). Airbus and Rolls-Royce are also based at Filton, and aerospace engineering is an area of research at the University of the West of England. Another aviation company in the city is Cameron Balloons, who manufacture hot air balloons; each August the city hosts the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta, one of Europe's largest hot-air balloon festivals.\nIn 2005, Bristol was named by the UK government one of England's six science cities. A \u00a3500million shopping centre, Cabot Circus, opened in 2008 amidst predictions by developers and politicians that the city would become one of England's top ten retail destinations. The Bristol Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone, focused on creative, high-tech and low-carbon industries around Bristol Temple Meads railway station, was announced in 2011 and launched the following year. The Urban Enterprise Zone has streamlined planning procedures and reduced business rates. Rates generated by the zone are channelled to five other designated enterprise areas in the region: Avonmouth, Bath, Bristol and Bath Science Park in Emersons Green, Filton, and Weston-super-Mare. Bristol is the only big city whose wealth per capita is higher than that of Britain as a whole. The wider region has one of the biggest aerospace hubs in the UK, centred on Airbus, Rolls-Royce and GKN at Filton airfield.\nBetween 2012 and 2020, the city had the largest circulating community currency in the UK, the Bristol Pound, which was pegged to the pound sterling before it ceased operation.\nCulture.\nArts.\nBristol has a thriving arts scene. Some of the modern venues and modern digital production companies have merged with legacy production companies based in old buildings around the city. In 2008 the city was a finalist for the 2008 European Capital of Culture, although the title was awarded to Liverpool. The city was designated \"City of Film\" by UNESCO in 2017 and has been a member of the Creative Cities Network since then.\nThe Bristol Old Vic, founded in 1946 as an offshoot of The Old Vic in London, occupies the 1766 Theatre Royal (607 seats) on King Street and the Weston Studio in the adjacent Coopers' Hall (built in 1743), with a 2018 bar and foyer area. The Theatre Royal, a grade I listed building, is the oldest continuously operating theatre in England. The Bristol Old Vic Theatre School (which originated in King Street) is a separate company, and the Bristol Hippodrome is a 1,951-seat theatre for national touring productions. Other smaller theatres include the Tobacco Factory, QEH, the Redgrave Theatre at Clifton College, The Wardrobe Theatre, Bristol Improv Theatre, and the Alma Theatre. Bristol's theatre scene features several companies as well as the Old Vic, including Show of Strength, Shakespeare at the Tobacco Factory and Travelling Light. Theatre Bristol is a partnership between the city council, Arts Council England and local residents to develop the city's theatre industry. Several organisations support Bristol theatre; the Residence (an artist-led community) provides office, social and rehearsal space for theatre and performance companies, and Equity has a branch in the city.\nThe city has many venues for live music, its largest being the 2,000-seat Bristol Beacon, previously Colston Hall, named after Edward Colston. Others include the Bristol Academy, The Fleece, The Croft, the Exchange, Fiddlers, the Victoria Rooms, Rough Trade, Trinity Centre, St George's Bristol and several pubs, from the jazz-oriented The Old Duke to rock at the Fleece and indie bands at the Louisiana. In 2010 PRS for Music called Bristol the UK's most musical city, based on the number of its members born there relative to the city's population.\nSince the late 1970s, Bristol has been home to bands combining punk, funk, dub and political consciousness. With trip hop and Bristol Sound artists such as Tricky, Portishead and Massive Attack, the list of bands from Bristol is extensive. The city is a stronghold of drum and bass, with artists such as Roni Size's Mercury Prize-winning Reprazent, as DJ Krust, More Rockers and TC. Musicians were at the centre of the broader Bristol urban-culture scene which received international media attention during the 1990s. The Downs Festival is also a yearly occurrence where both local and well-known bands play. Since its inception in 2016, it has become a major event in the city.\nThe Bristol Museum and Art Gallery houses a collection encompassing natural history, archaeology, local glassware, Chinese ceramics and art. The M Shed museum opened in 2011 on the site of the former Bristol Industrial Museum. Both are operated by Bristol Culture and Creative Industries, which also runs three historic houses\u200d\u2014\u200cthe Tudor Red Lodge, the Georgian House and Blaise Castle House; and Bristol Archives. The 18th- and 19th-century portrait painter Thomas Lawrence, 19th-century architect Francis Greenway (designer of many of Sydney's first buildings) were born in the city. The graffiti artist Banksy is believed to be from Bristol, and many of his works are on display in the city.\nThe Watershed Media Centre and Arnolfini gallery (both in dockside warehouses) exhibit contemporary art, photography and cinema, and the city's oldest gallery is at the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton. The nomadic Antlers Gallery opened in 2010, moving into empty spaces on Park Street, on Whiteladies Road and in the Purifier House on Bristol's Harbourside. Stop-motion animation films and commercials (produced by Aardman Animations) are made in Bristol, such as \"Wallace and Gromit\" and \"Chicken Run\", while Aardman has also branched out into computer-animation, such as \"Arthur Christmas\". Robert Newton, Bobby Driscoll and other cast members of the 1950 Walt Disney film \"Treasure Island\" (some scenes were filmed along the harbourside) visited the city along with Disney himself. Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit. Locations in and around Bristol have featured in the BBC's natural-history programmes, including \"Animal Magic\" (filmed at Bristol Zoo).\nBristol is the birthplace of 18th-century poets Robert Southey and Thomas Chatterton. Southey (born on Wine Street in 1774) and his friend, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, married the Fricker sisters from the city. William Wordsworth spent time in Bristol, where Joseph Cottle published \"Lyrical Ballads\" in 1798. Actor Cary Grant was born in Bristol, and comedians from the city include Justin Lee Collins, Lee Evans, Russell Howard and writer-comedian Stephen Merchant.\nThe author John Betjeman wrote a poem called \"Bristol\". It begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nArchitecture.\nBristol has 51 Grade I, 500 Grade II* and over 3,800 Grade II listed buildings in a variety of architectural styles, from medieval to modern. During the mid-19th century, Bristol Byzantine, a style unique to the city, was developed, and several examples have survived. Buildings from most architectural periods of the United Kingdom can be seen in the city. Surviving elements of the fortifications and castle date to the medieval period, and the Church of St James dates back to the 12th century.\nThe oldest Grade I listed buildings in Bristol are religious. St James' Priory was founded in 1129 as a Benedictine priory by Earl Robert of Gloucester, the illegitimate son of Henry I. The second-oldest is Bristol Cathedral and its associated Great Gatehouse. Founded in 1140 as an Augustinian monastery, the church became the seat of the bishop and cathedral of the new Diocese of Bristol in 1542. Most of the medieval stonework, particularly the Elder Lady Chapel, is made from limestone taken from quarries around Dundry and Felton, with Bath stone being used in other areas. Amongst the other churches included in the list is the 12th-century St Mary Redcliffe which is the second tallest building in Bristol. The church was described by Queen Elizabeth I as \"the fairest, goodliest, and most famous parish church in England.\"\nSecular buildings include The Red Lodge, built in 1580 for John Yonge as a lodge for a larger house that once stood on the site of the present Bristol Beacon (previously known as Colston Hall). It was subsequently added to in Georgian times and restored in the early 20th century. St Bartholomew's Hospital is a 12th-century town house which was incorporated into a monastery hospital founded in 1240 by Sir John la Warr, 2nd Baron De La Warr (c.\u20091277\u20131347), and became Bristol Grammar School from 1532 to 1767, and then Queen Elizabeth's Hospital 1767\u20131847. The round piers predate the hospital, and may come from an aisled hall, the earliest remains of domestic architecture in the city, which was then adapted to form the hospital chapel. Three 17th-century town houses which were attached to the hospital were incorporated into model workers' flats in 1865, and converted to offices in 1978. St Nicholas's Almshouses were built in 1652 to provide care for the poor. Several public houses were also built in this period, including the Llandoger Trow on King Street and the Hatchet Inn.\nManor houses include Goldney Hall, where the highly decorated Grotto dates from 1739. Commercial buildings such as the Exchange and Old Post Office from the 1740s are also included in the list. Residential buildings include the Georgian Portland Square and the complex of small cottages around a green at Blaise Hamlet, which was built around 1811 for retired employees of Quaker banker and philanthropist John Scandrett Harford, who owned Blaise Castle House. The 18th-century Kings Weston House, in northern Bristol, was designed by John Vanbrugh and is the only Vanbrugh building in any UK city outside London. Almshouses and pubs from the same period intermingle with modern development. Several Georgian squares were designed for the middle class as prosperity increased during the 18th century. During World War II, the city centre was heavily bombed during the Bristol Blitz. The central shopping area near Wine Street and Castle Street was particularly hard-hit, and the Dutch House and St Peter's Hospital were destroyed. Nevertheless, in 1961 John Betjeman called Bristol \"the most beautiful, interesting and distinguished city in England\".\nDialect.\nA dialect of English (West Country English), known as Bristolian, is spoken by longtime residents, who are known as Bristolians. Bristol natives have a rhotic accent, in which the post-vocalic \"r\" in \"car\" and \"card\" is pronounced (unlike in Received Pronunciation). The city is regarded as one of the last locations in England, along with Blackburn, to preserve the traditional English rhotic R sound. The unique feature of this accent is the 'Bristol (or terminal) l', in which \"l\" is appended to words ending in \"a\" or \"o\". Whether this is a broad \"l\" or a \"w\" is a subject of debate, with \"area\" pronounced 'areal' or 'areaw'. The ending of \"Bristol\" is another example of the Bristol \"l\". Bristolians pronounce \"-a\" and \"-o\" at the end of a word as \"-aw\" (\"cinemaw\"). To non-natives, the pronunciation suggests an \"l\" after the vowel.\nBristolian is characterised by use of \"cassn't\" instead of \"can't\" and \"canst\" and \"dissn't\" instead of \"didst\" and \"didn't\". The second-person singular was retained and children were admonished with \"Thee and thou, the Welshman's cow\". In Bristolian, as in French and German, the second-person singular was not used when speaking to a superior (except by the egalitarian Quakers). The pronoun \"thee\" is also used in the subject position (\"What bist thee doing?\"), and \"I\" or \"he\" in the object position (\"Give he to I.\"). Linguist Stanley Ellis, who found that many dialect words in the Filton area were linked to aerospace work, described Bristolian as \"a cranky, crazy, crab-apple tree of language and with the sharpest, juiciest flavour that I've heard for a long time\".\nSport.\nBristol is represented by professional teams in all the major national sports. Bristol City and Bristol Rovers are the city's main football clubs. Bristol Bears (rugby union) and Gloucestershire County Cricket Club are also based in the city.\nThe two Football League clubs are Bristol City and Bristol Rovers\u200d\u2014\u200cthe former being the only club from the city to play in the precursor to the Premier League. Bristol City, formed in 1894, were Division One runners-up in 1907 and lost the FA Cup final in 1909. In the First Division in 1976, they then sank to the bottom professional tier before reforming after a 1982 bankruptcy. They have been above Bristol Rovers in the Football League since 2000, and were promoted to the second tier of English football in 2007. Bristol City Women were formerly based at Twerton Park, but now share Ashton Gate Stadium as a home venue with the men's team.\nBristol Rovers, the oldest professional football team in the city, were formed in 1883 and promoted back into the Football League in 2015. They were third-tier champions twice (Division Three South in 1952\u201353 and Division Three in 1989\u201390), Watney Cup Winners (1972) and runners-up for the Johnstone's Paint Trophy (2006\u201307), although they have never played in England's top division.\nBristol Bears was formed in 1888 and has often competed at the highest level of rugby union. The club played at the Memorial Ground, which it shared with Bristol Rovers from 1996, until moving to Ashton Gate Stadium in 2014. They changed their name from Bristol Rugby to Bristol Bears to coincide with their return to Premiership Rugby in the 2018\u201319 season.\nThe first-class cricket club Gloucestershire County Cricket Club has its headquarters and plays the majority of its home games at the Bristol County Ground, the only major international sports venue in the south-west of England. It was formed by the family of W. G. Grace.\nBristol sponsors the annual Bristol Half Marathon and hosted the 2001 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships. Bristol has staged finishes and starts of the Tour of Britain cycle race, and facilities in the city were used as training camps for the 2012 London Olympics. The Bristol International Balloon Fiesta, a major UK hot-air ballooning event, is held each summer at Ashton Court.\nMedia.\nBristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit based at Broadcasting House, which produces television, radio and online content with a natural history or wildlife theme. The city has a long association with David Attenborough's authored documentaries, including \"Life on Earth\", \"The Blue Planet\" and \"Planet Earth\".\nThe BBC announced in 2021 that it was moving the production of many of its programmes from Broadcasting House to Finzels Reach in the centre of Bristol.\nBristol has two daily newspapers, the \"Western Daily Press\" and the \"Bristol Post\" (both owned by Reach plc); and a Bristol edition of the free \"Metro\" newspaper (owned by DMGT). \"The Bristol Cable\" specialises in investigative journalism with a quarterly print edition and website.\nAardman Animations is a Bristol-based animation studio, known for the characters Wallace and Gromit and Morph.\nLocal radio stations, including BBC Radio Bristol, Heart West, Greatest Hits Radio Bristol &amp; The South West, Hits Radio Bristol, Kiss, and BCfm, a community based station. Television programmes produced in the city include \"Points West\", Endemol productions such as \"Deal or No Deal\", \"The Crystal Maze\", \"Tipping Point\" and \"ITV News West Country\". Coming-of-age drama \"Skins\" and supernatural comedy-drama \"Being Human\" were also shot in the city. Bristol was the former home of long-running BBC medical soap opera \"Casualty\" until 2011. In October 2018, Channel 4 announced that Bristol would be home to one of its 'Creative Hubs', as part of their move to produce more content outside of London.\nPublishers in the city have included 18th-century Bristolian Joseph Cottle, who helped introduce Romanticism by publishing the works of William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. During the 19th century, J.W. Arrowsmith published the Victorian comedies \"Three Men in a Boat\" (by Jerome K. Jerome) and \"The Diary of a Nobody\" by George and Weedon Grossmith. The contemporary Redcliffe Press has published over 200 books covering all aspects of the city. Bristol is home to YouTube video developers and stylists The Yogscast, with founders Simon Lane and Lewis Brindley having moved their operations from Reading to Bristol in 2012.\nEducation.\nBristol has two major institutions of higher education: the University of Bristol, a redbrick chartered in 1909; and the University of the West of England, opened as Bristol Polytechnic in 1969, which became a university in 1992. The University of Law also has a campus in the city. Bristol has two further education institutions (City of Bristol College and South Gloucestershire and Stroud College) and two theological colleges: Trinity College, and Bristol Baptist College. The city has 129 infant, junior and primary schools,\n17 secondary schools, and three learning centres. After a section of north London, Bristol has England's second-highest number of private school places. Independent schools in the city include Clifton College, Clifton High School, Badminton School, Bristol Grammar School, Queen Elizabeth's Hospital (the only all-boys school) and the Redmaids' School (founded in 1634 by John Whitson, which claims to be England's oldest girls' school).\nPlaying Out is a community interest company founded in 2009 in Bristol by Alice Ferguson and Amy Rose. It supports residents to organise temporary street closures creating \"play streets\" so that children can play safely outside.\nScience city.\nIn 2005, Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown named Bristol one of six English 'science cities',\nand a \u00a3300million science park was planned at Emersons Green. Research is conducted at the two universities, the Bristol Royal Infirmary and Southmead Hospital, and science outreach is practised at We The Curious, the Bristol Zoo, the Bristol Festival of Nature and the CREATE Centre.\nThe city has produced a number of scientists, including 19th-century chemist Humphry Davy (who worked in Hotwells). Physicist Paul Dirac (from Bishopston) received the 1933 Nobel Prize for his contributions to quantum mechanics. Cecil Frank Powell was the Melvill Wills Professor of Physics at the University of Bristol when he received the 1950 Nobel Prize for, among other discoveries, his photographic method of studying nuclear processes. Colin Pillinger was the planetary scientist behind the Beagle 2 project, and neuropsychologist Richard Gregory founded the Exploratory (a hands-on science centre which was the predecessor of At-Bristol/We The Curious).\nInitiatives such as the Flying Start Challenge encourage an interest in science and engineering in Bristol secondary-school pupils; links with aerospace companies impart technical information and advance student understanding of design.\nThe Bloodhound LSR project to break the land speed record is based at the Bloodhound Technology Centre on the city's harbourside.\nTransport.\nRail.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBristol has two principal railway stations. Bristol Temple Meads (near the city centre) has Great Western Railway services which include high-speed trains to London Paddington and local, regional and CrossCountry trains. Bristol Parkway, north of the city in Gloucestershire, but within the conurbation, has high-speed Great Western Railway services to Swansea, Cardiff Central and London Paddington, and CrossCountry services reaching Birmingham, Manchester and Edinburgh. There are scheduled coach links to most major UK cities.\nBristol's principal surviving suburban railway is the Severn Beach Line to Avonmouth and Severn Beach. Although Portishead Railway's passenger service was a casualty of the Beeching cuts, freight service to the Royal Portbury Dock was restored from 2000 to 2002. The MetroWest scheme, formerly known as The Greater Bristol Metro, proposes to increase the city's rail capacity including the restoration of a further of track on the line to Portishead (a dormitory town with one connecting road), and a further commuter rail line from Bristol Temple Meads to Henbury, on an existing freight line. Following numerous delays, the two lines are due to be opened in 2026.\nRoads.\nThe M4 motorway connects the city on an east\u2013west axis from London to West Wales, and the M5 is a north\u2013south west axis from Birmingham to Exeter. The M49 motorway is a shortcut between the M5 in the south and the M4 Severn Crossing in the west, and the M32 is a spur from the M4 to the city centre. The Portway connects the M5 to the city centre, and was the most expensive road in Britain when opened in 1926.\nPrivate car use is high in the city, leading to traffic congestion costing an estimated \u00a3350million per year.\nBristol allows motorcycles to use most of the city's bus lanes and provides secure, free parking for them. In 2022, Bristol implemented a Clean Air Zone to reduce pollution by charging the most polluting vehicles to enter the city centre, with the money raised reinvested in transport.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport in the city consists primarily of a First West of England bus network. Other providers are Abus, Stagecoach West, and Stagecoach South West. Bristol's bus service has been criticised as unreliable and expensive, and in 2005 FirstGroup was fined for delays and safety violations.\nAlthough the city council has included a light rail system in its local transport plan since 2000, it has been unsuccessful in funding the project. Instead, Bristol has a network of five bus rapid transit routes, named MetroBus, which in part run on dedicated infrastructure. The Metrobus project aimed to provide a faster and more reliable service than standard buses, improving transport infrastructure and reducing congestion, but has been criticised as a limited success because the routes are not fully segregated from other traffic. The first routes opened in 2018, and as of 2025, they connect the city centre with Emersons Green, Bristol Parkway, Cribbs Causeway, Hengrove, and a park and ride near Long Ashton.\nThree park and ride sites serve Bristol.\nThe city centre has water transport operated by Bristol Ferry Boats, Bristol Packet Boat Trips and Number Seven Boat Trips, providing leisure and commuter service in the harbour.\nCycling.\nBristol was designated as England's first \"cycling city\" in 2008 and one of England's 12 \"Cycling demonstration\" areas. It is home to Sustrans, the sustainable transport charity. The Bristol and Bath Railway Path links it to Bath, and was the first part of the National Cycle Network. The city also has urban cycle routes and links with National Cycle Network routes to the rest of the Country. Cycling trips increased by 21% from 2001 to 2005.\nAir.\nIn 2023, Bristol Airport (BRS), located in neighbouring North Somerset, was ranked the eighth busiest airport in the United Kingdom. It handled 9.9\u00a0million passengers, an 14% increase compared with 2018.\nInternational relations.\nBristol was among the first cities to adopt town twinning after World War II. Twin towns include:\nFreedom of the City.\nPeople and military units receiving the Freedom of the City of Bristol include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36743", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36743", "title": "Atalanta", "text": "Greek mythological character\nAtalanta (; ) is a heroine in Greek mythology.\nThere are two versions of the huntress Atalanta: one from Arcadia, whose parents were Iasus and Clymene and who is primarily known from the tales of the Calydonian boar hunt and the Argonauts; and the other from Boeotia, who is the daughter of King Schoeneus and is primarily noted for her skill in the footrace. In both versions, Atalanta was a local figure allied to the goddess Artemis; in such oral traditions, minor characters were often assigned different names, resulting in minor regional variations.\nMythology.\nEarly life.\nAt birth, Atalanta was taken to Mount Parthenion to be exposed because her father had desired a son. A she-bear\u2014one of the symbols of Artemis\u2014whose cubs had been recently killed by hunters came upon Atalanta and nursed her until those same hunters discovered her and raised her themselves in the mountains. Atalanta then grew up to be a swift-footed virgin who eschewed men and devoted herself to the huntress Artemis.\nAtalanta modelled herself after Artemis, wearing a simple sleeveless tunic that reached her knees and living in the wilderness. While living in the wild, Atalanta slew two centaurs with her bow and arrows, Rhoecus and Hylaios, after her beauty caught their attention and they attempted to rape her.\nThe voyage of the Argonauts.\nAtalanta is only occasionally mentioned in the legend of the Argonauts; however, her participation is noted in Pseudo-Apollodorus's account, which says that during the search for the Golden Fleece, Atalanta, who was invited and invoked the protection of Artemis, sailed with the Argonauts as the only woman among them. In Diodorus Siculus's account, Atalanta is not only noted to have sailed with the Argonauts but to have fought alongside them at the battle in Colchis, where she, Jason, Laertes, and the sons of Thesipae were wounded and later healed by Medea. In the account of Apollonius of Rhodes, Jason prevents Atalanta from joining not because she lacks skill but because as a woman she has the potential to cause strife among men on the ship. \nAfter the death of King Pelias in Iolcus, funeral games were held in which Atalanta defeated Peleus in a wrestling match. This match became a popular subject in Greek art.\nThe Calydonian boar hunt.\nIn an annual celebration, King Oeneus of Calydon had forgotten to honour Artemis with a sacrifice in his rites to the gods. In anger, she sent the Calydonian boar, a monstrous wild boar that ravaged the land, cattle, and people, and prevented the crops from being sown. Atalanta was called upon to join Meleager, Theseus, Pollux, Telamon, Peleus, and all those who were part of the Argonaut expedition on the hunt for the boar. Many of the men were angry that a woman was joining them, but Meleager, though having a family of his own, convinced them otherwise as he desired to father a child with Atalanta after hearing of her expertise in archery and beauty while hunting.\nDuring the hunt Hyleus and Ancaeus were killed, Peleus accidentally killed a fellow hunter and others were wounded. Atalanta drew first blood on the boar with her bow. After this feat, killing the boar became a collective effort as, after the initial blow, Amphiaraus shot the boar's eye and Meleager ended its life. Meleager awarded the hide to Atalanta for her valor, but it was taken away by Meleager's uncles, Plexippus and Toxeus, who considered it dishonorable for a woman to hold such a prize. In response, Meleager killed his uncles. Althaea, Meleager's mother, became grief-stricken after hearing of her brothers\u2019 deaths and threw the log that was tied to her son's life into a fire, killing him.\nFootrace.\nAccording to Ovid, before her adventures, Atalanta had consulted an oracle who prophesied that marriage would be her undoing. As a result, she chose to live in the wilderness. After the Calydonian boar hunt, Atalanta was discovered by her father, who accepted her as his daughter and began to arrange a marriage for her. To prevent this, she agreed to marry only if a suitor could outrun her in a footrace, which swift-footed Atalanta knew was impossible. If the suitor was unsuccessful, he would be killed. Her father agreed to the terms, and many suitors died in the attempt until Hippomenes, who fell in love with Atalanta at first sight, appealed for divine help. Hippomenes knew he could not best Atalanta even with the advantage of a head start, so he prayed to the goddess Aphrodite for assistance. Aphrodite, who felt spurned because Atalanta was a devotee of Artemis and rejected love, gave Hippomenes three irresistible golden apples. As the race began, Atalanta, wearing armour and carrying weapons, quickly passed Hippomenes, but she was diverted off the path when he tossed an apple for her to retrieve; each time Atalanta caught up with Hippomenes, he would toss another apple, ultimately winning the race and Atalanta herself.\nAtalanta bore a son, Parthenopaios (who may have been fathered by Meleager or Ares), who became one of the Seven against Thebes.\nMetamorphosis into lions.\nAfter the footrace, Hippomenes forgot to thank Aphrodite for her aid, and while the couple were out hunting, the goddess afflicted them with such sexual passion that they had sex in a sanctuary belonging to either Zeus or Rhea. They were turned into lions for their sacrilege by either Artemis (angered by Atalanta losing her virginity), the goddess Cybele, or Zeus himself. The belief at the time was that lions could not mate with their own species, only with leopards; therefore Atalanta and Hippomenes would never be able to have \"intercourse of love\".\nModern.\nThe Italian football club Atalanta, based in Bergamo, took its name from the heroine, and the club's crest depicts her face.\nThe English football club Huddersfield Atalanta Ladies F.C. was also named after the heroine.\nA version of Atalanta's story appears in the multimedia children's entertainment project \"Free to Be... You and Me\". She is also the focus of the 2017 historical novel \"For the Winner\", by the British Classicist and author Emily Hauser, which retells the story of Atalanta's voyage with the Argonauts.\nIn the light novel \"Fate/Apocrypha\", Atalanta is summoned as the Archer-class Servant of the Red faction.\nOlympic-medal-winning javelin thrower Fatima Whitbread said that she took up an interest in track and field events after being inspired by the myth of Atalanta, \"whom no man could outrun except by cheating, and whose javelin killed a terrible monster.\"\nA version of Atalanta's story is told in \"Atalanta\" by Jennifer Saint (2023). This modern feminist retelling claims Atalanta as the daughter of Iasus and follows both the tales of the Argonauts and the Calydonian boar hunt and the tales of her skill in the footrace.\nThe European Union anti-piracy mission in Somalia is named \"Operation Atalanta\" in reference to the Greek heroine.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36744", "revid": "43933890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36744", "title": "Iris", "text": "Iris most often refers to:\nIris or IRIS may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36745", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36745", "title": "Hestia", "text": "Greek goddess of the hearth\nIn ancient Greek religion and mythology, Hestia (; ) is the virgin goddess of the hearth and the home. In myth, she is the firstborn child of the Titans Cronus and Rhea, and one of the Twelve Olympians.\nIn Greek mythology, newborn Hestia, along with four of her five siblings, was devoured by her father Cronus, who feared being overthrown by one of his offspring. Zeus, the youngest child, escaped with his mother's help, and made his father disgorge all his siblings. Cronus was supplanted by this new generation of deities; and Hestia thus became one of the Olympian gods, the new rulers of the cosmos, alongside her brothers and sisters. In spite of her status, she has little prominence in Greek mythology. Like Athena and Artemis, Hestia elected never to marry and remained an eternal virgin goddess instead, forever tending to the hearth of Olympus.\nAs the goddess of sacrificial fire, Hestia received the first offering at every domestic sacrifice. In the public domain, the hearth of the \"prytaneum\" functioned as her official sanctuary. Whenever a new colony was established, a flame from Hestia's public hearth in the mother city would be carried to the new settlement. The goddess Vesta is her Roman equivalent.\nOrigins and etymology.\nHestia's name means \"hearth, fireplace, altar\". This stems from the PIE root , \"burn\" (ultimately from \"dwell, pass the night, stay\"). It thus refers to the \"oikos:\" domestic life, home, household, house, or family. Burkert states that an \"early form of the temple is the hearth house; the early temples at Dreros and Prinias on Crete are of this type as indeed is the temple of Apollo at Delphi which always had its inner \"hestia\"\". The Mycenaean great hall (\"megaron\"), like Homer's hall of Odysseus at Ithaca, had a central hearth. Likewise, the hearth of the later Greek \"prytaneum\" was the community and government's ritual and secular focus. Hestia's naming thus makes her a personification of the hearth and its fire, a symbol of society and family, also denoting authority and kingship.\nMythology.\nOrigin.\nHestia is a goddess of the first Olympian generation. She is the eldest daughter of the Titans Rhea and Cronus, and sister to Demeter, Hades, Hera, Poseidon, and Zeus. Immediately after their birth, starting with Hestia, Cronus swallowed each of them, but their mother deceived Cronus and helped Zeus escape. Zeus forced Cronus to disgorge his siblings and led them in a war against their father and the other Titans.\nKarl Kerenyi interprets the lines from the \"Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite\" (composed around the eighth or seventh century BC) that Hestia is simultaneously the eldest and youngest Cronid to mean that because she was the first to be devoured and (presumably) the last to be yielded up again, Hestia thus counts as both the eldest and youngest daughter of her parents. It is more likely that the anonymous author of the hymn was trying to reconcile the two conflicting birth orders given by Hesiod and Homer; while in the \"Theogony\" the firstborn is Hestia, in the \"Iliad\" Hera states that she is the eldest child.\nZeus assigned Hestia a duty to feed and maintain the fires of the Olympian hearth with the fatty, combustible portions of animal sacrifices to the gods. Wherever food was cooked, or an offering was burnt, she thus had her share of honor; also, in all the temples of the gods, she has a share of honor. \"Among all mortals, she was chief of the goddesses\".\nVirgin goddess.\nThe gods Poseidon and Apollo (her brother and nephew respectively) both fell in love with Hestia and vied for her hand in marriage. But Hestia would have neither of them, and went to Zeus instead, and swore a great oath, that she would remain a virgin for all time and never marry. In the \"Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite,\" Aphrodite (goddess of sex and love) has \"no power\" over Hestia.\nStatus and attributes.\nAt Athens, \"in Plato's time\", notes Kenneth Dorter \"there was a discrepancy in the list of the twelve chief gods, as to whether Hestia or Dionysus was included with the other eleven. The altar to them at the agora, for example, included Hestia, but the east frieze of the Parthenon had Dionysus instead.\" However, the hearth was immovable, and \"there is no story of Hestia's \"ever having been removed from her fixed abode\". Burkert remarks that \"Since the hearth is immovable Hestia is unable to take part even in the procession of the gods, let alone the other antics of the Olympians\".\nTraditionally, Hestia is absent from ancient depictions of the Gigantomachy as she is the one who must keep the home fires burning when the other gods are away. Nevertheless, her possible participation in the fight against the Giants is evidenced from an inscription on the northern frieze of the Siphnian Treasury in Delphi; Brinkmann (1985) suggests that the letter tracings of one of the two goddesses right next to Hephaestus be restored as \"Hestia\", although other possible candidates include Demeter and Persephone, or two of the three Fates.\nHer mythographic status as firstborn of Rhea and Cronus seems to justify the tradition in which a small offering is made to Hestia before any sacrifice (\"Hestia comes first\"), though this was not universal among the Greeks. In \"Odyssey\"\u00a0\"14\", 432\u2013436, the loyal swineherd Eumaeus begins the feast for his master Odysseus by plucking tufts from a boar's head and throwing them into the fire with a prayer addressed to all the powers, then carved the meat into seven equal portions: \"one he set aside, lifting up a prayer to the forest nymphs and Hermes, Maia's son.\"\nHestia is identified with the hearth as a physical object, and the abstractions of community and domesticity, in contrast to the fire of the forge employed in blacksmithing and metalworking, the province of the god Hephaestus. Portrayals of her are rare and seldom secure. In classical Greek art, she is occasionally depicted as a woman simply and modestly cloaked in a head veil. At times, she is shown with a staff in hand or by a large fire. She sits on a plain wooden throne with a white woolen cushion. Her associated sacrificial animal was a domestic pig.\nEquivalence.\nHer Roman equivalent is Vesta; Vesta has similar functions as a divine personification of Rome's \"public\", domestic, and colonial hearths, binding Romans together within a form of extended family. The similarity of names between Hestia and Vesta is, however, misleading: \"The relationship \"hestia-histie-Vesta\" cannot be explained in terms of Indo-European linguistics; borrowings from a third language must also be involved\", according to Walter Burkert.\nHerodotus equates Hestia with the high ranking Scythian deity Tabiti. Procopius equates her with the Zoroastrian holy fire (\"atar\") of the Sasanians in Adhur Gushnasp.\nTo Vesta is attributed one more story not found in Greek tradition by the Roman poet Ovid in his poem \"Fasti\", where during a feast of the gods the resting Vesta is nearly raped in her sleep by the god Priapus, and only avoids this fate when Silenus' donkey abruptly cries out, alerting Vesta and prompting the other gods to attack Priapus in defense of the goddess. This story is an almost word-for-word repeat of the myth of Priapus and Lotis, recounted earlier in the same book, with the difference that Lotis had to transform into a lotus tree to escape Priapus, making some scholars suggest the account where Vesta supplants Lotis only exists in order to create some cult drama.\nWorship.\nThe worship of Hestia was centered around the hearth, both domestic and civic. The hearth was essential for warmth, food preparation, and the completion of sacrificial offerings to deities. At feasts, Hestia was offered the first and last libations of wine. Pausanias writes that the Eleans sacrifice first to Hestia and then to other gods. Xenophon in Cyropaedia wrote that Cyrus the Great sacrificed first to Hestia, then to sovereign Zeus, and then to any other god that the magi suggested.\nThe accidental or negligent extinction of a domestic hearth fire represented a failure of domestic and religious care for the family; failure to maintain Hestia's public fire in her temple or shrine was a breach of duty to the broad community. A hearth fire might be deliberately, ritually extinguished at need; but its lighting should be accompanied by rituals of completion, purification, and renewal, comparable with the rituals and connotations of an eternal flame and of sanctuary lamps. At the level of the \"polis\", the hearths of Greek colonies and their mother cities were allied and sanctified through Hestia's cult. Athenaeus, in the Deipnosophistae, writes that in Naucratis the people dined in the Prytaneion on the birthday of Hestia Prytanitis.\nResponsibility for Hestia's domestic cult usually fell to the leading woman of the household, although sometimes to a man. Hestia's rites at the hearths of public buildings were usually led by holders of civil office; Dionysius of Halicarnassus testifies that the \"prytaneum\" of a Greek state or community was sacred to Hestia, who was served by the most powerful state officials. However, evidence of her dedicant priesthood is extremely rare. Most stems from the early Roman Imperial era, when Sparta offers several examples of women with the priestly title \"Hestia\"; Chalcis offers one, a daughter of the local elite. Existing civic cults to Hestia probably served as stock for the grafting of Greek ruler-cult to the Roman emperor, the Imperial family, and Rome itself. In Athens, a small seating section at the Theatre of Dionysus was reserved for priesthoods of \"Hestia on the Acropolis, Livia, and Julia\", and of \"Hestia Romain\" (\"Roman Hestia\", thus \"The Roman Hearth\" or Vesta). At Delos, a priest served \"Hestia the Athenian Demos\" (the people or state) \"and Roma\". An eminent citizen of Carian Stratoniceia described himself as a priest of Hestia and several other deities, as well as holding several civic offices. Hestia's political and civic functions are further evidenced by her very numerous privately funded dedications at civic sites, and the administrative rather than religious titles used by the lay-officials involved in her civic cults.\nShrines, temples and colonies.\nEvery private and public hearth was regarded as a sanctuary of the goddess, and a portion of the sacrifices, to whatever divinity they were offered, belonged to her. Aeschines, \"On the Embassy\", declares that \"the hearth of the Prytaneum was regarded as the common hearth of the state and a statue of Hestia was there, and in the senate-house there was an altar of the goddess.\" A temple at Ephesus was dedicated to Hestia Boulaea \u2013 Hestia \"of the senate\", or boule. Pausanias reports a figurative statue of Hestia in the Athenian Prytaneum, together with one of the goddess Eirene (\"Peace\"). Hestia offered sanctuary from persecution to those who showed her respect and would punish those who offended her. Diodorus Siculus writes that Theramenes sought asylum directly from Hestia at the Council Chamber, leaping onto her hearth not to save himself, but in the hope that his slayers would demonstrate their impiety by killing him there\".\nVery few free-standing temples were dedicated to Hestia. Pausanias mentions one in Hermione and one in Sparta, the latter having an altar but no image. Xenophon's \"Hellenica\" mentions fighting around and within Olympia's temple of Hestia, a building separate from the city's council hall and adjoining theatre. A temple to Hestia was in Andros.\nProspective founders of city-states and colonies sought approval and guidance not only of their \"mother city\" (represented by Hestia) but of Apollo, through one or another of his various oracles. He acted as consulting archegetes (founder) at Delphi. Among his various functions, he was patron god of colonies, architecture, constitutions and city planning. Additional patron deities might also be persuaded to support the new settlement, but without Hestia, her sacred hearth, an \"agora\" and prytaneum there could be no \"polis\".\nHymns, odes and oaths.\nHomeric Hymn 24, \"To Hestia\", is an invocation of five lines, alluding to her role as an attendant to Apollo:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHomeric Hymn 29, \"To Hestia\" invokes Hestia and Hermes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hestia, in the high dwellings of all, both deathless gods and men who walk on earth, you have gained an everlasting abode and highest honor: glorious is your portion and your right. For without you mortals hold no banquet, \u2013 where one does not duly pour sweet wine in offering to Hestia both first and last. And you, slayer of Argus (an epithet of Hermes), Son of Zeus and Maia, the messenger of the blessed gods, bearer of the goldenrod, the giver of good, be favorable and help us, you and Hestia, the worshipful and dear. Come and dwell in this glorious house in friendship together; for you two, well knowing the noble actions of men, aid on their wisdom and their strength. Hail, Daughter of Cronos, and you also, Hermes, bearer of the goldenrod! Now I will remember you and another song also.\nBacchylides Ode 14b, \"For Aristoteles of Larisa\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Golden-throned Hestia (), you who increase the great prosperity of the rich Agathocleadae, seated in the midst of city streets near the fragrant river Peneius in the valleys of sheep-nurturing Thessaly. From there Aristoteles came to flourishing Cirrha, and was twice crowned, for the glory of horse-mastering Larisa ... (The rest of the ode is lost)\n\"Orphic Hymn\" 84 and Pindar's 11th Nemean ode are dedicated to Hestia.\nIn one military oath found at Acharnai, from the Sanctuary of Ares and Athena Areia, dated 350\u2013325 BC, Hestia is called, among many others, to bear witness.\nHestia tapestry.\nThe Hestia tapestry is a Byzantine tapestry, made in Egypt during the 6th century AD. It is a late and very rare representation of the goddess, whom it identifies in Greek as \"Hestia Polyolbos\"; ( \"Hestia full of Blessings\"). Its history and symbolism are discussed in Friedlander (1945).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36747", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36747", "title": "IBRD", "text": ""}
{"id": "36749", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36749", "title": "IDA", "text": ""}
{"id": "36751", "revid": "1314115436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36751", "title": "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development", "text": "Lending arm of the World Bank\nThe International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) is an international financial institution, established in 1944 and headquartered in Washington, D.C., United States; it is the lending arm of the World Bank Group. The IBRD offers loans to middle-income developing countries. It is the first of five member institutions that compose the World Bank Group. The initial mission of the IBRD in 1944, was to finance the reconstruction of European nations devastated by World War II. The IBRD and the concessional lending institution, the International Development Association (IDA), are collectively known as the World Bank as they share the same leadership and staff.\nFollowing the reconstruction of Europe, the Bank's mandate expanded to advancing worldwide economic development and eradicating poverty. The IBRD provides commercial-grade or concessional financing to sovereign states to fund projects that seek to improve transportation and infrastructure, education, domestic policy, environmental consciousness, energy investments, healthcare, access to food and potable water, and access to improved sanitation.\nThe IBRD is owned and governed by its 189 member states, with each country represented on the Board of Governors. The IBRD has its executive leadership and staff which conduct its normal business operations. The Bank's member governments are shareholders which contribute and have the right to vote on its matters. In addition to contributions from its member nations, the IBRD acquires most of its capital by borrowing on international capital markets through bond issues at a preferred rate because of its AAA credit rating.\nIn 2011, it raised US$29 billion in capital from bond issues made in 26 different currencies. The Bank offers several financial services and products, including flexible loans, grants, risk guarantees, financial derivatives, and catastrophic risk financing. It reported lending commitments of $26.7 billion made to 132 projects in 2011.\nGovernance.\nThere are five \"closely associated institutions\" that each have a \"distinct role\" and together form the World Bank\u2014the IBRD, the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), that \"invests in private firms and promotes entrepreneurship\", the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), that guarantees loans, and the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Their mission is to \"fight poverty and improve living standards for people in the developing world.\" By 2018, the World Bank Group was \"one of the world's largest sources of funding and knowledge for developing countries.\" Of the five institutions, the IBRD and the IDA are the World Bank's two largest units. When a country reaches a GDP per person over US$1,145, they are no longer eligible for IDA financial support. For example, of the BRIC countries, China was no longer eligible in 1999 and by 2014, neither was India.\nThe IBRD is governed by the World Bank's Board of Governors which meets annually and consists of one governor per member country (most often the country's finance minister or treasury secretary). The Board of Governors delegates most of its authority over daily matters such as lending and operations to the board of directors. The Board of Directors consists of 25 executive directors and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group. The executive directors collectively represent all 189 member states of the World Bank. The president oversees the IBRD's overall direction and daily operations.\nThe Bank and IDA operate with a staff of approximately 10,000 employees.\nOn 9 April 2019, United States President Donald Trump nominated David Malpass as the World Bank Group's president. Malpass had served as one of President Trump's economic advisers and as a senior official in the United States Treasury Department. The IBRD member nations did not sponsor a \"rival candidate\" and Malpass became president, in spite of the fact that he is critical of the role of the IBRD.\nBackground.\nThe International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) were established by delegates at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944 and became operational in 1946. According to a March 2012 \"Washington Post\" article, IBRD was the \"original 'world bank'\".\nIBRD field offices were opened in Paris, France, Copenhagen, Denmark, and Prague in the former Czechoslovakia.\nThe IBRD was established with the original mission of financing the reconstruction efforts of war-torn European nations following World War II, with goals shared by the later Marshall Plan. The Bank issued its inaugural loan of $250 million ($2.6 billion in 2 dollars) to France in 1947 to finance infrastructure projects.\nIn 1946, a few months after it became operational, Chile sought financial help from the IBRD\u2014the first of the developing countries to do so.\nThroughout the remainder of the 1940s and 1950s, the Bank-financed projects sought to dam rivers, generate electricity and improve access to water and sanitation. It also invested in France, Belgium, and Luxembourg's steel industry. Following the reconstruction of Europe, the Bank's mandate has transitioned to eradicating poverty around the world.\nIn 1960, the International Development Association (IDA) was established to serve as the Bank's concessional lending arm and provide low and no-cost finance and grants to the poorest of the developing countries as measured by gross national income per capita.\nThe IBRD is restricted in its borrowing, as it cannot provide loans in competition with private capital; IBRD loans have to be tied to specific projects; and the IBRD will normally only finance the direct foreign exchange costs of a project.\nAt the time of its creation, the IBRD was the only Multilateral Development Bank. During the period of decolonization\u2014the mid\u20101950s to the mid\u20101970s\u2014several MDBs were created\u2014the International Finance Corporation, the International Development Association. They were both WBG members. During this period other MDBs that were similar to the IBRD in their governance and operations, were established by countries that were not member nations of the WBG. This included the Inter\u2010American Development Bank (IDB), the African Development Bank (AfDB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF), and the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB). Both the CAF and IsDB are \"primarily owned and controlled by borrower countries.\"\nIn the early 1990s, European nations established the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and expanded European Investment Bank, to foster European integration and to assist post\u2010communist countries to transform their economies to become more market\u2010oriented.\nBy 2012, according to \"The Post\", IBRD was using \"its AAA credit rating to sell bonds at interest rates close to those of U.S. Treasury bonds.\" It loaned money to developing nations, such as China and Brazil.\nAccording to the \"Global Policy\", journal, While the IBRD and the IDA historically prioritized funding infrastructure projects, since the 1990s, the Bank has directed less lending to infrastructure projects in favour of other development projects such as fighting climate change, eradicating poverty and ensuring good governance.\nFinancial model.\nThe IBRD finances its activities from the shares its members hold, as well as borrowing on international capital markets by issuing World Bank bonds. The Bank raised US$54.0 billion worth of capital in fiscal 2019 from bonds issued in 27 different currencies.\nSince 1959, the IBRD, which is backed by world governments has had a triple-A credit rating, which allows it to borrow capital at lower rates.\nAccording to a 2015 article, commissioned by the Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-Four on International Monetary Affairs and Development\u2014also known as the Group of 24 (G-24)\u2014multilateral development banks (MDBs)\u2014such as the IBRD\u2014\"represent one of the most successful types of international organization created in the post-World War II era.\" By October 2015, although the WBG\u2014with its lending arms\u2014was the only \"global institution, there were more than twenty operational 20 MDBs in the world. In 2016, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and BRICS New Development Bank began operations. Like other multilateral development banks, (MDBs), the IBRD has a preferred credit treatment (PCT), through which borrowers grant the MDBs a \"privileged position to be first in line for repayment, should a country face financial restrictions.\"\nThe bank also generates income from the return on its equity and the small margins on the loans. As the IBRD does not seek profit, it transfers part of its excess income to the IDA ($259 million in fiscal 2019).\nIn 2011, the IBRD loaned about US$26 billion, which represented just a \"fraction of the $72 billion the IMF approved as a credit line to a single nation, Mexico.\" In the early 2010s, the total of \"capital investments in emerging markets from all sources have topped $1 trillion annually\". According to the Institute of International Finance, in 2011, the \"combined net investment of the World Bank and other international development banks and agencies\" was about $20 billion in 2011.\nAccording to a 2019 \"The Economist\" article, the IBRD is \"more controversial\" than the International Development Association (IDA) lending arm. With its AAA credit rating, the IBRD can \"borrow money cheaply on the international financial markets\". Middle-income countries, like Brazil and China, that currently borrow from the IBRD, could \"borrow in abundance from foreign investors\" on their own.\nServices.\nThe IBRD provides financial services as well as strategic coordination and information services to its borrowing member countries. The Bank only finances sovereign governments directly, or projects backed by sovereign governments. The World Bank Treasury is the division of the IBRD that manages the Bank's debt portfolio of over $100 billion and financial derivatives transactions of $20 billion.\nThe Bank offers flexible loans with maturities as long as 30 years and custom-tailored repayment scheduling. The IBRD also offers loans in local currencies. Through a joint effort between the IBRD and the International Finance Corporation, the Bank offers financing to subnational entities either with or without sovereign guarantees. For borrowers needing quick financing for an unexpected change, the IBRD operates a Deferred Drawdown Option which serves as a line of credit with features similar to the Bank's flexible loan program. Among the World Bank Group's credit enhancement and guarantee products, the IBRD offers policy-based guarantees to cover countries' sovereign default risk, partial credit guarantees to cover the credit risk of a sovereign government or subnational entity, and partial risk guarantees to private projects to cover a government's failure to meet its contractual obligations. The IBRD's Enclave Partial Risk Guarantee covers private projects in member countries of the IDA against sovereign governments' failures to fulfil contractual obligations. The Bank provides an array of financial risk management products including foreign exchange swaps, currency conversions, interest rate swaps, interest rate caps and floors, and commodity swaps. To help borrowers protect against catastrophes and other special risks, the bank offers a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option to provide financing after a natural disaster or declared state of emergency. It also issues catastrophe bonds which transfer catastrophic risks from borrowers to investors. The IBRD reported $23.2 billion in lending commitments for 100 projects in fiscal year 2019. The top 10 borrowers were India, Indonesia, Jordan, Egypt, Argentina, China, Morocco, Turkey, Ukraine and Colombia. The most supported sector was Public Administration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
