{"id": "32031", "revid": "326639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32031", "title": "University of Texas at Austin", "text": "Public research university in Austin, Texas, US\nThe University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin, UT, or Texas) is a public research university in Austin, Texas, United States. Founded in 1883, it is the flagship institution of the University of Texas System. With 53,864 students as of fall 2024, it is also the largest institution in the system.\nThe university is a major center for academic research, with research expenditures totaling $1.06 billion for the 2023 fiscal year. It joined the Association of American Universities in 1929. The university houses seven museums and seventeen libraries, including the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library and the Blanton Museum of Art, and operates various auxiliary research facilities, such as the J. J. Pickle Research Campus and McDonald Observatory.\nUT Austin's athletics constitute the Texas Longhorns. The Longhorns have won four NCAA Division I National Football Championships, six NCAA Division I National Baseball Championships, sixteen NCAA Division I National Men's Swimming and Diving Championships, and the school has claimed more titles in men's and women's sports than any other member in the Big 12.\nAs of 2020,[ [update]] 13 Nobel Prize winners, 25 Pulitzer Prize winners, 3 Turing Award winners, 2 Fields Medal recipients, 2 Wolf Prize winners, and 3 Abel Prize winners have been affiliated with the school as alumni, faculty members, or researchers. The university has also been affiliated with three Primetime Emmy Award winners, and as of 2021, its students and alumni have earned a total of 155 Olympic medals.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe idea of a public university in Texas was first mentioned in the 1827 constitution of the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas, which promised public education in the arts and sciences under Title 6, Article 217, but no action was taken. After Texas gained independence from Mexico in 1836, the Constitution of the Republic emphasized Congress's duty, in Section 5 of its General Provisions, to establish a general system of education when circumstances allowed.\nAfter Texas was annexed, the Seventh Texas Legislature passed O.B. 102 on February 11, 1858, allocating $100,000 in United States bonds from the Compromise of 1850 for the University of Texas. The Civil War delayed fund repayment, leaving the university with only $16,000 by 1865. Nevertheless, the Texas Constitution of 1876 reaffirmed the mandate to establish \"The University of Texas\" by popular vote.\nOn March 30, 1881, the Texas legislature organized the structure of the university and called for a popular vote to determine its location. Austin was chosen as the site with 30,913 votes, while Galveston was designated for the medical department. On November 17, 1882, the cornerstone of the Old Main Building was laid at the original \"College Hill\" location, and university President Ashbel Smith expressed optimism about Texas's untapped resources. The University of Texas officially opened its doors on September 15, 1883.\nExpansion and growth.\nThe old Main Building of the university was built in a Victorian-Gothic style and served as the central point of the campus's site, and was used for nearly all purposes. But by the 1930s, discussions arose about the need for new library space, and the Main Building was razed in 1934, despite the objections of many students and faculty. The modern-day tower and Main Building were constructed in its place.\nIn 1916, a contentious dispute erupted between Texas Governor James E. Ferguson and the University of Texas over faculty appointments. Ferguson's attempt to influence these appointments led to a retaliatory veto of the university's budget, jeopardizing its operations. Subsequently, Ferguson was impeached by the Texas House of Representatives, convicted by the Senate on charges including misapplication of public funds, and removed from office.\nIn 1921, the legislature appropriated $1.35\u00a0million to purchase land next to the main campus. However, expansion was hampered by the restriction against using state revenues to fund construction of university buildings as set forth in Article 7, Section 14 of the Constitution. With the completion of Santa Rita No. 1 well and the discovery of oil on university-owned lands in 1923, the university added significantly to its Permanent University Fund. The additional income from Permanent University Fund investments allowed for bond issues in 1931 and 1947, which allowed the legislature to address funding for the university along with the Agricultural and Mechanical College (now known as Texas A&amp;M University). With sufficient funds to finance construction on both campuses, on April 8, 1931, the Forty Second Legislature passed H.B. 368. which dedicated the Agricultural and Mechanical College a 1/3 interest in the Available University Fund, the annual income from Permanent University Fund investments.\nIn 1929, the University of Texas was inducted into the Association of American Universities.\nDuring World War II, the University of Texas was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. Additionally, to facilitate the wartime effort, academic calendars were compressed, allowing for accelerated graduation.\nAfter \"Brown v. Board of Education\" in 1954, Houston, Texas, area teen Marion Ford had been accepted to become one of the first Black attendees. In an interview with a reporter he announced his desire to try-out for the football team. The Ford Crisis would begin and all Black admissions at the time were rescinded until policy could be drawn up.\nIn the fall of 1956, the first Black students entered the university's undergraduate class. Black students were permitted to live in campus dorms, but were barred from campus cafeterias. The University of Texas integrated its facilities and desegregated its dormitories in 1965. UT, which had had an open admissions policy, adopted standardized testing for admissions in the mid-1950s, at least in part as a conscious strategy to minimize the number of Black undergraduates, given that they were no longer able to simply bar their entry after the Brown decision.\nFollowing growth in enrollment after World War II, the university unveiled an ambitious master plan in 1960 designed for \"10 years of growth\" that was intended to \"boost the University of Texas into the ranks of the top state universities in the nation.\" In 1965, the Texas Legislature granted the university Board of Regents to use eminent domain to purchase additional properties surrounding the original . The university began buying parcels of land to the north, south, and east of the existing campus, particularly in the Blackland neighborhood to the east and the Brackenridge tract to the southeast, in hopes of using the land to relocate the university's intramural fields, baseball field, tennis courts, and parking lots.\nOn March 6, 1967, the Sixtieth Texas Legislature changed the university's official name from \"The University of Texas\" to \"The University of Texas at Austin\" to reflect the growth of the University of Texas System.\n1966 shooting.\nOn August 1, 1966, Texas student Charles Whitman barricaded the observation deck in the tower of the Main Building. Armed with multiple firearms, he killed 14 people on campus, 11 from the observation deck and below the clocks on the tower, and three more in the tower, as well as wounding two others inside the observation deck. The massacre ended when Whitman was shot and killed by police after they breached the tower.\nAfter the Whitman event, the observation deck was closed until 1968 and then closed again in 1975 following a series of suicide jumps during the 1970s. In 1999, after installation of security fencing and other safety precautions, the tower observation deck reopened to the public. There is a turtle pond park near the tower dedicated to those affected by the tragedy.\nThe first presidential library on a university campus was dedicated on May 22, 1971, with former President Johnson, Lady Bird Johnson and then-President Richard Nixon in attendance. Constructed on the eastern side of the main campus, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum is one of 13 presidential libraries administered by the National Archives and Records Administration.\nA statue of Martin Luther King Jr. was unveiled on campus in 1999 and subsequently vandalized. By 2004, John Butler, a professor at the McCombs School of Business suggested moving it to Morehouse College, a historically black college, \"a place where he is loved\".\nRecent history.\nThe University of Texas at Austin has experienced a wave of new construction recently with several significant buildings. On April 30, 2006, the school opened the Blanton Museum of Art. In August 2008, the AT&amp;T Executive Education and Conference Center opened, with the hotel and conference center forming part of a new gateway to the university. Also in 2008, Darrell K Royal-Texas Memorial Stadium was expanded to a seating capacity of 100,119, making it the largest stadium (by capacity) in the state of Texas at the time.\nOn Tuesday, September 28, 2010, a shooting occurred at the Perry\u2013Casta\u00f1eda Library (PCL) where student Colton Tooley, armed with an AK-47, fired shots on his walk from Guadalupe Street to the library's front entrance. The student ascended to the sixth floor, before killing himself. No one else was injured, except for one sprained ankle suffered by a student fleeing the scene.\nIn early 2020, following a major outbreak of the new coronavirus, the university restricted travel to Wuhan province in China, aligning with the US Department of State's recommendation. By March 17, 2020, then-UT President Gregory L. Fenves announced a transition to online classes for the rest of the spring semester after 49 confirmed COVID-19 cases emerged from students' travels to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, during spring break. Throughout the summer, the university reported over 400 cases and its first COVID-19-related death, a custodial worker.\nThe fall 2020 semester consisted of a majority of online courses through platforms like Zoom. On August 6, 2020, UT Austin initiated plans for free COVID-19 tests for all students. UT Austin returned to primarily in-person classes and campus activities for the fall 2021 semester, implementing safety protocols like testing requirements and vaccination incentives to ensure a safe return amid the ongoing pandemic.\nIn 2024, after four years of test-optional admissions for undergraduate applications due to the COVID-19 pandemic, standardized testing scores were once again made a mandatory part of admissions, beginning with applications for the fall 2025 semester. Jay Hartzell commented that the SAT and ACT standardized exams were \"a proven differentiator that is in each student's and the University's best interest.\"\nOn April 2, 2024, the University of Texas at Austin announced additional adjustments in compliance with Senate Bill 17, particularly in response to a letter from March 26, 2024, from Texas State Senator Brandon Creighton, which led to the layoff of approximately 60 individuals, most of whom formerly worked in DEI-related programs, and the elimination of the newly renamed Division of Campus and Community Engagement. Students, faculty, staff, and outside critics denounced the university's over-compliance with the anti-DEI law, since the university had already been compliant since January 1, 2024. At a UT Austin Faculty Council meeting on April 15, 2024, in response to mounting criticism, President Jay Hartzell stated the additional changes were made in response to the threats from the Republican-led State Legislature and the University of Texas System Board of Regents, and to restore \"confidence\" in the university, reacting to changing tides in public opinion towards higher education amongst Republicans. The university's Division of Campus and Community Engagement operated the University of Texas-University Charter School, a charter school system with 23 campuses across Texas, until the closure on April 2, 2024, leading the charter school to be moved to the College of Education.\nOn April 24, 2024, a large Pro-Palestinian demonstration occurred that included students and faculty. Protestors demanded a ceasefire in the Gaza war and urged the university to divest from companies profiting from Israel's actions. The protests occurred amidst the ongoing nationwide demonstrations on college campuses. In response, the university requested the assistance of the Austin Police Department (APD) and the Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS). The deployment of multiple police units led to the confirmed arrest of 57 protesters, including a photojournalist for Fox 7 Austin, with several more detained. Charges were then dismissed against 46 protesters the next day, leading to their subsequent release, with the charges against the remaining 11 protesters dropped on April 26, 2024. The decision to send law enforcement received sharp backlash, including from general faculty, staff, students, several Democratic legislators for the region. The UT Faculty Council Executive Committee denounced the response, in part due to the extreme, chaotic, and violent police response that ensued. The university ultimately set new rules for protests on campus, such as banning masks and face coverings and instituting a 10 PM curfew for all protests, directly contradicting prior guidelines. Initially, the university told students and faculty that arrested protestors would no longer be allowed on campus, but retracted the statement two hours later, stating that they would be allowed \"academic\" access, only to then announce a change to full access for university affiliates. Additionally, the university temporarily suspended the student organization that organized the protests, the Palestine Solidarity Committee.\nCampus.\nThe university's property totals , comprising the for the Main Campus in central Austin and the J. J. Pickle Research Campus in north Austin and the other properties throughout Texas. The main campus has 150 buildings totaling over .\nOne of the university's most visible features is the Beaux-Arts Main Building, including a tower designed by Paul Philippe Cret. Completed in 1937, the Main Building is in the middle of campus. The tower usually appears illuminated in white light in the evening but is lit burnt orange for various special occasions, including athletic victories and academic accomplishments; conversely, it is darkened for solemn occasions. At the top of the tower is a carillon of 56 bells, the largest in Texas. Songs are played on weekdays by student carillonneurs, in addition to the usual pealing of Westminster Quarters every quarter-hour between 6\u00a0a.m. and 9\u00a0p.m. In 1998, after the installation of security and safety measures, the observation deck reopened to the public indefinitely for weekend tours.\nThe university's seven museums and seventeen libraries hold over nine million volumes, making it the seventh-largest academic library in the country. The holdings of the university's Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center include one of only 21 remaining complete copies of the Gutenberg Bible and the first permanent photograph, \"View from the Window at Le Gras\", taken by Nic\u00e9phore Ni\u00e9pce. The newest museum, the Blanton Museum of Art, is the largest university art museum in the United States and hosts approximately 17,000 works from Europe, the United States, and Latin America. The Perry\u2013Casta\u00f1eda Library, which houses the central University Libraries operations and the Perry\u2013Casta\u00f1eda Library Map Collection, is at the heart of campus. The Benson Latin American Collection holds the largest collection of Latin American materials among US university libraries, and maintains substantial digital collections.\nThe University of Texas at Austin has an extensive tunnel system that links the buildings on campus. Constructed c.\u20091928 under the supervision of UT engineering professor Carl J. Eckhardt Jr., then head of the physical plant, the tunnels have grown along with the campus. They measure approximately six miles in length. The tunnel system is used for communications and utility service. It is closed to the public and guarded by silent alarms. Since the late 1940s, the university has generated its own electricity. Today its natural gas cogeneration plant has a capacity of 123 MW. The university also operates a TRIGA nuclear reactor at the J. J. Pickle Research Campus.\nThe university continues to expand its facilities on campus. In 2010, the university opened the state-of-the-art Norman Hackerman building (on the site of the former Experimental Sciences Building) housing chemistry and biology research and teaching laboratories. In 2010, the university broke ground on the $120\u00a0million Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Computer Science Complex and Dell Computer Science Hall and the $51\u00a0million Belo Center for New Media, both of which are now complete. The new LEED gold-certified, Student Activity Center (SAC) opened in January 2011, housing study rooms, lounges and food vendors. The SAC was constructed as a result of a student referendum passed in 2006 which raised student fees by $65 per semester. In 2012, the Moody Foundation awarded the College of Communication $50\u00a0million, the largest endowment any communication college has received, so naming it the Moody College of Communication.\nThe university operates two public radio stations, KUT with news and information, and KUTX with music, via local FM broadcasts as well as live streaming audio over the Internet. The university uses CapMetro to provide bus transportation for students around the campus on the UT Shuttle system and throughout Austin, and UT students, faculty, and staff with an active UT ID card are able to ride public transportation without paying a fare.\nOrganization and administration.\nThe university contains nineteen colleges and schools and one academic unit, each listed with its founding date:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAcademics.\nThe University of Texas at Austin offers more than 100 undergraduate and 170 graduate degrees. In the 2009\u20132010 academic year, the university awarded a total of 13,215 degrees: 67.7% bachelor's degrees, 22.0% master's degrees, 6.4% doctoral degrees, and 3.9% Professional degrees.\nIn addition, the university has nine honors programs, eight of which span a variety of academic fields: Liberal Arts Honors, the Business Honors Program, the Turing Scholars Program in Computer Science, Engineering Honors, the Dean's Scholars Program in Natural Sciences, the Health Science Scholars Program in Natural Sciences, the Polymathic Scholars Program in Natural Sciences, and the Undergraduate Nursing Honors Program in School of Nursing. The ninth is the Plan II Honors Program, a rigorous interdisciplinary program that is a major in and of itself. Many Plan II students pursue a second major, often participating in another department's honors program in addition to Plan II. The university also offers programs such as the Freshman Research Initiative and Texas Interdisciplinary Plan.\nAdmissions.\nUndergraduate.\nThe University of Texas at Austin encourages applicants to submit SAT/ACT scores, but it is not required. However, for students applying for admission from fall 2025 onwards, submission of SAT/ACT scores is mandatory as part of their undergraduate admission application. As of 2011, the university was one of the most selective universities in the region. Relative to other universities in the state of Texas, UT Austin was second to Rice University in selectivity according to a \"Business Journal\" study weighing acceptance rates and the mid-range of the SAT and ACT. The University of Texas at Austin was ranked as the 18th most selective in the South.\nAs a state public university, UT Austin was subject to Texas House Bill 588, which guaranteed Texas high school seniors graduating in the top 10% of their class admission to any public Texas university. A new state law granting UT Austin (but no other state university) a partial exemption from the top 10% rule, Senate Bill 175, was passed by the 81st Legislature in 2009. It modified this admissions policy by limiting automatically admitted freshmen to 75% of the entering in-state freshman class, starting in 2011. The university will admit the top one percent, the top two percent and so forth until the cap is reached; the university currently admits the top 6%. Furthermore, students admitted under Texas House Bill 588 are not guaranteed their choice of college or major, but rather only guaranteed admission to the university as a whole. Many colleges, such as the Cockrell School of Engineering, have secondary requirements that must be met for admission.\nFor others who go through the traditional application process, selectivity is deemed \"more selective\" according to the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". For fall 2023, 66,109 applied and 19,253 were accepted (29.1%), and of those accepted, 48.8% enrolled. Among freshman students who enrolled for fall 2024, the average SAT English reading and writing score was 680, with the 25th percentile at 630 and the 75th percentile at 730, while the average SAT Math score was 690, with the 25th percentile at 610 and the 75th percentile at 760. In terms of class rank, 74.4% of enrolled freshmen were in the top 10% of their high school classes and 91.7% ranked in the top quarter. In the 2020\u20132021 academic year, 79 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.\nRankings.\nThe University of Texas at Austin was tied for 30th among all universities in the US and tied for 7th among public universities according to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2025 rankings. Internationally, UT Austin was ranked 65th in the 2025 \"Best Global Universities\" ranking by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", 49th in the world by Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) in 2025, 50th worldwide by Times Higher Education World University Rankings (2026), and 68th globally by QS World University Rankings (2026). UT Austin was also ranked 36th in the world by the Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) in 2025.\nThe university is considered to be a \"Public Ivy\"\u2014a public university that provides an Ivy League collegiate experience at a public school price, having been ranked in virtually every list of \"Public Ivies\" since Richard Moll coined the term in his 1985 book \"Public Ivies: A Guide to America's best public undergraduate colleges and universities\". The seven other \"Public Ivy\" universities, according to Moll, were the College of William &amp; Mary, Miami University, the University of California, the University of Michigan, the University of North Carolina, the University of Vermont, and the University of Virginia.\nThe accounting and Latin American history programs are consistently ranked top in the nation by the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" college rankings, most recently in their 2023 and 2021 editions, respectively. More than 50 other science, humanities, and professional programs rank in the top 25 nationally. The College of Pharmacy is listed as the third-best in the nation and The School of Information (iSchool) is sixth-best in Library and Information Sciences. Among other rankings, the School of Social Work is 7th, the Jackson School of Geosciences is 8th for Earth Sciences, the Cockrell School of Engineering is tied for 10th-best (with the undergraduate engineering program tied for 11th-best in the country), the Nursing School is tied for 13th, the University of Texas School of Law is 15th, the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs is 7th, and the McCombs School of Business is tied for 16th-best (with the undergraduate business program tied for 5th-best in the country).\nResearch.\nUT Austin is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity.\" For the 2014\u20132015 cycle, the university was awarded over $580\u00a0million in sponsored projects, and has earned more than 300 patents since 2003. The University of Texas at Austin houses the Office of Technology Commercialization, a technology transfer center which serves as the bridge between laboratory research and commercial development. In 2009, the university created nine new start-up companies to commercialize technology developed at the university and has created 46 start-ups in the past seven years. License agreements generated $10.9\u00a0million in revenue for the university in 2009. In January 2020, the University of Texas Austin's Texas Innovation Center was established to provide support for startups.\nResearch at UT Austin is largely focused in the engineering and physical sciences, and the university is a world-leading research institution in fields such as computer science. Energy is a major research thrust, with federally funded projects on biofuels, battery and solar cell technology, and geological carbon dioxide storage, water purification membranes, among others. In 2009, the University of Texas founded the Energy Institute, led by former Under Secretary for Science Raymond L. Orbach, to organize and advance multi-disciplinary energy research. In addition to its own medical school, it houses medical programs associated with other campuses and allied health professional programs, as well as major research programs in pharmacy, biomedical engineering, neuroscience, and others.\nIn 2010, the University of Texas at Austin opened the $100\u00a0million Dell Pediatric Research Institute to increase medical research at the university and establish a medical research complex, and associated medical school, in Austin.\nThe university operates several major auxiliary research centers. The world's third-largest telescope, the Hobby\u2013Eberly Telescope, and three other large telescopes are part of the university's McDonald Observatory, west of Austin. The university manages nearly of biological field laboratories, including the Brackenridge Field Laboratory in Austin. The Center for Agile Technology focuses on software development challenges. The J.J. Pickle Research Campus (PRC) is home to the Texas Advanced Computing Center which operates a series of supercomputers, such as Ranger (from 2008 to 2013), Stampede (2013\u20132017), Stampede2 (since 2017), and Frontera (since 2019). The Pickle campus also hosts the Microelectronics Research Center which houses micro- and nanoelectronics research and features a cleanroom for device fabrication.\nFounded in 1946, the university's Applied Research Laboratories at the PRC has developed or tested the vast majority of the Navy's high-frequency sonar equipment. In 2007, the Navy granted it a research contract funded up to $928\u00a0million over ten years. The Institute for Advanced Technology, founded in 1990 and located in the West Pickle Research Building, supports the US Army with basic and applied research in several fields.\nThe Center for Transportation Research is a nationally recognized research institution focusing on transportation research, education, and public service. Established in 1963 as the Center for Highway Research, its projects address virtually all aspects of transportation, including economics, multimodal systems, traffic congestion relief, transportation policy, materials, structures, transit, environmental impacts, driver behavior, land use, geometric design, accessibility, and pavements.\nIn 2013, the University of Texas at Austin announced the naming of the O'Donnell Building for Applied Computational Engineering and Sciences. The O'Donnell Foundation of Dallas, headed by Peter O'Donnell and his wife, Edith Jones O'Donnell, has given more than $135\u00a0million to the university between 1983 and 2013. University president William C. Powers declared the O'Donnells \"among the greatest supporters of the University of Texas in its 130-year history. Their transformative generosity is based on the belief in our power to change society for the better.\" In 2008, O'Donnell pledged $18\u00a0million to finance the hiring of university faculty members undertaking research in mathematics, computers, and multiple scientific disciplines; his pledge was matched by W. A. \"Tex\" Moncrief Jr., an oilman and philanthropist from Fort Worth.\nIn addition, UT Austin and Amazon established a new science hub in 2023.\nThe University of Texas at Austin Marine Science Institute is located on the Gulf coast in Port Aransas. Established in 1941, UTMSI was the first permanent marine research facility in the state of Texas and has since contributed significantly to our understanding of marine ecosystems. Research at the Marine Science Institute ranges from locally-important work on mariculture and estuarine ecosystems to the investigation of global issues in marine science, from the Arctic to the tropics.\nEndowment.\nThe University of Texas System is entitled to at least 30% of the distributions from the Permanent University Fund (PUF), with over $33 billion in assets as of year-end 2021. The University of Texas System gets two-thirds of the Available University Fund (the name of the annual distribution of PUF's income), and the Texas A&amp;M University System gets the other third. A regental policy requires \"at least\" 45 percent of UT System's share of this money go to the University of Texas at Austin for \"program enrichment\". By taking two-thirds and multiplying it by 45 percent, UT gets 30 percent, which is the \"minimum\" amount of AUF income that can be distributed to the school under current policies. The Regents, however, can decide to allocate additional amounts to the university. Also, the majority of the University of Texas system share of the AUF is used for its debt service bonds, some of which were issued for the benefit of the Austin campus. The Regents can change the 45 percent minimum of the University of Texas System share that goes to the Austin campus at any time, although doing so might be difficult politically.\nProceeds from lands appropriated in 1839 and 1876, as well as oil monies, comprise the majority of PUF. At one time, the PUF was the chief source of income for Texas' two university systems, the University of Texas System and the Texas A&amp;M University System; today, however, its revenues account for less than 10 percent of the universities' annual budgets. This has challenged the universities to increase sponsored research and private donations. Privately funded endowments contribute over $2\u00a0billion to the university's total endowment.\nThe University of Texas System also has about $22 billion of assets in its General Endowment Fund.\nStudent life.\nStudent profile.\nFor fall 2024, the university enrolled 43,165 undergraduate students and 10,699 postgraduate students, bringing the total student count to 53,864. Out-of-state students accounted for 9.2% of the total student body, and international students comprised 9.7% of the total student body.\nFor fall 2015, the undergraduate student body was 48.9% male and 51.1% female. In 2022, the three most popular undergraduate majors were Biology/Biological Sciences, Psychology, and Computer and Information Sciences. For graduate studies, the top choices were Business Administration and Management, Accounting, and Management Sciences and Quantitative Methods.\nResidential life.\nThe campus has fourteen residence halls, the newest of which opened in spring 2007. As of 2024, there are a total of fifteen on-campus residence halls, with eight located in North Campus and seven in South Campus. Residence Hall Rates for the 2024\u201325 fall and spring terms vary across eleven different rates, ranging from the lowest rate of $13,504 to the highest rate of $20,447, each corresponding to different room types. On-campus housing can hold more than 7,100 students. Jester Center is the largest residence hall with its capacity of 2,945. Academic enrollment exceeds the on-campus housing capacity; as a result, most students must live in private residence halls, housing cooperatives, apartments, or with Greek organizations and other off-campus residences. University Housing and Dining, which already has the largest market share of 7,000 of the estimated 27,000 beds in the campus area, plans to expand to 9,000 beds.\nGreek life.\nThe University of Texas at Austin is home to an active Greek community. Approximately 14 percent of undergraduate students are in fraternities or sororities. With more than 65 national chapters, the university's Greek community is one of the nation's largest. These chapters are under the authority of one of the school's six Greek council communities, Interfraternity Council, National Pan-Hellenic Council, Texas Asian Pan-Hellenic Council, Latino Pan-Hellenic Council, Multicultural Greek Council and University Panhellenic Council. Other registered student organizations also name themselves with Greek letters and are called affiliates. They are not a part of one of the six councils but have all of the same privileges and responsibilities of any other organization. Most Greek houses are west of the Drag in the West Campus neighborhood.\nMedia.\nStudents express their opinions in and out of class through periodicals including \"Study Breaks\" magazine, Longhorn Life, \"The Daily Texan\" (the most award-winning daily college newspaper in the United States), and the \"Texas Travesty\". Over the airwaves students' voices are heard through Texas Student Television (K29HW-D) and KVRX Radio.\nThe Computer Writing and Research Lab of the university's Department of Rhetoric and Writing also hosts \"the Blogora\", a blog for \"connecting rhetoric, rhetorical methods and theories, and rhetoricians with public life\" by the Rhetoric Society of America.\nTraditions.\nTraditions at the University of Texas are perpetuated through several school symbols and mediums. At athletic events, students frequently sing \"Texas Fight\", the university's fight song while displaying the Hook 'em Horns hand gesture\u2014the gesture mimicking the horns of the school's mascot, Bevo the Texas Longhorn.\nSmokey the Cannon.\nThe University of Texas is also represented by the Texas Cowboys, who maintain Smokey, the university's replica 1,200-pound Civil War artillery cannon.\nAthletics.\nThe University of Texas offers a wide variety of varsity and intramural sports programs.\nVarsity sports.\nThe university's men's and women's athletics teams are nicknamed the Longhorns. Texas has won 50 total national championships, 42 of which are NCAA national championships.\nThe football team experienced its greatest success under coach Darrell Royal, winning three national championships in 1963, 1969, and 1970. It won a fourth title under head coach Mack Brown in 2005 after a 41\u201338 victory over previously undefeated Southern California in the 2006 Rose Bowl.\nThe university's baseball team has made more trips to the College World Series (35) than any other school, and won championships in 1949, 1950, 1975, 1983, 2002, and 2005.\nThe Texas Longhorns men's basketball has qualified for the NCAA Final Four three times and achieved 28 conference championships and 38 total appearances in the NCAA tournament.\nRick Barnes led the Texas Longhorns men's basketball from 1998 to 2015. Under his leadership, the team achieved 16 NCAA Tournament appearances, including a Final Four appearance in 2003.\nShaka Smart coached the Texas Longhorns men's basketball from 2015 to 2021. While at UT Austin, Smart's teams made three NCAA Tournament appearances.\nAdditionally, the university's men's and women's swimming and diving teams lay claim to sixteen NCAA Division I titles, with the men's team having 13 of those titles, more than any other Division 1 team. The swim team was first developed under Coach Tex Robertson.\nOn June 12, 2020, UT student-athletes banded together with their #WeAreOne statement on Twitter. Among the list of changes included: renaming certain campus buildings, replacing statues, starting outreach programs, and replacing \"The Eyes of Texas\". UT Interim President Jay Hartzell released a statement on July 13, 2020, announcing the changes to be implemented in light of these demands from UT student-athletes. Hartzell said the university would make a multi-million dollar investment to programs that recruit, retain and support Black students; rename the Robert L. Moore Building as the Physics, Math and Astronomy Building; honor Heman M. Sweatt in numerous ways, including placing a statue of Sweatt near the entrance of \u00a0T.S. Painter Hall; honor the Precursors, the first Black undergraduates to attend the University of Texas at Austin, by commissioning a new monument on the East Mall; erect a statue for Julius Whittier, the Longhorns' first Black football letterman, at DKR-Texas Memorial Stadium; and more. However, one of the most controversial topics on the list \u2013 replacing \"The Eyes of Texas\" as UT's alma mater \u2013 remained untouched.\nNotable people.\nFaculty.\nIn the fall of 2016, the school employed 3,128 full-time faculty members, with a student-to-faculty ratio of 18.86 to 1. These include winners of the Nobel Prize, the Pulitzer Prize, the National Medal of Science, the National Medal of Technology, the Turing Award, the Primetime Emmy Award, and other various awards. Nine Nobel Laureates are or have been affiliated with the University of Texas at Austin. Research expenditures for the university exceeded $679.8\u00a0million in fiscal year 2018.\nAlumni.\nTexas Exes is the official University of Texas alumni organization. \"The Alcalde\", founded in 1913 and pronounced \"all-call-day\", is the university's alumni magazine.\nAlumni in government.\nAt least 15 graduates have served in the US Senate or US House of Representatives, including Lloyd Bentsen, who served in both Houses. Presidential cabinet members include former US secretaries of state Rex Tillerson and James Baker, former US Secretary of Education William J. Bennett, and former US Secretary of Commerce Donald Evans. Former First Lady Laura Bush and daughter Jenna both graduated from Texas, as well as former First Lady Lady Bird Johnson and her eldest daughter Lynda.\nIn foreign governments, the university has been represented by Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry (42nd president of Peru) and by Abdullah al-Tariki (co-founder of OPEC). Additionally, the prime minister of the Palestinian National Authority, Salam Fayyad, graduated from the university with a PhD in economics. Tom C. Clark served as United States attorney general from 1945 to 1949 and as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1949 to 1967.\nAlumni in academia.\nAlumni in academia include the Nobel Prize-winning immunologist James P. Allison, and the Nobel Prize-winning hematologist E. Donnall Thomas. Additional alumni include 26th president of The College of William &amp; Mary Gene Nichol, the 10th president of Boston University Robert A. Brown, and the 8th president of the University of Southern California John R. Hubbard. The university also graduated Alan Bean, the fourth man to walk on the Moon.\nAlumni in business.\nAlumni who have served as business leaders include former Secretary of State and former ExxonMobil Corporation CEO Rex Tillerson, Dell founder and CEO Michael Dell, Morton Meyerson (name sake of the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center) and Gary C. Kelly, a former Southwest Airlines CEO.\nAlumni in literature and journalism.\nIn literature and journalism, the school boasts over 25 Pulitzer Prizes credited to alumni and faculty members, including Gail Caldwell and Ben Sargent. Walter Cronkite, the former \"CBS Evening News\" anchor once called the most trusted man in America, attended the University of Texas at Austin, as did CNN anchor Betty Nguyen. Alumnus J. M. Coetzee also received the 2003 Nobel Prize in Literature. Novelist Raymond Benson was the official author of James Bond novels between 1996 and 2002, the only American to be commissioned to pen them. Donna Alvermann, a distinguished research professor at the University of Georgia, department of education also graduated from the University of Texas, as did Wallace Clift and Jean Dalby Clift, authors of several books in the fields of psychology of religion and spiritual growth. Notable alumni authors also include Kovid Gupta, author of several bestselling books, Ruth Cowan Nash, America's first female war correspondent, and Alireza Jafarzadeh, author of \"The Iran Threat: President Ahmadinejad and the Coming Nuclear Crisis\" and television commentator. Although expelled from the university, former student and \"The Daily Texan\" writer John Patric went on to become a noted writer for \"National Geographic\", \"Reader's Digest\", and author of 1940s best-seller \"Why Japan was Strong\".\nAlumni with Fulbright Scholarships.\nUniversity of Texas at Austin alumni include 112 Fulbright Scholars, 31 Rhodes Scholars, 28 Truman Scholars, 23 Marshall Scholars, and 9 astronauts.\nAlumni in music and entertainment.\nSeveral musicians and entertainers attended the university. Janis Joplin, the American singer posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame who received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, attended the university, as did February 1955 \"Playboy\" Playmate of the Month and Golden Globe recipient Jayne Mansfield. Composer Harold Morris is a 1910 graduate. Noted film director, cinematographer, writer, and editor Robert Rodriguez is a Longhorn, as are actors Eli Wallach and Matthew McConaughey, the latter of whom now teaches a class at the university. Founding members of psychedelic rock band The Bright Light Social Hour Jackie O'Brien and Curtis Roush both received master's degrees from the university in 2009 while completing their debut self-titled album.\nKendall Ross Bean completed his Master of Music Degree in Piano Performance. As a master piano rebuilder and concert pianist, Bean first performed on a piano he rebuilt on the A&amp;E Network in 1985. The video was titled \"\".\nRobert Rodriguez dropped out of the university after two years to pursue his career in Hollywood, but completed his degree from the Radio-Television-Film department on May 23, 2009. Rodriguez also gave the keynote address at the university-wide commencement ceremony. Radio-Television-Film alumni Mark Dennis and Ben Foster took their award-winning feature film, \"Strings\", to the American film festival circuit in 2011. Web and television actress Felicia Day and film actress Ren\u00e9e Zellweger attended the university. Day graduated with degrees in music performance (violin) and mathematics, while Zellweger graduated with a BA in English. Writer and recording artist Phillip Sandifer graduated with a degree in history. Michael \"Burnie\" Burns is an actor, writer, film director and film producer who graduated with a degree in computer science. He, along with graduate Matt Hullum, also founded the Austin-based production company Rooster Teeth, that produces many hit shows, including the award-winning Internet series, \"Red vs. Blue\". Farrah Fawcett, one of the original \"Charlie's Angels\", left after her junior year to pursue a modeling career. Actor Owen Wilson and writer/director Wes Anderson attended the university, where they wrote \"Bottle Rocket\" together, which became Anderson's first feature film. Writer and producer Charles Olivier is a Longhorn. So are filmmakers and actors Mark Duplass and his brother Jay Duplass, key contributors to the mumblecore film genre. Another notable writer, Rob Thomas graduated with a BA in history in 1987 and later wrote the young adult novel \"Rats Saw God\" and created the series \"Veronica Mars\". Illustrator, writer and alum Felicia Bond is best known for her illustrations in the \"If You Give...\" children's books series, starting with \"If You Give a Mouse a Cookie\". Taiwanese singer-songwriter, producer, actress Cindy Yen (birth name Cindy Wu) graduated with double degrees in music (piano performance) and broadcast journalism in 2008. Noted composer and arranger Jack Cooper received his D.M.A. in 1999 from the University of Texas at Austin in composition and has gone on to teach in higher education and become known internationally through the music publishing industry. Actor Trevante Rhodes competed as a sprinter for the Longhorns and graduated with a BS in Applied Learning and Development in 2012. In 2016, he starred as Chiron in the Academy Award- and Golden Globe-winning film \"Moonlight\".\nAlumni in sports.\nMany alumni have found success in professional sports. Legendary pro football coach Tom Landry attended the university as an industrial engineering major but interrupted his education after a semester to serve in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II. Following the war, he returned to the university and played fullback and defensive back on the Longhorns' bowl-game winners on New Year's Day of 1948 and 1949. Seven-time Cy Young Award-winner Roger Clemens entered the MLB after helping the Longhorns win the 1983 College World Series. NBA MVP and four-time scoring champion Kevin Durant entered the 2007 NBA draft and was selected second overall behind Greg Oden, after sweeping National Player of the Year honors, becoming the first freshman to win any of the awards. After becoming the first freshman in school history to lead Texas in scoring and being named the Big 12 Freshman of the Year, Daniel Gibson entered the 2006 NBA draft and was selected in the second round by the Cleveland Cavaliers. In his one year at Texas, golfer Jordan Spieth led the University of Texas Golf club to the NCAA Men's Golf Championship in 2012 and went on to win The Masters Tournament three years after leaving the university. Several Olympic medalists have also attended the school, including 2008 Summer Olympics athletes Ian Crocker (swimming world record holder and two-time Olympic gold medalist) and 4 \u00d7 400 m relay defending Olympic gold medalist Sanya Richards. Mary Lou Retton (the first female gymnast outside Eastern Europe to win the Olympic all-around title, five-time Olympic medalist, and 1984 \"Sports Illustrated\" Sportswoman of the Year) also attended the university. Garrett Weber-Gale, a two-time Olympic gold medalist, and world record-holder in two events, was a swimmer for the school. Also an alumnus is Robert Cade, the inventor of the sports drink Gatorade. In big, global philanthropy, the university is honored by Darren Walker, president of Ford Foundation. 2022 and 2024 Masters Tournament champion, Scottie Scheffler, attended the university, where he was an All-American Golfer for the Longhorns.\nOther notable alumni.\nOther notable alumni include prominent businessman Red McCombs, Diane Pamela Wood, the first female chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, chemist Donna J. Nelson, and neuroscientist Tara Spires-Jones. Also an alumnus is Admiral William H. McRaven, credited for organizing and executing Operation Neptune's Spear, the special ops raid that led to the death of Osama bin Laden. Oveta Culp Hobby, the first woman to earn the rank of a colonel in the United States Army, first commanding officer and director of the Women's Army Corps, first secretary of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare attended the university as well. Amit Kshatriya was named associate administrator of NASA in 2025. Erika Thompson is a well-known beekeeper.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32032", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32032", "title": "Usama bin Laden", "text": ""}
{"id": "32034", "revid": "796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32034", "title": "U.S. Politics", "text": ""}
{"id": "32035", "revid": "374440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32035", "title": "Unix shell", "text": "Command-line interpreter for Unix operating system\nA Unix shell is a shell that provides a command-line user interface for a Unix-like operating system. A Unix shell provides a command language that can be used either interactively or for writing a shell script. A user typically works within a Unix shell via a terminal emulator; however, direct access via serial hardware connections or a Secure Shell are common for server systems. Although use of a Unix shell is popular with some users, others prefer to use a graphical shell in a windowing system, such as those provided in desktop Linux distributions or macOS, instead of a command-line interface (CLI).\nA user may have access to multiple Unix shells with one configured to run by default when the user logs in interactively. The default selection is typically stored in a user's profile; for example, in the local passwd file or in a distributed configuration system such as NIS or LDAP. A user may use other shells nested inside the default shell.\nA Unix shell may provide many features including: variable definition and substitution, command substitution, filename wildcarding, stream piping, control flow structures (condition-testing and iteration), working directory context, and here document.\nHistory.\nEarly shells.\nThe first Unix shell was the Thompson shell, \"sh\", written by Ken Thompson at Bell Labs and distributed with Versions 1 through 6 of Unix, from 1971 to 1975. Though rudimentary by modern standards, it introduced many of the basic features common to all later Unix shells, including piping, simple control structures using codice_1 and codice_2, and filename GLOBbing. Though not in current use, it is still available as part of some Ancient UNIX systems and is the default shell on current FreeBSD systems.\nIt was modeled after the Multics shell, developed in 1965 by American software engineer Glenda Schroeder. Schroeder's Multics shell was itself modeled after the RUNCOM program Louis Pouzin showed to the Multics Team. The \"rc\" suffix on some Unix configuration files (e.g. \".bashrc\" or \".vimrc\"), is a remnant of the RUNCOM ancestry of Unix shells.\nThe PWB shell or Mashey shell, \"sh\", was an upward-compatible version of the Thompson shell, augmented by John Mashey and others and distributed with the Programmer's Workbench UNIX, circa 1975\u20131977. It focused on making shell programming practical, especially in large shared computing centers. It added shell variables (precursors of environment variables, including the search path mechanism that evolved into $PATH), user-executable shell scripts, and interrupt-handling. Control structures were extended from if/goto to if/then/else/endif, switch/breaksw/endsw, and while/end/break/continue. As shell programming became widespread, these external commands were incorporated into the shell itself for performance.\nBut the most widely distributed and influential of the early Unix shells were the Bourne shell and the C shell. Both shells have been used as the coding base and model for many derivative and work-alike shells with extended feature sets.\nBourne shell.\nThe Bourne shell, \"sh\", was a new Unix shell by Stephen Bourne at Bell Labs. Distributed as the shell for UNIX Version 7 in 1979, it introduced the rest of the basic features considered common to all the later Unix shells, including here documents, command substitution, more generic variables and more extensive builtin control structures. The language, including the use of a reversed keyword to mark the end of a block, was influenced by ALGOL 68. Traditionally, the Bourne shell program name is sh and its path in the Unix file system hierarchy is /bin/sh. But a number of compatible work-alikes are also available with various improvements and additional features. On many systems, sh may be a symbolic link or hard link to one of these alternatives:\nThe POSIX standard specifies its standard shell as a strict subset of the Korn shell, an enhanced version of the Bourne shell. From a user's perspective the Bourne shell was immediately recognized when active by its characteristic default command line prompt character, the dollar sign ($).\nC shell.\nThe C shell, \"csh\", was modeled on the C programming language, including the control structures and the expression grammar. It was written by Bill Joy as a graduate student at University of California, Berkeley, and was widely distributed with BSD Unix.\nThe C shell also introduced many features for interactive work, including the history and editing mechanisms, aliases, directory stacks, tilde notation, cdpath, job control and path hashing. On many systems, csh may be a symbolic link or hard link to TENEX C shell (tcsh), an improved version of Joy's original version. Although the interactive features of csh have been copied to most other shells, the language structure has not been widely copied. The only work-alike is Hamilton C shell, written by Nicole Hamilton, first distributed on OS/2 in 1988 and on Windows since 1992.\nConfiguration files.\nShells read configuration files in various circumstances. These files usually contain commands for the shell and are executed when loaded; they are usually used to set important variables used to find executables, like $PATH, and others that control the behavior and appearance of the shell. The table in this section shows the configuration files for popular shells.\nExplanation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther shells.\nVariations on the Unix shell concept that don't derive from Bourne shell or C shell include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32037", "revid": "11445145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32037", "title": "Ursula K. Le Guin", "text": "American author (1929\u20132018)\nUrsula Kroeber Le Guin ( ; n\u00e9e Kroeber; October 21, 1929 \u2013 January 22, 2018) was an American author. She is best known for her works of speculative fiction, including science fiction works set in her Hainish universe, and the \"Earthsea\" fantasy series. Her work was first published in 1959, and her literary career spanned nearly sixty years, producing more than twenty novels and more than a hundred short stories, in addition to poetry, literary criticism, translations, and children's books. Frequently described as an author of science fiction, Le Guin has also been called a \"major voice in American Letters\". Le Guin said that she would prefer to be known as an \"American novelist\".\nLe Guin was born in Berkeley, California, to author Theodora Kroeber and anthropologist Alfred Louis Kroeber. Having earned a master's degree in French, Le Guin began doctoral studies but abandoned these after her marriage in 1953 to historian Charles Le Guin. She began writing full-time in the late 1950s, and she achieved major critical and commercial success with the novels \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" (1968) and \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" (1969); these have been described by Harold Bloom as her masterpieces. For the latter volume, Le Guin won both the Hugo and Nebula awards for best novel, becoming the first woman to do so. Several more works set in Earthsea or the Hainish universe followed; others included books set in the fictional country of Orsinia, several works for children, and many anthologies.\nCultural anthropology, Taoism, feminism, and the writings of Carl Jung all had a strong influence on Le Guin's work. Many of her stories used anthropologists or cultural observers as protagonists, and Taoist ideas about balance and equilibrium have been identified in several writings. Le Guin often subverted typical speculative fiction tropes, such as by writing dark-skinned protagonists in Earthsea, and also used unusual stylistic or structural devices in works such as the experimental \"Always Coming Home\" (1985). Social and political themes, including race, gender, sexuality, and coming of age were prominent in her writing. She explored alternative political structures in many stories, such as the philosophical short story \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\" (1973) and the anarchist utopian novel \"The Dispossessed\" (1974).\nLe Guin's writing was enormously influential in the field of speculative fiction and has been the subject of intense critical attention. She received numerous accolades, including eight Hugo Awards, six Nebula Awards, and twenty-five Locus Awards; in 2003, she became the second woman honored as a Grand Master of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. The U.S. Library of Congress named her a Living Legend in 2000, and in 2014, she won the National Book Foundation Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters. Le Guin influenced many other authors, including the Booker Prize winner Salman Rushdie, David Mitchell, Neil Gaiman, and Iain Banks. After her death in 2018, critic John Clute wrote that Le Guin had \"presided over American science fiction for nearly half a century\", while author Michael Chabon referred to her as the \"greatest American writer of her generation\".\nLife.\nChildhood and education.\nUrsula Kroeber was born in Berkeley, California, on October 21, 1929. Her father, Alfred Louis Kroeber, was an anthropologist at the University of California, Berkeley. Le Guin's mother, Theodora Kroeber (born Theodora Covel Kracaw), had a graduate degree in psychology, but turned to writing in her 60s, developing a successful career as an author. Among her works was \"Ishi in Two Worlds\" (1961), a biographical volume about Ishi, an Indigenous American who had been studied by Alfred Kroeber. Ishi was the last known member of the Yahi tribe after the rest of its members died or (mostly) were killed by white colonizers.\nLe Guin had three older brothers: Karl, who became a literary scholar, Theodore, and Clifton. The family had a large book collection, and the siblings all became interested in reading while they were young. The Kroeber family had a number of visitors, including well-known academics such as Robert Oppenheimer; Le Guin would later use Oppenheimer as the model for Shevek, the physicist protagonist of \"The Dispossessed\". The family divided its time between a home in Napa Valley during the summer and a house in Berkeley during the academic year.\nLe Guin's reading included science fiction and fantasy: she and her siblings often read issues of \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" and \"Astounding Science Fiction\". She was fond of myths and legends, particularly Norse mythology, and of Native American legends that her father would narrate. Other authors who she enjoyed were Lord Dunsany and Lewis Padgett. In addition to reading, Le Guin also developed an early interest in writing; she wrote a short story when she was nine, and submitted her first short story to \"Astounding Science Fiction\" when she was 11. The piece was rejected, and she did not submit anything else for another 10 years.\nLe Guin attended Berkeley High School. From 1947 to 1951 she took a Bachelor of Arts degree in Renaissance French and Italian literature from Radcliffe College of Harvard University, graduating as a member of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society. As a child she had been interested in biology and poetry, but had been limited in her choice of career by her difficulties with mathematics. Le Guin undertook graduate studies at Columbia University, and earned a Master of Arts degree in French in 1952. Soon after, she began working towards a PhD, and won a Fulbright grant to continue her studies in France from 1953 to 1954.\nMarried life and death.\nIn 1953, while traveling to France aboard the \"Queen Mary\", Ursula met historian Charles Le Guin. They married in Paris in December 1953. According to Le Guin, the marriage signaled the \"end of the doctorate\" for her. While her husband finished his doctorate at Emory University in Georgia, and later at the University of Idaho, Le Guin taught French: first at Mercer University, then at the University of Idaho after their move. She also worked as a secretary until the birth of her daughter Elisabeth in 1957. A second daughter, Caroline, was born in 1959. Also in that year, Charles became an instructor in history at Portland State University, and the couple moved to Portland, Oregon, where their son Theodore was born in 1964. They would live in Portland for the rest of their lives, although Le Guin received further Fulbright grants to travel to London in 1968 and 1975.\nLe Guin's writing career began in the late 1950s, but the time she spent caring for her children constrained her writing schedule. She would continue writing and publishing for nearly 60 years. She also worked as an editor, and taught undergraduate classes. She served on the editorial boards of the journals \"Paradoxa\" and \"Science Fiction Studies\", in addition to writing literary criticism herself. She taught courses at Tulane University, Bennington College, and Stanford University, among other institutions.\nLe Guin died on January 22, 2018, at her home in Portland, at the age of 88. Her son said that she had been in poor health for several months, and stated that she had likely suffered a heart attack. Private memorial services for her were held in Portland. A public memorial service, which included speeches by the writers Margaret Atwood, Molly Gloss, and Walidah Imarisha, was held in Portland on June 13, 2018.\nViews and advocacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI think hard times are coming when we will be wanting the voices of writers who can see alternatives to how we live now and can see through our fear-stricken society and its obsessive technologies. We will need writers who can remember freedom. Poets, visionaries\u00a0\u2013 the realists of a larger reality.\n\u2014Ursula K. Le Guin\nLe Guin refused a Nebula Award for her story \"The Diary of the Rose\" in 1977, in protest of the Science Fiction Writers of America's revocation of Stanis\u0142aw Lem's membership. Le Guin attributed the revocation to Lem's criticism of American science fiction and willingness to live in the Eastern Bloc of states, and said she felt reluctant to receive an award \"for a story about political intolerance from a group that had just displayed political intolerance\".\nLe Guin once said that she was \"raised as irreligious as a jackrabbit\". She expressed a deep interest in Taoism and Buddhism, saying that Taoism gave her a \"handle on how to look at life\" during her adolescent years. In 1997, she published a translation of the \"Tao Te Ching.\"\nIn December 2009, Le Guin resigned from the Authors Guild in protest over its endorsement of Google's book digitization project. \"You decided to deal with the devil\", she wrote in her resignation letter. \"There are principles involved, above all the whole concept of copyright; and these you have seen fit to abandon to a corporation, on their terms, without a struggle.\" In a speech at the 2014 National Book Awards, Le Guin criticized Amazon and the control it exerted over the publishing industry, specifically referencing Amazon's treatment of the Hachette Book Group during a dispute over ebook publication. Her speech received widespread media attention within and outside the United States, and was broadcast twice by National Public Radio.\nChronology of writings.\nEarly work.\nLe Guin's first published work was the poem \"Folksong from the Montayna Province\" in 1959, while her first published short story was \"An die Musik\", in 1961; both were set in her fictional country of Orsinia. Between 1951 and 1961 she also wrote five novels, all set in Orsinia, which were rejected by publishers on the grounds that they were inaccessible. Some of her poetry from this period was published in 1975 in the volume \"Wild Angels\". Le Guin turned her attention to science fiction after a lengthy period of receiving rejections from publishers, knowing that there was a market for writing that could be readily classified as such. Her first professional publication was the short story \"April in Paris\" in 1962 in \"Fantastic Science Fiction\", and seven other stories followed in the next few years, in \"Fantastic\" or \"Amazing Stories\". Among them were \"The Dowry of Angyar\", which introduced the fictional Hainish universe, and \"The Rule of Names\" and \"The Word of Unbinding\", which introduced the world of Earthsea. These stories were largely ignored by critics.\nAce Books released \"Rocannon's World\", Le Guin's first published novel, in 1966. Two more Hainish novels, \"Planet of Exile\" and \"City of Illusions\" were published in 1966 and 1967, respectively, and the three books together would come to be known as the Hainish trilogy. The first two were each published as half of an \"Ace Double\": two novels bound into a paperback and sold as a single low-cost volume. \"City of Illusions\" was published as a standalone volume, indicating Le Guin's growing name recognition. These books received more critical attention than Le Guin's short stories, with reviews being published in several science fiction magazines, but the critical response was still muted. The books contained many themes and ideas also present in Le Guin's better known later works, including the \"archetypal journey\" of a protagonist who undertakes both a physical journey and one of self-discovery, cultural contact and communication, the search for identity, and the reconciliation of opposing forces.\nWhen publishing her story \"Nine Lives\" in 1968, \"Playboy\" magazine asked Le Guin whether they could run the story without her full first name, to which Le Guin agreed: the story was published under the name \"U. K. Le Guin\". She later wrote that it was the first and only time she had experienced prejudice against her as a woman writer from an editor or publisher, and reflected that \"it seemed so silly, so grotesque, that I failed to see that it was also important.\" In subsequent printings, the story was published under her full name.\nCritical attention.\nLe Guin's next two books brought her sudden and widespread critical acclaim. \"A Wizard of Earthsea\", published in 1968, was a fantasy novel written initially for teenagers. Le Guin had not planned to write for young adults, but was asked to write a novel targeted at this group by the editor of Parnassus Press, who saw it as a market with great potential. A coming of age story set in the fictional archipelago of Earthsea, the book received a positive reception in both the U.S. and Britain.\nHer next novel, \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", was a Hainish universe story exploring themes of gender and sexuality on a fictional planet where humans have no fixed sex. The book was Le Guin's first to address feminist issues, and according to scholar Donna White, it \"stunned the science fiction critics\"; it won both the Hugo and the Nebula Awards for best novel, making Le Guin the first woman to win these awards, and a number of other accolades. \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" and \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" have been described by critic Harold Bloom as Le Guin's masterpieces. She won the Hugo Award again in 1973 for \"The Word for World Is Forest\". The book was influenced by Le Guin's anger over the Vietnam War, and explored themes of colonialism and militarism: Le Guin later described it as the \"most overt political statement\" she had made in a fictional work.\nLe Guin continued to develop themes of equilibrium and coming-of-age in the next two installments of the \"Earthsea\" series, \"The Tombs of Atuan\" and \"The Farthest Shore\", published in 1971 and 1972, respectively. Both books were praised for their writing, while the exploration of death as a theme in \"The Farthest Shore\" also drew praise. Her 1974 novel \"The Dispossessed\" again won both the Hugo and the Nebula awards for best novel, making her the first person to win both awards for each of two books. Also set in the Hainish universe, the story explored anarchism and utopianism. Scholar Charlotte Spivack described it as representing a shift in Le Guin's science fiction towards discussing political ideas. Several of her speculative fiction short stories from the period, including her first published story, were later anthologized in the 1975 collection \"The Wind's Twelve Quarters\". The fiction of the period 1966 to 1974, which also included \"The Lathe of Heaven\", the Hugo Award-winning \"The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas\" and the Nebula Award-winning \"The Day Before the Revolution\", constitutes Le Guin's best-known body of work.\nWider exploration.\nLe Guin published a variety of work in the second half of the 1970s. This included speculative fiction in the form of the novel \"The Eye of the Heron\", which, according to Le Guin, may be a part of the Hainish universe. She also published \"Very Far Away from Anywhere Else\", a realistic novel for adolescents, as well as the collection \"Orsinian Tales\" and the novel \"Malafrena\" in 1976 and 1979, respectively. Though the latter two were set in the fictional country of Orsinia, the stories were realistic fiction rather than fantasy or science fiction. \"The Language of the Night\", a collection of essays, was released in 1979, and Le Guin also published \"Wild Angels\", a volume of poetry, in 1975.\nBetween 1979, when she published \"Malafrena\", and 1994, when the collection \"A Fisherman of the Inland Sea\" was released, Le Guin wrote primarily for a younger audience. In 1985 she published the experimental work \"Always Coming Home\". She wrote 11 children's picture books, including the \"Catwings\" series, between 1979 and 1994, along with \"The Beginning Place\", an adolescent fantasy novel, released in 1980. Four more poetry collections were also published in this period, all of which were positively received. She also revisited Earthsea, publishing \"Tehanu\" in 1990: coming eighteen years after \"The Farthest Shore\", during which Le Guin's views had developed considerably, the book was grimmer in tone than the earlier works in the series, and challenged some ideas presented therein. It received critical praise, won Le Guin a third Nebula Award for Best Novel, and led to the series being recognized among adult literature.\nLater writings.\nLe Guin returned to the Hainish Cycle in the 1990s after a lengthy hiatus with the publication of a series of short stories, beginning with \"The Shobies' Story\" in 1990. These stories included \"Coming of Age in Karhide\" (1995), which explored growing into adulthood and was set on the same planet as \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". It was described by scholar Sandra Lindow as \"so transgressively sexual and so morally courageous\" that Le Guin \"could not have written it in the '60s\". In the same year she published the story suite \"Four Ways to Forgiveness\", and followed it up with \"Old Music and the Slave Women\", a fifth, connected, story in 1999. All five of the stories explored freedom and rebellion within a slave society. In 2000 she published \"The Telling\", which would be her final Hainish novel, and the next year released \"Tales from Earthsea\" and \"The Other Wind\", the last two \"Earthsea\" books. The latter won the World Fantasy Award for Best Novel in 2002.\nFrom 2002 onwards several collections and anthologies of Le Guin's work were published. A series of her stories from the period 1994\u20132002 was released in 2002 in the collection \"The Birthday of the World and Other Stories\", along with the novella \"Paradises Lost\". The volume examined unconventional ideas about gender, as well as anarchist themes. Other collections included \"Changing Planes\", also released in 2002, while the anthologies included \"The Unreal and the Real\" (2012), and \"The Hainish Novels and Stories\", a two-volume set of works from the Hainish universe released by the Library of America.\nOther works from this period included \"Lavinia\" (2008), based on a character from Virgil's \"Aeneid\", and the \"Annals of the Western Shore\" trilogy, consisting of \"Gifts\" (2004), \"Voices\" (2006), and \"Powers\" (2007). Although \"Annals of the Western Shore\" was written for an adolescent audience, the third volume, \"Powers\", received the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 2009. In her final years, Le Guin largely turned away from fiction, and produced a number of essays, poems, and some translation. Her final publications included the non-fiction collections \"Dreams Must Explain Themselves\" and \"Ursula K Le Guin: Conversations on Writing\", and the poetry volume \"So Far So Good: Final Poems 2014\u20132018\", all of which were released after her death.\nStyle and influences.\nInfluences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Once I learned to read, I read everything. I read all the famous fantasies \u2013 \"Alice in Wonderland\", and \"Wind in the Willows\", and Kipling. I adored Kipling's \"Jungle Book\". And then when I got older I found Lord Dunsany. He opened up a whole new world \u2013 the world of pure fantasy. And\u00a0... \"Worm Ouroboros\". Again, pure fantasy. Very, very fattening. And then my brother and I blundered into science fiction when I was 11 or 12. Early Asimov, things like that. But that didn't have too much effect on me. It wasn't until I came back to science fiction and discovered Sturgeon \u2013 but particularly Cordwainer Smith. ...\u00a0I read the story \"Alpha Ralpha Boulevard\", and it just made me go, \"Wow! This stuff is so beautiful, and so strange, and I want to do something like that.\"\n\u2014Ursula K. Le Guin\nLe Guin read both classic and speculative fiction widely in her youth. She later said that science fiction did not have much impact on her until she read the works of Theodore Sturgeon and Cordwainer Smith, and that she had sneered at the genre as a child. Authors Le Guin describes as influential include Victor Hugo, William Wordsworth, Charles Dickens, Boris Pasternak, and Philip K. Dick. Le Guin and Dick attended the same high-school, but did not know each other; Le Guin later described her novel \"The Lathe of Heaven\" as an homage to him. She also considered J. R. R. Tolkien and Leo Tolstoy to be stylistic influences, and preferred reading Virginia Woolf and Jorge Luis Borges to well-known science-fiction authors such as Robert Heinlein, whose writing she described as being of the \"white man conquers the universe\" tradition. Several scholars state that the influence of mythology, which Le Guin enjoyed reading as a child, is also visible in much of her work: for example, the short story \"The Dowry of Angyar\" is described as a retelling of a Norse myth.\nThe discipline of cultural anthropology had a powerful influence on Le Guin's writing. Her father Alfred Kroeber is considered a pioneer in the field, and was a director of the University of California Museum of Anthropology: as a consequence of his research, Le Guin was exposed to anthropology and cultural exploration as a child. In addition to myths and legends, she read such volumes as \"The Leaves of the Golden Bough\" by Elizabeth Grove Frazer, a children's book adapted from \"The Golden Bough\", a study of myth and religion by her husband James George Frazer. She described living with her father's friends and acquaintances as giving her the experience of the other. The experiences of Ishi, in particular, were influential on Le Guin, and elements of his story have been identified in works such as \"Planet of Exile\", \"City of Illusions\", and \"The Word for World Is Forest\" and \"The Dispossessed\".\nSeveral scholars have commented that Le Guin's writing was influenced by Carl Jung, and specifically by the idea of Jungian archetypes. In particular, the shadow in \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" is seen as the Shadow archetype from Jungian psychology, representing Ged's pride, fear, and desire for power. Le Guin has discussed her interpretation of this archetype, and her interest in the dark and repressed parts of the psyche, in a 1974 lecture and in her 1975 essay \"The Child and the Shadow.\" She stated elsewhere that she had never read Jung before writing the first \"Earthsea\" books a few years earlier. Other Jungian archetypes, including the Mother, Animus, and Anima, have also been identified in Le Guin's writing. The planetary forests featured in multiple Hainish works are described as a metaphor for the mind, and of the Jungian \"collective unconscious\".\nPhilosophical Taoism had a large role in Le Guin's world view, and the influence of Taoist thought can be seen in many of her stories. Many of Le Guin's protagonists, including in \"The Lathe of Heaven\", embody the Taoist ideal of leaving things alone. The anthropologists of the Hainish universe try not to meddle with the cultures they encounter, while one of the earliest lessons Ged learns in \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" is not to use magic unless it is absolutely necessary. Taoist influence is evident in Le Guin's depiction of equilibrium in the world of Earthsea: the archipelago is depicted as being based on a delicate balance, which is disrupted by somebody in each of the first three novels. This includes an equilibrium between land and sea, implicit in the name \"Earthsea\", between people and their natural environment, and a larger cosmic equilibrium, which wizards are tasked with maintaining. Another prominent Taoist idea is the reconciliation of opposites such as light and dark, or good and evil. A number of Hainish novels, \"The Dispossessed\" prominent among them, explored such a process of reconciliation. In the Earthsea universe, it is not the dark powers, but the characters' misunderstanding of the balance of life, that is depicted as evil, in contrast to conventional Western stories in which good and evil are in constant conflict.\nGenre and style.\nAlthough Le Guin is primarily known for her works of speculative fiction, she also wrote realistic fiction, non-fiction, poetry, and several other literary forms, and as a result her work is difficult to classify. Her writings received critical attention from mainstream critics, critics of children's literature, and critics of speculative fiction. Le Guin herself said that she would prefer to be known as an \"American novelist\". Le Guin's transgression of conventional boundaries of genre led to literary criticism of Le Guin becoming \"Balkanized\", particularly between scholars of children's literature and speculative fiction. Commentators have noted that the \"Earthsea\" novels specifically received less critical attention because they were considered children's books. Le Guin herself took exception to this treatment of children's literature, describing it as \"adult chauvinist piggery\". In 1976, literature scholar George Slusser criticized the \"silly publication classification designating the original series as 'children's literature'\", while in Barbara Bucknall's opinion Le Guin \"can be read, like Tolkien, by ten-year-olds and by adults. These stories are ageless because they deal with problems that confront us at any age.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFortunately, though extrapolation is an element in science fiction, it isn't the name of the game by any means. It is far too rationalist and simplistic to satisfy the imaginative mind, whether the writer's or the reader's. Variables are the spice of life. [If] you like you can read [a lot of] science fiction, as a thought-experiment. Let's say (says Mary Shelley) that a young doctor creates a human being in his laboratory; let's say (says Philip K. Dick) that the Allies lost the second world war; let's say this or that is such and so, and see what happens... In a story so conceived, the moral complexity proper to the modern novel need not be sacrificed, nor is there any built-in dead end; thought and intuition can move freely within bounds set only by the terms of the experiment, which may be very large indeed.\n\u2014Ursula K. Le Guin, in the introduction to the 1976 edition of \"The Left Hand of Darkness\".\nSeveral of her works have a premise drawn from sociology, psychology, or philosophy. As a result, Le Guin's writing is often described as \"soft\" science fiction, and she has been described as the \"patron saint\" of this sub-genre. A number of science fiction authors have objected to the term \"soft science fiction\", describing it as a potentially pejorative term used to dismiss stories not based on problems in physics, astronomy, or engineering, and also to target the writing of women or other groups under-represented in the genre. Le Guin suggested the term \"social science fiction\" for some of her writing, while pointing out that many of her stories were not science fiction at all. She argued that the term \"soft science fiction\" was divisive, and implied a narrow view of what constitutes valid science fiction.\nThe influence of anthropology can be seen in the setting Le Guin chose for a number of her works. Several of her protagonists are anthropologists or ethnologists exploring a world alien to them. This is particularly true in the stories set in the Hainish universe, an alternative reality in which humans did not evolve on Earth, but on Hain. The Hainish subsequently colonized many planets, before losing contact with them, giving rise to varied but related biology and social structure. Examples include Rocannon in \"Rocannon's World\" and Genly Ai in \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". Other characters, such as Shevek in \"The Dispossessed\", become cultural observers in the course of their journeys on other planets. Le Guin's writing often examines alien cultures, and particularly the human cultures from planets other than Earth in the Hainish universe. In discovering these \"alien\" worlds, Le Guin's protagonists, and by extension the readers, also journey into themselves, and challenge the nature of what they consider \"alien\" and what they consider \"native\".\nSeveral of Le Guin's works have featured stylistic or structural features that were unusual or subversive. The heterogeneous structure of \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", described as \"distinctly post-modern\", was unusual for the time of its publication. This was in marked contrast to the structure of (primarily male-authored) traditional science fiction, which was straightforward and linear. The novel was framed as part of a report sent to the Ekumen by the protagonist Genly Ai after his time on the planet Gethen, thus suggesting that Ai was selecting and ordering the material, consisting of personal narration, diary extracts, Gethenian myths, and ethnological reports. \"Earthsea\" also employed an unconventional narrative form described by scholar Mike Cadden as \"free indirect discourse\", in which the feelings of the protagonist are not directly separated from the narration, making the narrator seem sympathetic to the characters, and removing the skepticism towards a character's thoughts and emotions that are a feature of more direct narration. Cadden suggests that this method leads to younger readers sympathizing directly with the characters, making it an effective technique for young-adult literature.\nA number of Le Guin's writings, including the \"Earthsea\" series, challenged the conventions of epic fantasies and myths. Many of the protagonists in \"Earthsea\" were dark-skinned individuals, in comparison to the white-skinned heroes more traditionally used; some of the antagonists, in contrast, were white-skinned, a switching of race roles that has been remarked upon by multiple critics. In a 2001 interview, Le Guin attributed the frequent lack of character illustrations on her book covers to her choice of non-white protagonists. She explained this choice, saying: \"most people in the world aren't white. Why in the future would we assume they are?\" Her 1985 book \"Always Coming Home\", described as \"her great experiment\", included a story told from the perspective of a young protagonist, but also included poems, rough drawings of plants and animals, myths, and anthropological reports from the matriarchal society of the Kesh, a fictional people living in the Napa valley after a catastrophic global flood.\nThemes.\nGender and sexuality.\nGender and sexuality are prominent themes in a number of Le Guin's works. \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", published in 1969, was among the first books in the genre now known as feminist science fiction, and is the most famous examination of androgyny in science fiction. The story is set on the fictional planet of Gethen, whose inhabitants are ambisexual humans with no fixed gender identity, who adopt female or male sexual characteristics for brief periods of their sexual cycle. Which sex they adopt can depend on context and relationships. Gethen was portrayed as a society without war, as a result of this absence of fixed gender characteristics, and also without sexuality as a continuous factor in social relationships. Gethenian culture was explored in the novel through the eyes of a Terran, whose masculinity proves a barrier to cross-cultural communication. Outside the Hainish Cycle, Le Guin's use of a female protagonist in \"The Tombs of Atuan\", published in 1971, was described as a \"significant exploration of womanhood\".\nLe Guin's attitude towards gender and feminism evolved considerably over time. Although \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" was seen as a landmark exploration of gender, it also received criticism for not going far enough. Reviewers pointed to its usage of masculine gender pronouns to describe its androgynous characters, the lack of androgynous characters portrayed in stereotypical feminine roles, and the portrayal of heterosexuality as the norm on Gethen. Le Guin's portrayal of gender in \"Earthsea\" was also described as perpetuating the notion of a male-dominated world; according to the \"Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\", \"Le Guin saw men as the actors and doers in the [world], while women remain the still centre, the well from which they drink\". Le Guin initially defended her writing; in a 1976 essay \"Is Gender Necessary?\" she wrote that gender was secondary to the primary theme of loyalty in \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". Le Guin revisited this essay in 1988, and acknowledged that gender was central to the novel; she also apologized for depicting Gethenians solely in heterosexual relationships.\nLe Guin responded to these critiques in her subsequent writing. She intentionally used feminine pronouns for all sexually latent Gethenians in her 1995 short story \"Coming of Age in Karhide\", and in a later reprinting of \"Winter's King\", which was first published in 1969. \"Coming of Age in Karhide\" was later anthologized in the 2002 collection \"\", which contained six other stories featuring unorthodox sexual relationships and marital arrangements. She also revisited gender relations in \"Earthsea\" in \"Tehanu\", published in 1990. This volume was described as a rewriting or reimagining of \"The Tombs of Atuan\", because the power and status of the female protagonist Tenar are the inverse of what they were in the earlier book, which was also focused on her and Ged. During this later period she commented that she considered \"The Eye of the Heron\", published in 1978, to be her first work genuinely centered on a woman. Le Guin's 1986 essay \u201cThe Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction\u201d is a critique of the traditional idea of the hero in storytelling, \"shifting the way we look at humanity's foundations from a narrative of domination to one of gathering, holding, and sharing,\" in the words of critic Siobhan Leddy.\nMoral development.\nLe Guin explores coming of age, and moral development more broadly, in many of her writings. This is particularly the case in those works written for a younger audience, such as \"Earthsea\" and \"Annals of the Western Shore\". Le Guin wrote in a 1973 essay that she chose to explore coming-of-age in \"Earthsea\" since she was writing for an adolescent audience: \"Coming of age\u00a0... is a process that took me many years; I finished it, so far as I ever will, at about age thirty-one; and so I feel rather deeply about it. So do most adolescents. It's their main occupation, in fact.\" She also said that fantasy was best suited as a medium for describing coming of age, because exploring the subconscious was difficult using the language of \"rational daily life\".\nThe first three \"Earthsea\" novels together follow Ged from youth to old age, and each of them also follow the coming of age of a different character. \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" focuses on Ged's adolescence, while \"The Tombs of Atuan\" and \"The Farthest Shore\" explore that of Tenar and the prince Arren, respectively. \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" is frequently described as a \"Bildungsroman\", in which Ged's coming of age is intertwined with the physical journey he undertakes through the novel. To Mike Cadden the book was a convincing tale \"to a reader as young and possibly as headstrong as Ged, and therefore sympathetic to him\". Reviewers have described the ending of the novel, wherein Ged finally accepts the shadow as a part of himself, as a rite of passage. Scholar Jeanne Walker writes that the rite of passage at the end was an analogue for the entire plot of \"A Wizard of Earthsea\", and that the plot itself plays the role of a rite of passage for an adolescent reader.\nEach volume of \"Annals of the Western Shore\" also describes the coming of age of its protagonists, and features explorations of being enslaved to one's own power. The process of growing up is depicted as seeing beyond narrow choices the protagonists are presented with by society. In \"Gifts\", Orrec and Gry realize that the powers their people possess can be used in two ways: for control and dominion, or for healing and nurturing. This recognition allows them to take a third choice, and leave. This wrestling with choice has been compared to the choices the characters are forced to make in Le Guin's short story \"The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas\". Similarly, Ged helps Tenar in \"The Tombs of Atuan\" to value herself and to find choices that she did not see, leading her to leave the Tombs with him.\nPolitical systems.\nAlternative social and political systems are a recurring theme in Le Guin's writing. Critics have paid particular attention to \"The Dispossessed\" and \"Always Coming Home\", although Le Guin explores related themes in a number of her works, such as in \"The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas\". \"The Dispossessed\" is an anarchist utopian novel, which according to Le Guin drew from pacifist anarchists, including Peter Kropotkin, as well as from the counterculture of the 1960s and 1970s. Le Guin has been credited with \"[rescuing] anarchism from the cultural ghetto to which it has been consigned\", and helping to bring it into the intellectual mainstream. Fellow author Kathleen Ann Goonan wrote that Le Guin's work confronted the \"paradigm of insularity toward the suffering of people, other living beings, and resources\", and explored \"life-respecting sustainable alternatives\".\n\"The Dispossessed\", set on the twin planets of Urras and Anarres, features a planned anarchist society depicted as an \"ambiguous utopia\". The society, created by settlers from Urras, is materially poorer than the wealthy society of Urras, but more ethically and morally advanced. Unlike classical utopias, the society of Anarres is portrayed as neither perfect nor static; the protagonist Shevek finds himself traveling to Urras to pursue his research. Nonetheless, the misogyny and hierarchy present in the authoritarian society of Urras is absent among the anarchists, who base their social structure on cooperation and individual liberty. \"The Eye of the Heron\", published a few years after \"The Dispossessed\", was described as continuing Le Guin's exploration of human freedom, through a conflict between two societies of opposing philosophies: a town inhabited by descendants of pacifists, and a city inhabited by descendants of criminals.\n\"Always Coming Home\", set in California in the distant future, examines a warlike society, resembling contemporary American society, from the perspective of the Kesh, its pacifist neighbors. The society of the Kesh has been identified by scholars as a feminist utopia, which Le Guin uses to explore the role of technology. Scholar Warren Rochelle stated that it was \"neither a matriarchy nor a patriarchy: men and women just are\". \"The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas\", a parable depicting a society in which widespread wealth, happiness, and security, comes at the cost of the continued misery of a single child, has also been read as a critique of contemporary American society. \"The Word for World is Forest\" explored the manner in which the structure of society affects the natural environment; in the novel, the natives of the planet of Athshe have adapted their way of life to the ecology of the planet. The colonizing human society, in contrast, is depicted as destructive and uncaring; in depicting it, Le Guin also critiqued colonialism and imperialism, driven partly by her disapproval for U.S. intervention in the Vietnam War.\nOther social structures are examined in works such as the story cycle \"Four Ways to Forgiveness\", and the short story \"Old Music and the Slave Women\", occasionally described as a \"fifth way to forgiveness\". Set in the Hainish universe, the five stories together examine revolution and reconstruction in a slave-owning society. According to Rochelle, the stories examine a society that has the potential to build a \"truly human community\", made possible by the Ekumen's recognition of the slaves as human beings, thus offering them the prospect of freedom and the possibility of utopia, brought about through revolution. Slavery, justice, and the role of women in society are also explored in \"Annals of the Western Shore\".\nReception and legacy.\nReception.\nLe Guin received rapid recognition after the publication of \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" in 1969, and by the 1970s she was among the best known writers in the field. Her books sold many millions of copies, and were translated into more than 40 languages; several remain in print many decades after their first publication. Her work received intense academic attention; she has been described as being the \"premier writer of both fantasy and science fiction\" of the 1970s, the most frequently discussed science fiction writer of the 1970s, and over her career, as intensively studied as Philip K. Dick. Later in her career, she also received recognition from mainstream literary critics: in an obituary, Jo Walton stated that Le Guin \"was so good that the mainstream couldn't dismiss SF any more\". According to scholar Donna White, Le Guin was a \"major voice in American letters\", whose writing was the subject of many volumes of literary critique, more than two hundred scholarly articles, and a number of dissertations.\nLe Guin was unusual in receiving most of her recognition for her earliest works, which remained her most popular; a commentator in 2018 described a \"tendency toward didacticism\" in her later works, while John Clute, writing in \"The Guardian\", stated that her later writing \"suffers from the need she clearly felt to speak responsibly to her large audience about important things; an artist being responsible can be an artist wearing a crown of thorns\". Not all of her works received as positive a reception; \"The Compass Rose\" was among the volumes that had a mixed reaction, while the \"Science Fiction Encyclopedia\" described \"The Eye of the Heron\" as \"an over-diagrammatic political fable whose translucent simplicity approaches self-parody\". Even the critically well-received \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", in addition to critique from feminists, was described by Alexei Panshin as a \"flat failure\".\nHer writing was recognized by the popular media and by commentators. The \"Los Angeles Times\" commented in 2009 that after the death of Arthur C. Clarke, Le Guin was \"arguably the most acclaimed science fiction writer on the planet\", and went on to describe her as a \"pioneer\" of literature for young people. In an obituary, Clute described Le Guin as having \"presided over American science fiction for nearly half a century\", and as having a reputation as an author of the \"first rank\". In 2016, \"The New York Times\" described her as \"America's greatest living science fiction writer\". Praise for Le Guin frequently focused on the social and political themes her work explored, and for her prose; literary critic Harold Bloom described Le Guin as an \"exquisite stylist\", saying that in her writing, \"Every word was exactly in place and every sentence or line had resonance\". According to Bloom, Le Guin was a \"visionary who set herself against all brutality, discrimination, and exploitation\". \"The New York Times\" described her as using \"a lean but lyrical style\" to explore issues of moral relevance. Prefacing an interview in 2008, \"Vice\" magazine described Le Guin as having written \"some of the more mind-warping [science fiction] and fantasy tales of the past 40 years\".\nLe Guin's fellow authors also praised her writing. After Le Guin's death in 2018, writer Michael Chabon referred to her as the \"greatest American writer of her generation\", and said that she had \"awed [him] with the power of an unfettered imagination\". Author Margaret Atwood hailed Le Guin's \"sane, smart, crafty and lyrical voice\", and wrote that social injustice was a powerful motivation through Le Guin's life. Her prose, according to Zadie Smith, was \"as elegant and beautiful as any written in the twentieth century\". Academic and author Joyce Carol Oates highlighted Le Guin's \"outspoken sense of justice, decency, and common sense\", and called her \"one of the great American writers and a visionary artist whose work will long endure\". China Mi\u00e9ville described Le Guin as a \"literary colossus\", and wrote that she was a \"writer of intense ethical seriousness and intelligence, of wit and fury, of radical politics, of subtlety, of freedom and yearning\".\nAwards and recognition.\nThe accolades Le Guin has received include numerous annual awards for individual works. She won eight Hugo Awards from twenty-six nominations, and six Nebula Awards from eighteen nominations, including four Nebula Awards for Best Novel from six nominations, more than any other writer. \"Locus Magazine\" subscribers have voted Le Guin to receive 25 Locus Awards. At the time of her death she was third for total wins, as well as second behind Neil Gaiman for awards for fiction. For her novels alone she won five Locus Awards, four Nebula Awards, two Hugo Awards, and one World Fantasy Award, and won each of those awards in short fiction categories as well. Her third \"Earthsea\" novel, \"The Farthest Shore\", won the 1973 National Book Award for Young People's Literature, and she was a finalist for ten Mythopoeic Awards, nine in Fantasy and one for Scholarship. Her 1996 collection \"Unlocking the Air and Other Stories\" was one of three finalists for the 1997 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Other awards won by Le Guin include three James Tiptree Jr. Awards, and three Jupiter Awards. She won her final Hugo award a year after her death, for a complete edition of \"Earthsea\", illustrated by Charles Vess; the same volume also won a Locus award.\nOther awards and accolades have recognized Le Guin's contributions to speculative fiction. She was voted a Gandalf Grand Master Award by the World Science Fiction Society in 1979. The Science Fiction Research Association gave her its Pilgrim Award in 1989 for her \"lifetime contributions to SF and fantasy scholarship\". At the 1995 World Fantasy Convention she won the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement, a judged recognition of outstanding service to the fantasy field. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted her in 2001, its sixth class of two deceased and two living writers. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America named her its 20th Grand Master in 2003: she was the second, and at the time of death one of only six, women to receive that honor. In 2013, she was given the Eaton Award by the University of California, Riverside, for lifetime achievement in science fiction.\nLater in her career Le Guin also received accolades recognizing her contributions to literature more generally. In April 2000, the U.S. Library of Congress named Le Guin a Living Legend in the \"Writers and Artists\" category for her significant contributions to America's cultural heritage. The American Library Association granted her the annual Margaret Edwards Award in 2004, and also selected her to deliver the annual May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture. The Edwards Award recognizes one writer and a particular body of work: the 2004 panel cited the first four \"Earthsea\" volumes, \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" and \"The Beginning Place\". The panel said that Le Guin \"has inspired four generations of young adults to read beautifully constructed language, visit fantasy worlds that inform them about their own lives, and think about their ideas that are neither easy nor inconsequential\". A collection of Le Guin's works was published by the Library of America in 2016, an honor only rarely given to living writers. The National Book Foundation awarded Le Guin its Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters in 2014, stating that she had \"defied conventions of narrative, language, character, and genre, and transcended boundaries between fantasy and realism to forge new paths for literary fiction\". The American Academy of Arts and Letters made her a member in 2017. On July 27, 2021, Le Guin was honored by the US Postal Service with the 33rd stamp in the Postal Service's Literary Arts series. The stamp features a portrait of the author taken from a 2006 photograph against a background image inspired by her book \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". The stamp was designed by Donato Gionacola. A crater on the planet Mercury was named in Le Guin's honor in November 2024.\nLegacy and influence.\nLe Guin had a considerable influence on the field of speculative fiction; Jo Walton argued that Le Guin played a large role in both broadening the genre and helping genre writers achieve mainstream recognition. The \"Earthsea\" books are cited as having a wide impact, including outside the field of literature. Margaret Atwood considers \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" one of the \"wellsprings\" of fantasy literature, and modern writers have credited the book for the idea of a \"wizard school\", later made famous by the \"Harry Potter\" series of books, and with popularizing the trope of a boy wizard, also present in \"Harry Potter\". The notion that names can exert power is a theme in the Earthsea series; critics have suggested that this inspired Hayao Miyazaki's use of the idea in his 2001 film \"Spirited Away\".\nLe Guin's writings set in the Hainish universe also had a wide influence. Le Guin coined the name \"ansible\" for an instantaneous interstellar communication device in 1966; the term was later adopted by several other writers, including Orson Scott Card in the \"Ender Series\" and Neil Gaiman in a script for a \"Doctor Who\" episode. Suzanne Reid wrote that at the time \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" was written, Le Guin's ideas of androgyny were unique not only to science fiction, but to literature in general. That volume is specifically cited as leaving a large legacy; in discussing it, literary critic Harold Bloom wrote \"Le Guin, more than Tolkien, has raised fantasy into high literature, for our time\". Bloom followed this up by listing the book in his \"The Western Canon\" (1994) as one of the books in his conception of artistic works that have been important and influential in Western culture. This view was echoed in \"The Paris Review\", which wrote that \"No single work did more to upend the genre's conventions than \"The Left Hand of Darkness\"\", while White argued that it was one of the seminal works of science fiction, as important as Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\" (1818).\nCommentators have also described Le Guin as being influential in the field of literature more generally. Literary critic Elaine Showalter suggested that Le Guin \"set the pace as a writer for women unlearning silence, fear, and self-doubt\", while writer Brian Attebery stated that \"[Le Guin] invented us: science fiction and fantasy critics like me but also poets and essayists and picture book writers and novelists\". Le Guin's own literary criticism proved influential; her 1973 essay \"From Elfland to Poughkeepsie\" led to renewed interest in the work of Kenneth Morris, and eventually to the publication of a posthumous novel by Morris. Le Guin also played a role in bringing speculative fiction into the literary mainstream by supporting journalists and scholarly endeavors examining the genre.\nSeveral prominent authors acknowledge Le Guin's influence on their own writing. Jo Walton wrote that \"her way of looking at the world had a huge influence on me, not just as a writer but as a human being\". Nebula Awards winner Neil Gaiman stated, \"I learn more from her books at every stage of life than from any other writer.\" Other writers she influenced include Booker Prize winner Salman Rushdie, as well as David Mitchell, Algis Budrys, Kathleen Goonan, and Iain Banks. Mitchell, author of books such as \"Cloud Atlas\", described \"A Wizard of Earthsea\" as having a strong influence on him, and said that he felt a desire to \"wield words with the same power as Ursula Le Guin\". Le Guin is also credited with inspiring several female science fiction authors in the 1970s, including Vonda McIntyre. When McIntyre established a writers' workshop in Seattle in 1971, Le Guin was one of the instructors. Film-maker Arwen Curry began production on a documentary about Le Guin in 2009, filming \"dozens\" of hours of interviews with the author as well as many other writers and artists who have been inspired by her. Curry launched a successful crowdfunding campaign to finish the documentary in early 2016 after winning a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities.\nThe Ursula K. Le Guin Prize for Fiction was announced in October 2021. The award is managed by the Ursula K. Le Guin Literary Trust and a panel of jurors. The prize is worth US$ and is awarded annually to \"a single book-length work of imaginative fiction.\" The inaugural winner was Khadija Abdalla Bajaber for her book \"The House of Rust\".\nAdaptations of her work.\nLe Guin's works have been adapted for radio, film, television, and the stage. Her 1971 novel \"The Lathe of Heaven\" has been released on film twice, in 1979 by WNET with Le Guin's participation, and then in 2002 by the A&amp;E Network. In a 2008 interview, she said she considered the 1979 version as \"the only good adaptation to film\" of her work to date. In the early 1980s Hayao Miyazaki asked to create an animated adaptation of \"Earthsea\". Le Guin, who was unfamiliar with his work and anime in general, initially turned down the offer, but later accepted after seeing \"My Neighbor Totoro\". The third and fourth \"Earthsea\" books were used as the basis of \"Tales from Earthsea\", released in 2006. Rather than being directed by Hayao Miyazaki himself, the film was directed by his son Gor\u014d, which disappointed Le Guin. Le Guin was positive about the aesthetic of the film, writing that \"much of it was beautiful\", but was critical of the film's moral sense and its use of physical violence, and particularly the use of a villain whose death provided the film's resolution. In 2004, the Sci Fi Channel adapted the first two books of the \"Earthsea\" trilogy as the miniseries \"Legend of Earthsea\". Le Guin was highly critical of the miniseries, calling it a \"far cry from the Earthsea I envisioned\", objecting to the use of white actors for her red-, brown-, and black-skinned characters.\nLe Guin's novel \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" was adapted for the stage in 1995 by Chicago's Lifeline Theatre. Reviewer Jack Helbig at the \"Chicago Reader\" wrote that the \"adaptation is intelligent and well crafted but ultimately unsatisfying\", in large measure because it is extremely difficult to compress a complex 300-page novel into a two-hour stage presentation. \"Paradises Lost\" was adapted into an opera by the opera program of the University of Illinois. The opera was composed by Stephen A. Taylor; the libretto has been attributed both to Kate Gale and to Marcia Johnson. Created in 2005, the opera premiered in April 2012. Le Guin described the effort as a \"beautiful opera\" in an interview, and expressed hopes that it would be picked up by other producers. She also said she was better pleased with stage versions, including \"Paradises Lost\", than screen adaptations of her work to that date. In 2013, the Portland Playhouse and Hand2Mouth Theatre produced a play based on \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", directed and adapted by Jonathan Walters, with text written by John Schmor. The play opened May 2, 2013, and ran until June 16, 2013, in Portland, Oregon.\nWritten works.\nLe Guin's career as a professional writer spanned nearly sixty years, from 1959 to 2018. During this period, she wrote more than twenty novels, more than a hundred short stories, more than a dozen volumes of poetry, five translations, and thirteen children's books. Her writing encompassed speculative fiction, realistic fiction, non-fiction, screenplays, librettos, essays, poetry, speeches, translations, literary critiques, chapbooks, and children's fiction. Le Guin's first published work was the poem \"Folksong from the Montayna Province\" in 1959, while her first published short story was \"An die Musik\", in 1961. Her first professional publication was the short story \"April in Paris\" in 1962, while her first published novel was \"Rocannon's World\", released by Ace Books in 1966. Her final publications included the non-fiction collections \"Dreams Must Explain Themselves\" and \"Ursula K Le Guin: Conversations on Writing\", both released after her death. Her best-known works include the six volumes of the \"Earthsea\" series, and the many novels of the Hainish Cycle.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32039", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32039", "title": "The Dispossessed", "text": "1974 science fiction novel by Ursula K. Le Guin\nThe Dispossessed (subtitled An Ambiguous Utopia) is a 1974 anarchist utopian science fiction novel by American writer Ursula K. Le Guin, one of her seven Hainish Cycle novels. It is one of a small number of books to win all three awards\u2014Hugo, Locus, and Nebula\u2014for best science fiction or fantasy novel. It achieved a degree of literary recognition unusual for science fiction because of its exploration of themes such as anarchism and revolutionary societies, capitalism, utopia, individualism, and collectivism.\nThe novel features the development of the mathematical theory underlying a fictional \"ansible\", a device capable of faster-than-light communication, which can send messages without delay, even between star systems. This device plays a critical role in the Hainish Cycle. The invention of the ansible places the novel first in the internal chronology of the Hainish Cycle, although it was the fifth to be published.\nBackground.\nIn her introduction to the Library of America reprint in 2017, Le Guin reflected on her past 40 years by writing: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Dispossessed\" started as a very bad short story, which I didn't try to finish but couldn't quite let go. There was a book in it, and I knew it, but the book had to wait for me to learn what I was writing about and how to write about it. I needed to understand my own passionate opposition to the war that we were, endlessly it seemed, waging in Vietnam, and endlessly protesting at home. If I had known then that my country would continue making aggressive wars for the rest of my life, I might have had less energy for protesting that one. But, knowing only that I didn't want to study war no more, I studied peace. I started by reading a whole mess of utopias and learning something about pacifism and Gandhi and nonviolent resistance. This led me to the nonviolent anarchist writers such as Peter Kropotkin and Paul Goodman. With them I felt a great, immediate affinity. They made sense to me in the way Lao Tzu did. They enabled me to think about war, peace, politics, how we govern one another and ourselves, the value of failure, and the strength of what is weak.\nSo, when I realized that nobody had yet written an anarchist utopia, I finally began to see what my book might be. And I found that its principal character, whom I'd first glimpsed in the original misbegotten story, was alive and well\u2014my guide to Anarres.\nLe Guin's parents, anthropologist Alfred and writer Theodora Kroeber, were friends with J. Robert Oppenheimer; Le Guin stated that Oppenheimer was the model for Shevek, the book's protagonist.\nMeaning of the title.\nIt has been suggested that Le Guin's title is a reference to Dostoyevsky's novel about anarchists, \"Demons\" (, \"B\u00e9sy\"), one popular English-language translation of which is titled \"The Possessed\". Many of the philosophical underpinnings and ecological concepts came from Murray Bookchin's \"Post-Scarcity Anarchism\" (1971), according to a letter Le Guin sent to Bookchin. Anarres citizens are \"dispossessed\" not just by political choice, but by the very lack of actual resources to possess. Here, again, Le Guin draws a contrast with the natural wealth of Urras, and the competitive behaviors this fosters.\nSetting.\n\"The Dispossessed\" is set on Anarres and Urras, the twin inhabited worlds of Tau Ceti. Urras is divided into several states, but is dominated by two rival superpowers, A-Io and Thu. While on Urras, the main character spends most of his time in A-Io, a state with a capitalist economy and a patriarchal system. The state of Thu is never actually visited, but is said to have an authoritarian system that claims to rule in the name of the proletariat. A-Io has dissent in its borders, including a few different oppositional left-wing parties, one of which is closely linked to the rival society of Thu. When a revolution is sparked in Benbili, the third major, yet undeveloped, area of Urras, A-Io invades the Thu-supported revolutionary area, generating a proxy war.\nThe moon, Anarres, represents a more idealist ideological structure: anarcho-syndicalism. The Anarresti, who call themselves Odonians after the founder of their political philosophy, arrived on Anarres from Urras around 200 years ago. In order to forestall an anarcho-syndicalist rebellion, the major Urrasti states gave the revolutionaries the right to live on Anarres, along with a guarantee of non-interference. Before this, Anarres had had no permanent settlements, apart from some mining facilities.\nAnarres is settled after a revolution on Urras by the followers of Odo, the central character of Le Guin's 1974 short story \"The Day Before the Revolution\".\nThe economic and political situation of Anarres and its relation to Urras is ambiguous. The people of Anarres consider themselves as being free and independent, having broken off from the political and social influence of the old world. However, the powers of Urras consider Anarres as being essentially their mining colony, as the annual consignment of Anarres's precious metals and their distribution to major powers on Urras is a major economic event of the old world.\nTheoretical timeline.\nIn the last chapter of \"The Dispossessed\", it is revealed that the Hainish people arrived at Tau Ceti 60 years previously, which is more than 100 years after the secession of the Odonians from Urras and their exodus to Anarres. Terrans are also there, and the novel occurs some time in the future, according to an elaborate chronology worked out by science fiction author Ian Watson in 1975: \"the baseline date of AD 2300 for \"The Dispossessed\" is taken from the description of Earth in that book (\u00a711) as having passed through an ecological and social collapse with a population peak of 9 billion to a low-population but highly centralized recovery economy.\" In the same article, Watson assigns a date of AD 4870 to \"The Left Hand of Darkness\"; both dates are problematic \u2014 as Watson says himself, they are contradicted by \"Genly Ai's statement that Terrans 'were ignorant until about three thousand years ago of the uses of zero'\".\nStory.\nThe chapters alternate between the two planets and between the present and the past. The even-numbered chapters, which are set on Anarres, chronologically take place first and are followed by the odd-numbered chapters, which take place on Urras. The only exceptions occur in the first and last chapters: the first takes place on both the moon and the planet; the last takes place in a spaceship.\nAnarres (chapters 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12).\nChapter One begins in the middle of the story (\"in media res\"). The protagonist Shevek is an Anarresti physicist attempting to develop a General Temporal Theory. The physics of the book, Principles of Simultaneity, describes time as having a much deeper, more complex structure than as it is understood. It incorporates not only mathematics and physics, but also philosophy and ethics. Shevek finds his work blocked by a jealous superior, Sabul, who controls the publication of Anarresti manuscripts. As his theories conflict with the prevailing political philosophy, Shevek believes that his ideas are discordant with Anarresti society. Throughout his time in Abbenay, he runs into old acquaintances from his adolescence and his mother, Rulag. One of his old female acquaintances, Takver, becomes involved with Shevek and the two start a relationship and have their first child together.\nShevek's work is further disrupted by his social obligation to perform manual labor during a drought in Anarres's anarchist society. To ensure survival in a harsh environment, the people of Anarres must put the needs of society ahead of their own personal desires, so Shevek performs hard agricultural labor in a dusty desert for four years instead of working on his research. After the drought, he arranges to go to Urras, having won a prestigious award for his work there, to finish and publish his theory with the help of the syndicate he set up to distribute his works. His contact with scholars on Urras and his decision to travel results in political turmoil on Anarres. Shevek is accused of being a traitor by Sabul and threatening the political separation between the two worlds. Believing that his theory will benefit the Anarresti and the wider society, Shevek embarks to Urras.\nUrras (chapters 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11).\nShevek's journey to the only spaceport in Anarres is eventful. Having been deemed a traitor by some groups on the planet, Shevek is nearly killed as an angry mob tries to stop him getting on the spaceship to A-Io. Arriving in A-Io, Urras, Shevek is feted. He soon finds himself disgusted with the social, sexual, and political conventions of the hierarchical capitalist society of Urras. His grievances are further explored with the outbreak of war in neighbouring Benbili, of which A-Io is involved with rivalling Thu. At Ieu Eun University, Shevek struggles with teaching the Urrasti students and is manipulated by the physicists there, who hope that his breakthrough on the General Temporal Theory will allow them to build a faster-than-light ship. A mysterious note asking him to join his 'brothers' spooks Shevek, knowing that fellow like-minded anarchists are on Urras - in the shadows. Eventually, at a dinner party, a drunken Shevek publicly denounces his peers on A-Io, scolding them for their materialistic lives and taking their splendor for granted, before leading to a disastrous sexual encounter that further alienates Shevek from his peers. He has a sobering realisation that the theory he proposes will be capitalised by the Urrasti for potential warfare, not for the benefit of society. Shevek escapes the university, contacts an underground revolutionary group from the note he found, joining in a labor protest in Nio Esseia that is violently suppressed. He flees to the Terran embassy, where he asks them to transmit his theory to all worlds. The Terrans provide him safe passage back to Anarres.\nOnboard the \"Davenant\" (chapter 13).\nFor interplanetary travel to his world, Anarres, Shevek is shown around a Hainish spaceship. Hainish culture is described. A Hainishman named Ketho, who sympathizes with Odonian thought, wants to disembark with Shevek when they land on Anarres. Not knowing if the Anarresti will welcome him back with open arms, Shevek remains content thinking about his family as the spaceship begins to land.\nThemes.\nSymbolism.\nThe ambiguity of Anarres's economic and political situation in relation to Urras is symbolically manifested in the low wall surrounding Anarres's single spaceport. This wall is the only place on the anarchist planet where \"No Trespassing!\" signs may be seen, and it is where the book begins and ends. The people of Anarres believe that the wall divides a free world from the corrupting influence of an oppressor's ships. On the other hand, the wall could be a prison wall keeping the rest of the planet imprisoned and cut off. Shevek's life attempts to answer this question.\nIn addition to Shevek's journey to answer questions about his society's true level of freedom, the meaning of his theories themselves weave their way into the plot; they not only describe abstract physical concepts, but they also reflect ups and downs of the characters' lives, and the transformation of the Anarresti society. An oft-quoted saying in the book is \"true journey is return.\" The meaning of Shevek's theories\u2014which deal with the nature of time and simultaneity\u2014have been subject to interpretation. For example, there have been interpretations that the non-linear nature of the novel is a reproduction of Shevek's theory.\nAnarchism and capitalism.\nIn her foreword to the collected Hainish novels, Le Guin notes her \"great, immediate affinity\" with anarchist thinkers Peter Kropotkin and Paul Goodman. Elsewhere, she writes that \"Odonism is anarchism,\" mentioning parallels with Emma Goldman, Taoism and Percy Bysshe Shelley. For Le Guin, anarchism's \"principal target is the authoritarian State (capitalist or socialist); its principal moral-practical theme is cooperation (solidarity, mutual aid).\"\nBoth on Anarres and Urras, many conflicts occur between these anarchist principles and the constraints imposed by authority and society. On Anarres, there are no written laws. However, in practice, there are strong conventions about how most things should be done, which frustrate Shevek throughout the novel. Money is also not used, and instead the Anarresti rely on the DivLab database to match volunteer labor with work assignments. Via these conventions and institutions, \"The Dispossessed\" depicts an anarchist-syndicalist alternative to capitalism. Le Guin's computational economy combines a central economic plan for society with democratic decision-making on a syndicalist model, bureaucratic and computational efficiency, and a negotiated tension among syndicate federalism, individual autonomy, and the danger of centralized authority.\"\nThe language spoken on Anarres also reflects anarchism. Pravic is a constructed language in the tradition of Esperanto. Pravic reflects many aspects of the philosophical foundations of utopian anarchism. For instance, the use of the possessive case is strongly discouraged, a feature that also is reflected by the novel's title. Children are trained to speak only about matters that interest others; anything else is \"egoizing\" (pp.\u00a028\u201331). There is no property ownership of any kind. Shevek's daughter, upon meeting him for the first time, tells him, \"You can share the handkerchief I use\" rather than \"You may borrow my handkerchief\", thus conveying the idea that the handkerchief is not owned by the girl, but is merely used by her.\nUtopianism.\nThe work is sometimes said to represent a modern revival of the utopian genre. When first published, the book included the tagline: \"The magnificent epic of an ambiguous utopia!\" which was shortened by fans to \"An ambiguous utopia\" and adopted as a subtitle in certain editions.\nLe Guin brings her own innovations to the literary tradition of utopia. Many earlier utopian novels featured a visitor to utopia, as a device to teach the reader about its institutions. However \"The Dispossessed\" inverts this, by having Shevek, dissatisfied with his life in Anarres, travel to Urras. \"The Dispossessed\" also does not seek to portray Anarres as a society that is absolutely good, but only as \"ambiguously good\".\nTom Moylan describes \"The Dispossessed\" as \"the best known and the most popular of the critical utopias published in the 1970s.\" 'Critical' utopian fiction continues to embrace utopian ideals, but it is cautious of being too prescriptive, and tends to focus on \"the continuing presence of difference and imperfection within utopian society itself.\" \"The Dispossessed\" shares with many later critical utopias, including Iain M. Banks's Culture series and Samuel R. Delany's \"Trouble on Triton\", a focus on utopia's discontents, and an interest in how utopian society interacts with its neighbors.\nFeminism.\nSome critics disagree as to whether \"The Dispossessed\" should be considered a feminist utopia or a feminist science fiction novel. According to Mary Morrison of the \"State University of New York at Buffalo\" (SUNY), the anarchist themes in this book help to promote feminist themes as well. Other critics, such as William Marcellino of SUNY and Sarah LeFanu, writer of \"Popular Writing and Feminist Intervention in Science Fiction,\" argue that there are distinct anti-feminist undertones throughout the novel.\nMorrison argues that Le Guin's portrayed ideals of Taoism, the celebration of labor and the body, and desire for sexual freedom in an anarchist society contribute greatly to the book's feminist message. Taoism, which rejects dualisms and divisions in favor of a Yin and Yang balance, brings attention to the balance between not only the two planets, but between the male and female inhabitants. The celebration of labor on Anarres stems from a celebration of a mother's labor, focusing on creating life rather than on building objects. The sexual freedom on Anarres also contributes to the book's feminist message.\nOn the other hand, some critics believe that Le Guin's feminist themes are either weak or not present. Some believe that the Taoist interdependence between the genders actually weakens Le Guin's feminist message. Marcellino believes that the anarchist themes in the novel take precedence and dwarf any feminist themes. Lefanu adds that there is a difference between the feminist messages that the book explicitly presents and the anti-feminist undertones. For example, the book says that women created the society on Anarres. However, female characters seem secondary to the male protagonist, who seems to be a traditional male hero; Lefanu asserts that this subversion weakens any feminist message that Le Guin was trying to convey.\nPrison abolition.\nOdo, the founder of Anarresti society, wrote her most influential works during a nine-year imprisonment. Anarres itself has no prisons. Its post-carceral nature becomes apparent in chapter two, when a group of Annaresti schoolchildren learn about prisons in their history lesson. The teacher describes prisons \"with the reluctance of a decent adult forced to explain an obscenity to children. Yes, he said, a prison was a place where a State put people\nwho disobeyed its Laws.\" Fascinated by this \"perversity\", the schoolchildren construct their own prison and detain one of their own inside. They are ultimately horrified by the experience.\nFigurative imprisonment is an important theme in the novel too. In both the Urrasti and Anarresti parts of the novel, \"time after time the question of who is being locked out or in, which side of the wall one is on, is the focus of the narrative.\" Mark Tunik emphasises that \"the wall\" is the dominant metaphor for social constraints in \"The Dispossessed\". While on Urras, Shevek hits \"the wall of charm, courtesy, indifference.\" He later notes that he let a \"wall be built around him\" that kept him from seeing the poor people on Urras. He had been co-opted, with walls of smiles of the rich, and he didn't know how to break them down. Shevek at one point speculates that the people on Urras are not truly free, precisely because they have so many walls built between people and are so possessive. He says, \"You are all in jail. Each alone, solitary, with a heap of what he owns. You live in prison, die in prison. It is all I can see in your eyes \u2013 the wall, the wall!\" '\nIt is not just the state of mind of those inside the prisons that concerns Shevek, he also notes the effect on those outside the walls. Steve Grossi says, \"by building a physical wall to keep the bad in, we construct a mental wall keeping ourselves, our thoughts, and our empathy out, to the collective detriment of all.\" Shevek himself later says, \"those who build walls are their own prisoners.\"\nPublication.\nIn Le Guin's book-writing process, the story always came to her through a character rather than an event, idea, plot, or society. The story behind \"The Dispossessed\" first occurred to Le Guin through a vision, revealed as if seen from a distance, first as a male physicist, his thin face, clear eyes, large ears, possibly recalling a memory of Robert Oppenheimer, and a vivid personality. She attempted to capture the character in a short story in what she recalled as one of her worst in 30 years of writing, in which the physicist escapes a gulag planet for a nearby wealthy sister planet, where he has a love affair but likes the planet even less, and so nobly returns to the gulag. She proceeded to rewrite the story, beginning with his name and origin\u2014Shevek, from Utopia\u2014which she considered reasonable based on his intelligence and disarming naivety. Knowing only bits of Thomas More (\"Utopia\"), William Morris (\"News from Nowhere\"), William Henry Hudson (\"A Crystal Age\"), and H. G. Wells (\"A Modern Utopia\"), Le Guin's reading of modern libertarian socialists rounded Shevek's prison planet into a place where she saw he would want to return: Marx and Engels, William Godwin, Emma Goldman, Paul Goodman and, foremost, Peter Kropotkin and Mary Shelley.\nLe Guin wrote \"The Dispossessed\" in 1973 for publication in May or June 1974.\nCritical reception.\nThe novel received generally positive reviews. On the positive side, Baird Searles characterized the novel as an \"extraordinary work\", saying Le Guin had \"created a working society in exquisite detail\" and \"a fully realized hypothetical culture [as well as] living breathing characters who are inevitable products of that culture\". Gerald Jonas, writing in \"The New York Times\", said that \"Le Guin's book, written in her solid, no-nonsense prose, is so persuasive that it ought to put a stop to the writing of prescriptive Utopias for at least 10 years\". Theodore Sturgeon praised \"The Dispossessed\" as \"a beautifully written, beautifully composed book\", saying \"it performs one of [science fiction's] prime functions, which is to create another kind of social system to see how it would work. Or if it would work.\"\nLester del Rey, however, gave the novel a mixed review, citing the quality of Le Guin's writing but claiming that the ending \"slips badly\", a \"deus ex machina\" that \"destroy[s] much of the strength of the novel\".\nAdaptations.\nIn 1987, the CBC Radio anthology program \"Vanishing Point\" adapted \"The Dispossessed\" into a series of six 30 minute episodes.\nOn October 5, 2021, it was announced that 1212 Entertainment and Anonymous Content would adapt the novel into a limited series.\nTranslations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32041", "revid": "46824509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32041", "title": "Hainish Cycle", "text": "Science fiction series by Ursula K. Le Guin\nThe Hainish Cycle consists of a number of science fiction novels and stories by Ursula K. Le Guin. The cycle is set in a future history that features civilizations of human beings on planets orbiting a number of nearby stars, including Terra (\"Earth\"); these humans are contacting each other for the first time and establishing diplomatic relations, as well as setting up a confederacy under the guidance of the oldest of the human worlds, the peaceful planet Hain. In this history, human beings did not evolve on Earth, but they were instead the result of interstellar colonies planted by Hain in the distant past, after which interstellar travel ceased for an extended period. Some of the human races have new genetic traits, a result of ancient Hainish experiments in genetic engineering; this includes people who can dream while awake, and a world of hermaphroditic people who only enter active sexuality once per month, not knowing which sex will manifest in them. In keeping with Le Guin's narrative approach, she uses varied social and environmental settings to explore the anthropological and sociological outcomes of human evolution in those environments. The author often discounted the characterization of a so-called \"Hainish Cycle\".\nMany of Le Guin's works have won literary awards, including the Hainish novels \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" (1969) and \"The Dispossessed\" (1974); the novella \"The Word for World Is Forest\" (1972); and the short stories \"The Day Before the Revolution\" (1974) and \"The Matter of Seggri\" (1994).\nStory chronology.\nIn the first three novels\u2014\"Rocannon's World\" (1966), \"Planet of Exile\" (1966), and \"City of Illusions\" (1967)\u2014there is a League of All Worlds; by \"City of Illusions\", the League seems to have been conquered or fragmented by an alien race, the Shing, from beyond the League. In the fourth, \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" (1969), the planets of the former League have reunited as the \"Ekumen\", which was founded by the Hainish people. The fifth, \"The Word for World Is Forest\" (1972), part of the anthology \"Again, Dangerous Visions\" (and only published as a separate book in 1976) is set before any of the first four books, and in it the League of All Worlds and the \"ansible\" are new, and the term \"Ekumen\" is not used. The sixth, \"The Dispossessed\" (1974), is the earliest Hainish novel, chronologically; in it, the Cetians have been visited by people from other planets, including Terra (Earth) and Hain, and while the various planets are separate, there is some talk of a union (and the ansible concept is known, but none yet exist). The seventh and final novel, \"The Telling\" (2000), and the later short stories only speak of the Ekumen\u2014which now includes the Gethenians, who were the subject of \"The Left Hand of Darkness\"\u2014and not of the League.\nLeGuin's view.\nLe Guin often discounted the characterization of a \"Hainish Cycle\", writing on her website that \"The thing is, they aren't a cycle or a saga. They do not form a coherent history. There are some clear connections among them, yes, but also some extremely murky ones.\"\nLe Guin offers the following thoughts on the order in which readers should approach the series:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Rocannon's World\", \"Planet of Exile,\" \"City of Illusions\": where they fit in the \"Hainish cycle\" is anybody\u2019s guess, but I\u2019d read them first because they were written first. In them there is a \"League of Worlds,\" but the Ekumen does not yet exist. / Then you could read \"The Word for World is Forest\", \"The Left Hand of Darkness,\" [and] \"The Dispossessed,\" in any order. In \"Dispossessed\", the ansible gets invented; but they\u2019re using it in \"Left Hand\", which was written fifteen years earlier. Please do not try to explain this to me. I will not understand. / Then in the collection of stories \"A Fisherman of the Inland Sea\", the three last stories are Ekumenical, and we even finally find out a little about Hain, where it all began. The story suite \"Four Ways to Forgiveness\" is part of that universe, and so is the novel \"The Telling\". But I have to warn you that the planet Werel in \"Four Ways\" is not the planet Werel in \"Planet of Exile\". In between novels, I forget planets. Sorry. / \"The Eye of the Heron\" may or may not be set in the Hainish universe; it really doesn\u2019t matter. As for \"The Lathe of Heaven\" and \"Always Coming Home\", my Terran science fiction novels, they definitely don\u2019t exist in the same universe as the Hainish or Ekumenical books.\nUniverse of the stories.\nBackstory.\nHundreds of thousands of years ago, the people of Hain colonized a large number of worlds, including Earth, known as Terra, meaning that human beings did not evolve on Earth. Most of these were similar enough that humans from one world can pass as natives of another, but on some the old Hainish 'colonisers' used genetic engineering. At least one of the various species of \"Rocannon's World\" are the product of genetic engineering, as are the \"hilfs\" (\"highly intelligent life forms\") of Planet\u00a0S(whose story has not been told), and probably the androgynous humans of Gethen in \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". The Ekumen do not know whether the colonisers sought to adapt humans to varied worlds, were conducting various experiments, or had other reasons.\nHainish civilization subsequently collapsed, and the colony planets (including Earth) forgot that other human worlds existed. The Ekumen stories tell of the efforts to re-establish a civilization on a galactic scale through NAFAL (Nearly As Fast As Light) interstellar travel taking years to travel between stars (although only weeks or months from the viewpoint of the traveler because of time dilation), and through instantaneous interstellar communication using the ansible.\nThis seems to have happened in two phases: First, the League of All Worlds was formed, as an alliance of planets, mostly descended from colonization efforts from the planet Hain, uniting the \"nine known worlds\" \u2014 presumably along with new colonies. By the time of \"Rocannon's World\" it has grown but is also under threat from a distant enemy. In \"City of Illusions\" it is recalled as having been a league of some 80\u00a0worlds at the time it was destroyed by aliens called the Shing, who are uniquely able to lie in mindspeech. After the apparent overthrow of the Shing by the descendants of marooned Terrans and the inhabitants of Alterra / Werel who have succeeded in interbreeding (as related in \"Planet of Exile\") and are capable of detecting Shing lies, the alliance is eventually reconstructed.\nA second phase begins with \"The Left Hand of Darkness\". The 80\u00a0plus planets seem to have reunited as the \"Ekumen\" \u2013 a name derived from the Greek \"oikoumene\", meaning \"the inhabited world\", although characters occasionally refer to it as \"the Household\", which is in turn a reference to the Greek \"oikos\", a word which developed from the same root as \"oikoumene\". Unexplained references are made by the protagonist from Terra in \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" to a long-past \"Age of the Enemy\", which presumably refers to the time that the Shing controlled Terra, portrayed in \"City of Illusions\".\nPlanets.\nThe Ekumen (or the League of All Worlds, though that is also believed to be the previous planetary coalition, before some sort of galactic crisis) contains a very large number of planets and is continually exploring new ones. Genly Ai in \"The Left Hand of Darkness\" explains that there are 83 planets in the Ekumen, with Gethen a candidate for becoming the 84th. The process of reaching out to potential civilizations is a tedious and sometimes dangerous one.\nTechnology.\nSocieties tend to use sophisticated but unobtrusive technologies. Most notable is the ansible, an instant-communication device that keeps worlds in touch with each other.\nPhysical communication is by NAFAL (Nearly As Fast As Light) ships. The physics is never explained; the ship vanishes from where it was and reappears somewhere else many years later. The trip takes slightly longer than it would to cross the same distance at the speed of light, but ship-time is just a few hours for those on board. It cannot be used for trips within a solar system. Trips can begin or end close to a planet, but if used without a \"retemporalizer\", there are drastic physical effects at the end of long trips, at least according to the Shing, whose information may be suspect. It is also lethal if the traveler is pregnant.\n\"City of Illusions\" mentions automatic death-machines that work on the same principle as the ansible and can strike instantly at distant worlds. Such a device is clearly used in the events of \"Rocannon's World\". The weapons are not mentioned again in later books.\nChurten theory, as developed by the physicists of Anarres, should allow people to go instantly from solar system to solar system. It is a development of the work of Shevek, whose tale is told in \"The Dispossessed\". Shevek's work made the ansible possible\u2014it is mentioned in his tale that engineers decided they could build it once the correct theory was found. Churten theory offers a way to move people and spacecraft instantaneously, but there are side effects. These are described in three short stories, \"The Shobies' Story,\" \"Dancing to Ganam\", and \"Another Story, or, A Fisherman of the Inland Sea,\" all collected in \"A Fisherman of the Inland Sea\" (1994).\nThe ansible has been adopted by other science fiction and fantasy authors, such as Orson Scott Card, Elizabeth Moon, and Vernor Vinge.\nPost-technological worlds.\nThe ideas of post-technological societies and social and ecological collapse are in several of the stories. These are portrayed as the end result of the wrong kind of civilizations, i.e., competitive, capitalist, patriarchal, \"dynamic, aggressive, ecology-breaking cultures,\" while successful societies are close to the land, peaceful, non-authoritarian, non-competitive, static, communitarian, with the holistic outlook of Eastern religions. The Earth, called \"Terra\" in the Cycle, is mentioned as one of the failed civilizations.\nBiology.\nMost of the people in the tales have a common descent from the planet Hain, whose people settled many worlds. Some of them are genetically similar enough to produce children together. The unusual hairiness of the Cetians is mentioned in \"The Word for World Is Forest\" and \"The Dispossessed\". \"The Telling\" includes the detail that the people of Chiffewar are all bald.\nThere are some cases of ancient biological manipulation:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32042", "revid": "1234701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32042", "title": "UDP", "text": "UDP may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32043", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32043", "title": "University of Tulsa", "text": "Private university in Tulsa, Oklahoma, US\nThe University of Tulsa (TU) is a private research university in Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States. It has a historic affiliation with the Presbyterian Church, although it is now nondenominational, and the campus architectural style is predominantly Collegiate Gothic. The school traces its origin to the Presbyterian School for Indian Girls, which was established in 1882 in Muskogee, Oklahoma, then a town in Indian Territory, and which evolved into an institution of higher education named Henry Kendall College by 1894. The college moved to Tulsa, another town in the Creek Nation in 1904, before the state of Oklahoma was created. In 1920, Kendall College was renamed the University of Tulsa.\nThe University of Tulsa is classified among \"R2: Doctoral Universities \u2013 High research activity\". It manages the Gilcrease Museum, which includes one of the largest collections of American Western art and indigenous American artifacts in the world. TU also hosts the \"Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature\", founded by former TU professor and noted feminist critic Germaine Greer (now at the University of Cambridge).\nTU's athletic teams are collectively known as the Tulsa Golden Hurricane and compete in Division I of the NCAA as members of the American Athletic Conference (The American). The University of Tulsa is designated as a National Security Agency Center of Academic Excellence in both Information Assurance and Cyber Defense. The McDougall School of Petroleum Engineering is ranked 6th among petroleum engineering graduate schools and 10th among undergraduate PE schools by U.S. News &amp; World report.\nHistory.\nFrontier Origins.\nThe Presbyterian School for Indian Girls (also known as \"Minerva Home\") was founded in Muskogee, Indian Territory, in 1882 to offer a primary education to young women of the Creek Nation.\nIn 1894, the young school expanded to become Henry Kendall College, named in honor of Reverend Henry Kendall, secretary of the Presbyterian Board of Home Missions. The first president was William A. Caldwell, who served a brief two-year term, which ended in 1896.\nCaldwell was succeeded by William Robert King, a Presbyterian minister and co-founder of the college, who had come to Oklahoma from Tennessee, by way of the Union Theological Seminary in New York City (affiliated with Columbia University). Kendall College, while still in Muskogee, granted the first post-secondary degree in Oklahoma in June 1898. Under King, the college was moved from its original location in downtown Muskogee to a larger campus on lands donated by Creek Nation Chief Pleasant Porter.\nKendall College students, faculty and administrators were instrumental in efforts to get the State of Sequoyah recognized; they wrote most of the proposed constitution and designed the seal among other things.\nThe opening of the new campus coincided with the start of the tenure of the third president, A. Grant Evans. Over the next 10 years, Evans oversaw the struggling school's growth. In most years, class sizes remained small and although the academy, the attached elementary, middle, and high school was more successful; by the end of the 1906\u201307 year Kendall College had had only 27 collegiate graduates. At the request of the administration, the Synod of Indian Territory assumed control as trustees and began to look at alternatives for the future of the school. When the administration was approached by the comparatively smaller town of Tulsa and offered a chance to move, the decision was made to relocate.\nRelocation to Tulsa.\nThe Tulsa Commercial Club (a forerunner of the Tulsa Chamber of Commerce) decided to bid for the college. Club members who packaged a bid in 1907 to move the college to Tulsa included: B. Betters, H. O. McClure, L. N. Butts, W. L. North, James H. Hall (\"sic\"), Grant C. Stebbins, Rev. Charles W. Kerr, C. H. Nicholson. The offer included $100,000, 20 acres of real estate, and a guarantee for utilities and street car service.\nThe college opened to 35 students in September 1907, two months before Oklahoma became a state. These first students attended classes at the First Presbyterian Church until permanent buildings could be erected on the new campus. This became the start of higher education in Tulsa. Kendall Hall, the first building of the new school, was completed in 1908 and was quickly followed by two other buildings. All three buildings have since been demolished, with Kendall the last to be razed in 1972. The bell that once hung in the Kendall Building tower was saved and displayed in Bayless Plaza.\nThe Kendall College presidents during 1907\u20131919 were Arthur Grant Evans, Levi Harrison Beeler, Seth Reed Gordon, Frederick William Hawley, Ralph J. Lamb, Charles Evans, James G. McMurtry and Arthur L. Odell.\nIn 1918, the Methodist Church proposed building a college in Tulsa, using money donated by a Tulsa oilman Robert M. McFarlin. The proposed college was to be named McFarlin College. However, it was soon apparent that Tulsa could not yet support two competing schools. In 1920, Henry Kendall College merged with the proposed McFarlin College to become the University of Tulsa. The McFarlin Library of TU was named for the principal donor of the proposed college. The name of Henry Kendall has lived on to the present as the Kendall College of Arts and Sciences.\n20th century.\nThe University of Tulsa opened its School of Petroleum Engineering in 1928.\nThe Great Depression hit the university hard. By 1935, the school was about to close because of its poor financial condition. It had a debt of $250,000, enrollment had fallen to 300 students (including many who could not pay their tuition), the faculty was poorly paid and morale was low. It was then that the oil tycoon and TU-patron Waite Phillips offered the school presidency to Clarence Isaiah (\"Cy\") Pontius, a former investment banker. His primary focus would be to rescue the school's finances. A dean's council would take charge of academic issues.\nHowever, Pontius' accomplishments went beyond raising money. During his tenure, the following events occurred:\nAfter William G. Skelly died, his widow donated the Skelly Mansion, at the corner of 21st Street and Madison Avenue, to the University of Tulsa. The school sold the mansion and its furnishings to private owners in 1959. On July 5, 2012, the university announced that it would repurchase the house as a residence for its president. TU sold the property in 2021.\nIn 1958, Ben Graf Henneke, a scholar of theater and communications, became the first alumnus to hold the presidency of the University of Tulsa. During his tenure, the university established new doctoral programs, increased the proportion of faculty with doctorates, started new publications including \"Petroleum Abstracts\" and the \"James Joyce Quarterly\", developed a North Campus center for petroleum engineering research, and expanded many main campus facilities. He was succeeded by Eugene L. Swearingen, a Stanford University-trained economist and Oklahoma native who served on the National Finance Committee for the Jimmy Carter Presidential Campaign. Swearingen increased TU's endowment and expanded the footprint of its campus.\n21st century.\nIn 2004, anthropologist Steadman Upham joined the University of Tulsa as president, having served in faculty and leadership positions at the University of Oregon and Arizona State University. Within five years of his arrival, TU saw 13 major construction projects and renovations on campus, ranging from the construction of the Roxana Rozsa and Robert Eugene Lorton Performance Center to the overhaul of Keplinger Hall, and plans for seven more major projects finalized (despite the nationwide recession).\nThe university also launched the Oxley College of Health Sciences, in downtown Tulsa, named in recognition of a major gift from Tulsa's Oxley Foundation. In 2023, the unit was renamed the Oxley College of Health &amp; Natural Sciences. The university also partnered with the George Kaiser Family Foundation to temporarily house The Bob Dylan Archive at TU in 2016. Under Upham's leadership, the University of Tulsa assumed management of the famous Gilcrease Museum in northwest Tulsa.\nIn 2016, President Upham retired and was succeeded by Gerard Clancy, who previously served as a psychiatry professor and held leadership positions at the University of Iowa and the University of Oklahoma. About two and a half years into his presidency, in the spring of 2019, President Clancy and Provost Janet K. Levit announced a restructuring of academic programs at the university that would eliminate several academic programs. The plan was met with resistance from some faculty who believed it was formulated without adequate input from faculty. Although faculty members voted \"no confidence\" in the president and provost in November, the university's board of trustees publicly affirmed their support of the plan.\nIn January 2020, President Clancy informed the board that he needed to cut back on his activities because of unspecified medical issues. The board named Provost Levit as interim president of the school, effective in January 2020.\nFormer Congressman Brad R. Carson became president of the University of Tulsa on July 1, 2021.\nAcademics.\nThe University of Tulsa offers liberal arts, music, film, and professional programs, including engineering, English, computer science, natural sciences, social sciences, health sciences, business, law, and other disciplines.\nThe university has an undergraduate research program, evidenced by 45 students receiving Goldwater Scholarships since 1995. The Tulsa Undergraduate Research Challenge (TURC) allows undergraduates to conduct advanced research with the guidance of top TU professors.\nRankings.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2025 edition of \"Best Colleges\" ranked the University of Tulsa tied for 179th among \"national universities\" and tied at 90th for \"Best Value\".\nScholarship and fellowship recipients.\nTU students have won 67 Goldwater Scholarships, 5 Marshall Scholarships, 3 Rhodes Scholarships (9 Rhodes finalists), 28 Fulbright Scholarships, and numerous Department of Defense, National Science Foundation, and Morris K. Udall Fellowships.\nCampus.\nThe campus of the University of Tulsa centers on a wide, grassy, quad-like space known as Dietler Commons, formerly called \"The U.\" The predominant architectural style is English Gothic. Most of the buildings are constructed from tan and rose-colored Crab Orchard sandstone from Tennessee interspersed with stone quarried in Arkansas. Other materials include Bedford limestone from Indiana and slate quarried in Vermont. The university's campus borders Tulsa's Kendall Whittier neighborhood and is not far from Tulsa's downtown and midtown neighborhoods. The campus, in particular its football venue Skelly Field, is located on the historic U.S.\u00a066, America's \"Mother Road\" stretching from Chicago to Los Angeles.\nSkelly Field at H. A. Chapman Stadium.\nTulsa Golden Hurricane football has played home games at Skelly Field at H. A. Chapman Stadium since 1930.\nMuseums and libraries.\nMcFarlin Library: Resources and Notable Collections\nThe library's Department of Special Collections and University Archives houses over 12 million archival items and has over 1,000 collections on a wide-ranging array of topics including 20th-century British, Irish, and American literature, which includes the world's second-largest collection of materials by James Joyce. It also houses the papers of Nobel Prize winners V.S. Naipaul and Doris Lessing, as well as novelists and poets Jean Rhys, Eliot Bliss, David Plante, Anna Kavan, and Stevie Smith, just to name a few. In addition to these famous novelists, McFarlin Library houses the papers of Congresswoman Alice Mary Robertson, literary critic Richard Ellmann, comic book innovator E. Nelson Bridwell, Cherokee Principal Chief J.B. Milam, and writer/sexologist Edward Charles, among others. The Department of Special Collections also contains a vast collection of books on Native American history.\nPartnership with Gilcrease Museum.\nIn July 2008, the University of Tulsa took over management of Gilcrease Museum in a public-private partnership with the City of Tulsa. The museum has one of the largest collections of American Western art in the world (including famous works by Frederic Remington, Thomas Moran, and others) and houses growing collections of artifacts from Central and South America. The museum sits on in northwest Tulsa.\nThe Bob Dylan Archive.\nThe Bob Dylan Archive is a collection of documents and objects relating to iconic American singer-songwriter Bob Dylan (whose mentor was Oklahoman Woody Guthrie). It was announced on March 2, 2016, that the archive had been acquired by the George Kaiser Family Foundation (GKFF) and the University of Tulsa. The university has since relinquished ownership to GKFF.\nStudent body and student life.\nStudents at the University of Tulsa represent 47 states and over 79 foreign countries, of which 58% are Oklahoma residents. The most common countries of origin for TU international students are China, Saudi Arabia, Oman, India, and Canada.\nThe University of Tulsa is home to more than 150 student organizations, registered with and partially funded by the Student Government Association.\nDiversity and campus life.\nSeveral groups exist to support diversity on the University of Tulsa campus. There are at least 25 campus organizations existing to support and sustain a diverse campus community. In addition, TU hosts the Chevron Multicultural Resource Center, funded by a gift from the energy company, which hosts events and programming to promote diversity on campus.\nAlthough TU has historic ties to the Presbyterian Church, the university has long embraced religious diversity. In 2002, TU was home to the first mosque built on an American university campus. TU also hosts a chapter of Hillel International, an organization to support Jewish life on campus. The university also hosts several organizations reflecting different streams of Christian spiritual practice, including Protestant, Catholic, and Orthodox.\n2015 student speech controversy.\nIn February 2015, after the University of Tulsa suspended a student under its zero-tolerance policy for harassment for threatening and defamatory Facebook postings by his fianc\u00e9e against multiple faculty members and a female student, administrators attempted to discourage the campus newspaper from publishing information the university deemed \"confidential\". The controversy was picked up by two websites that claimed the administration used \"threats\" and \"intimidation\" to \"cover up\" their handling of the disciplinary issue. In January 2016, the former student filed a lawsuit against the university, claiming his dismissal was unfair and was a breach of the institution's commitment to due process. The incident earned the university a spot on the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE) 2016 \"10 Worst Colleges for Free Speech\". By 2023, however, the University of Tulsa had received a \"green light\" rating from the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression in recognition of the university's commitment to free speech.\nAthletics.\nTulsa's sports teams participate in NCAA Division I as a member of the American Athletic Conference (The American); its football team is part of the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS). Tulsa has the smallest undergraduate enrollment of any FBS school. TU has had a rivalry with both Rice University and the University of Houston. It also has two current rivalries with D-I schools that do not sponsor football\u2014an in-conference rivalry with Wichita State University, especially in men's basketball, and a crosstown rivalry, most prominently in basketball, with Summit League member Oral Roberts University.\nThe university's nickname is the Golden Hurricane (it was originally the Golden Tornadoes). The Sound of the Golden Hurricane marching band plays at all home football and basketball games as well as traveling to championships in support of the Golden Hurricane. Tulsa has won six national championships (three NCAA): four in women's golf and two in men's basketball. The University of Tulsa currently fields a varsity team in seven men's sports and ten women's sports.\nSymbols.\nThe school's colors are old gold (PMS 7502), royal blue (PMS 661C), and crimson (PMS 186).\nThe university's original motto was, in full: \"Faith, Wisdom, Service: For Christ, For State.\"\nMedia.\nThe \"University of Tulsa Collegian\" is the long-standing independent and student-run newspaper on campus.\nThe following scholarly journals are published by the university:\nIn 2003 Tulsa joined the efforts of Brown University on the Modernist Journals Project, an online archive of early 20th-century periodicals. Tulsa has contributed various modernist texts from McFarlin Library's Special Collections to the project's website.\nSean Latham, then-editor of the \"James Joyce Quarterly\", brought the 2003 North American James Joyce Conference to the University of Tulsa.\nThe university is the owner of the Tulsa region\u2019s National Public Radio station, KWGS, as well as KWTU, which airs a classical music format.\nNotable people.\nTU students have won 67 Goldwater Scholarships, 5 Marshall Scholarships, 3 Rhodes Scholarships (9 Rhodes finalists), 28 Fulbright Scholarships, and numerous Department of Defense, National Science Foundation, and Morris K. Udall Fellowships.\nAlumni.\nThe University of Tulsa counts a number of distinguished individuals among its alumni, including current Walmart CEO Doug McMillon, New York School poet Ted Berrigan, \"The Outsiders\" author S.E. Hinton, voicemail inventor Gordon Matthews, \"Golden Girls\" actress Rue McClanahan, actor Peter McRobbie, roboticist and author Daniel H. Wilson, radio legend Paul Harvey, Kuwaiti Petroleum Company CEO Hani Abdulaziz Al Hussein, TV personality Dr. Phil McGraw (who played football for TU but did not graduate), Cherokee Nation Chief Chad \"Corntassel\" Smith, botanist and ecologist Harriet George Barclay, U.S. Congressman and Pro Football Hall of Fame wide receiver Steve Largent, NBA basketball player Steve Bracey, and Brazilian billionaire businessman Ermirio Pereira de Moraes; HE Suhail Al Mazroui, Minister of Energy &amp; Industry for the United Arab Emirates, member of the Supreme Petroleum Council, and sits on the executive committee and other sections of Mubadala Investment Company.\nFaculty.\nSeveral notable individuals have served on the University of Tulsa's faculty over the years. Current notable faculty members include psychologist Robert Hogan, political scientist Robert Donaldson, Catholic philosopher F. Russell Hittinger, computer scientist Sujeet Shenoi, and former U.S. Congressman Brad Carson. Noted artist Adah Robinson was the founder and first chairperson of the university's Department of Art. Several renowned literary figures and critics have served on Tulsa's faculty, including feminist pioneer Germaine Greer, Booker-prize winning novelist Paul Scott, author and critic Darcy O'Brien, and the famous Russian poet and dissident intellectual Yevgeny Yevtushenko until he died in 2017. Other notable former faculty members include legal scholars Paul Finkelman and Larry Cat\u00e1 Backer, psychologist Brent Roberts, painter Alexandre Hogue, Catholic Bishop Daniel Henry Mueggenborg, and others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32044", "revid": "44407740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32044", "title": "Libertarian Party (United States)", "text": "American political party\nThe Libertarian Party (LP) is a political party in the United States. It promotes civil liberties, non-interventionism, \"laissez-faire\" capitalism, and limiting the size and scope of government. The world's first explicitly libertarian party, it was conceived in August 1971 at meetings in the home of David Nolan in Westminster, Colorado, and was officially formed on December 11, 1971, in Colorado Springs. The organizers of the party drew inspiration from the works and ideas of the prominent Austrian school economist Murray Rothbard. The founding of the party was prompted in part due to concerns about the Nixon administration's wage and price controls, the Vietnam War, conscription, and the introduction of fiat money.\nThe party generally supports \"personal liberty\" and fiscal conservatism, as compared to the Democratic Party's modern liberalism and progressivism and the Republican Party's social conservatism and right-wing populism. Gary Johnson, the party's presidential nominee in 2012 and 2016, claims that the Libertarian Party is more socially liberal than Democrats, and more fiscally conservative than Republicans. Its fiscal policy positions include lowering taxes and abolishing the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), decreasing the national debt, allowing people to opt out of Social Security, and eliminating the welfare state, in part by utilizing private charities. Its social policy positions include ending the prohibition of illegal drugs, advocating criminal justice reform, supporting same-sex marriage, ending capital punishment, and supporting the right to keep and bear arms.\nAs of \u00a02024,[ [update]] it is the third-largest political party in the United States by voter registration. In the 2020 election, the Libertarians gained a state legislative seat in the Wyoming House of Representatives, the first such win for the party since 2000. The first and only Libertarian in the United States Congress was Justin Amash, who joined the Libertarian Party in 2020 and left the U.S. House of Representatives in 2021 after choosing not to seek re-election.\nIn 2022, the Mises Caucus (LPMC) became the dominant faction on the Libertarian National Committee, leading to internal conflicts and significant policy changes, specifically regarding immigration and abortion. Some classical liberalism-minded dissidents split from the Libertarian Party to form the Liberal Party USA, while others formed the Classical Liberal Caucus.\nHistory.\nThe first Libertarian National Convention was held in June 1972. In 1978, Dick Randolph of Alaska became the first elected Libertarian state legislator. Following the 1980 federal elections, the Libertarian Party assumed the title of being the third-largest party for the first time after the American Independent Party and the Conservative Party of New York (the other largest minor parties at the time) continued to decline. In 1994, over 40 Libertarians were elected or appointed which was a record for the party at that time. 1995 saw a soaring membership and voter registration for the party. In 1996, the Libertarian Party became the first third party to earn ballot status in all 50 states two presidential elections in a row. By the end of 2009, 146 Libertarians were holding elected offices.\nTonie Nathan, running as the Libertarian Party's vice presidential candidate in the 1972 presidential election with John Hospers as the presidential candidate, was the first female candidate in the United States to receive an electoral vote.\nThe 2012 election Libertarian Party presidential candidate, former New Mexico Governor Gary Johnson, and his running mate, former judge Jim Gray, received the highest number of votes\u2014more than 1.2 million\u2014of any Libertarian presidential candidate at the time. He was renominated for president in 2016, this time choosing former Massachusetts Governor William Weld as his running mate. Johnson/Weld shattered the Libertarian record for a presidential ticket, earning over 4.4 million votes. Both Johnson and Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein received significantly more news coverage in 2016 than third-party candidates usually get, with polls showing both candidates potentially increasing their support over the last election, especially among younger voters.\nThe Libertarian Party has had significant electoral success in the context of state legislatures and other local offices. Libertarians won four elections to the Alaska House of Representatives between 1978 and 1984 and another four to the New Hampshire General Court in 1992. Neil Randall, a Libertarian, won the election to the Vermont House of Representatives in 1998 running on both the Libertarian and Republican lines. In 2000, Steve Vaillancourt won election to the New Hampshire General Court running on the Libertarian ballot line. Rhode Island State Representative Daniel P. Gordon was expelled from the Republicans and joined the Libertarian Party in 2011.\nIn July 2016 and June 2017, the Libertarians tied their 1992 peak of four legislators when four state legislators from four different states left the Republican Party to join the Libertarian Party: Nevada Assemblyman John Moore in January, Nebraska Senator Laura Ebke (although the Nebraska Legislature is officially non-partisan) and New Hampshire Representative Max Abramson in May and Utah Senator Mark B. Madsen in July. In the 2016 election cycle, Madsen and Abramson did not run for re-election to their respective offices while Moore lost his race after the Libertarian Party officially censured him over his support of taxpayer stadium funding. Ebke was not up for re-election in 2016. New Hampshire Representative Caleb Q. Dyer changed party affiliation to the Libertarian Party from the Republican Party in February 2017. New Hampshire Representative Joseph Stallcop changed party affiliation to the Libertarian Party from the Democratic Party in May 2017. New Hampshire State Legislator Brandon Phinney joined with the Libertarian Party from the Republican Party in June 2017, the third to do so in 2017 and matching their 1992 and 2016 peaks of sitting Libertarian state legislators.\nIn January 2018, sitting New Mexico Commissioner of Public Lands Aubrey Dunn Jr. changed party affiliation from Republican to the Libertarian Party, becoming the first Libertarian statewide officeholder in history.\nIn April 2020, Representative Justin Amash of Michigan became the first Libertarian member of Congress after leaving the Republican Party and spending time as an independent. In June 2020, Amash, with Ayanna Pressley of the Democratic Party, introduced the Ending Qualified Immunity Act in response to the murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer. The bill was the first to gain support of members from the Democratic, Republican and Libertarian parties in the history of the United States Congress.\nNotable Libertarian local officeholders in the 2020s include Vermont Representative Jarrod E. Sammis, Mayor of Wichita Lily Wu, and Mayor of Cedar Falls Rob Green.\nDallas Accord.\nThe Dallas Accord is an implicit agreement that was made at the 1974 Libertarian National Convention as a compromise between the party's larger minarchist and smaller anarcho-capitalist factions by adopting a platform that explicitly did not say whether it was desirable for the state to exist.\nThe purpose of this agreement was to make the Libertarian Party a \"big tent\" that would welcome more ideologically diverse groups of people interested in reducing the size and scope of government. Consequently, the 1974 platform included a \"Statement of Principles\" which focused on statements arguing for getting government out of various activities, and used phrases such as \"where governments exist they must not violate the rights of any individual.\" The previous version of the Statement of Principles adopted at the party's first convention in 1972, in contrast, affirmatively endorsed the minarchist perspective with statements such as \"Since government has only one legitimate function, the protection of individual rights...\" It was agreed that the topic of anarchism would not even be on the table for discussion until a limited government was achieved.\nDuring the 2006 Libertarian National Convention, delegates deleted a large portion of the very detailed platform. The phrase \"Government exists to protect the rights of every individual including life, liberty and property\" was added. This development was described as the \"Portland Massacre\" by its opponents. Some took this as meaning the Dallas Accord was dead. Confusion resulted in the 2000s on whether the Dallas Accord remained in effect, and if so whether it should, or what limits it places on the party's public statements or candidates.\n2020s.\nAt the 2022 Libertarian National Convention, members of the Mises Caucus, a paleolibertarian group affiliated with the beliefs of Ron Paul successfully staged a takeover of the Party, with over two-thirds of delegates becoming members of the Caucus, shifting the party in a right-ward direction. The caucus successfully swept leadership positions, including electing Angela McArdle as chairwomen and Joshua Smith as vice-chairman. The 2022 convention had an unusually high number of delegates, with the last recorded number for an off-election year convention in 2006 being just 300 delegates. The 2022 convention by contrast saw over 1,000 delegates. After the takeover, non-Mises affiliated members walked out, criticizing the group for lacking in libertarian orthodoxy, as well as condemning several racist statements that members of the Caucus had made in the past. More ardent members of the party started to splinter, with Pennsylvania's split resulting in the formation of the Keystone Party of Pennsylvania.\nFollowing changes to the party's official core platform by new leadership, several other state-level affiliated parties disaffiliated from the national Party or dissolved themselves. The New Mexico Libertarian Party further argued the Mises Caucus sweep was illegal, citing bylaws which was later amended. After the Libertarian Party of Virginia reformed, the dissidents formed a splinter group, the Virginia Classical Liberal Party. A similar situation occurred regarding the Libertarian Party of Massachusetts. The Mises Caucus furthermore blocked the disaffiliation of the New Hampshire party.\nThe Association of Liberty State Parties was officially formed on December 3, 2022 as a national party committee between the Massachusetts, New Mexico, and New Mexico parties. The Association formally rebranded to Liberal Party USA in February 2024.\nIn\u00a0late 2023, Party Chair Angela McArdle, after being contacted by former acting director of national intelligence Richard Grenell, met with Donald Trump to consult on how Trump could win over the Libertarian vote. McArdle suggested the pardon of Ross Ulbricht, who was sentenced to life in prison in 2015 for his role in the marketplace Silk Road, which was achieved after the inauguration of Donald Trump. Five months later, Donald Trump was invited to the Libertarian Party's 2024 National Convention by McArdle, where he promised to include a libertarian in the cabinet and stated that the Libertarians should make him the presidential nominee. Trump was booed and heckled, including cries of \u201cBullshit!\u201d and \u201cFuck you!\u201d. Subsequently, the convention nominated \u201carmed and gay\u201d former senate candidate Chase Oliver for president, who defeated paleolibertarian Michael Rectenwald. Oliver's nomination was denounced by the state affiliates in Montana, Colorado, New Hampshire, and Idaho.\nChair Angela McArdle, after claims of improper party fund spending directed at her partner, stepped down from her position as chair of the Libertarian Party National Committee in January 2025. Mises Caucus founder Michael Heise was defeated by Steven Nekhaila in a 9\u20136 vote, who promised commitments to a policy of emphasizing small local races. Six national committee members endorsed by the Mises Caucus defected to Nekhaila, cementing his victory. Classical Liberal Caucus member Paul Darr was elected as vice-chairman.\nThe Libertarian Party of New Hampshire was censured in September 2025 by the National Committee citing \"despicable conduct\", and was invited to disaffiliate and cease its use of the Libertarian Party name.\nName and symbols.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1972, \"Libertarian Party\" was chosen as the party's name, selected over \"New Liberty Party\". The first official slogan of the Libertarian Party was \"There ain't no such thing as a free lunch\" (abbreviated \"TANSTAAFL\"), a phrase popularized by Robert A. Heinlein in his 1966 novel \"The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress\", sometimes dubbed \"a manifesto for a libertarian revolution\". The slogan of the party has since become \"The Party of Principle\".\nAlso in 1972, the \"Libersign\"\u2014an arrow angling upward through the abbreviation \"TANSTAAFL\"\u2014was adopted as a party symbol. By the end of the decade, this was replaced with the Lady Liberty until 2015, with the adoption of the \"Torch Eagle\" logo.\nIn 1975 the Free Libertarian Party of New York choose the porcupine as their mascot. In the 1990s, other state Libertarian parties adopted the Liberty Penguin (\"LP\") as their official mascot. Over the next few decades the porcupine became the consensus animal mascot of the Libertarian Party.\nStructure and composition.\nThe Libertarian Party is democratically governed by its members, with state affiliate parties each holding annual or biennial conventions at which delegates are elected to attend the party's biennial national convention. National convention delegates vote on changes to the party's national platform and bylaws and elect officers and \"at-large\" representatives to the party's National Committee. The National Committee also has \"regional representatives\", some of whom are appointed by delegate caucuses at the national convention whereas others are appointed by the chairpersons of LP state affiliate chapters within a region.\nNational committee.\nThe Libertarian National Committee (LNC) is a 27-member body including alternates, or 17 voting members. Since February 2, 2025, the chair is currently Steven Nekhaila of Florida, who was elected by the LNC in a special election.\nState chapters.\nThe Libertarian Party is organized in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Each state affiliate has a governing committee, usually consisting of statewide officers elected by state party members and regional representation of one kind or another. Similarly, county, town, city and ward committees, where organized, generally consist of members elected at the local level. State and local committees often coordinate campaign activities within their jurisdiction, oversee local conventions and in some cases primaries or caucuses, and may have a role in nominating candidates for elected office under state law.\nMembership.\nSince the Libertarian Party's inception, individuals have been able to join the party as voting members by signing their agreement with the organization's non-aggression pledge, which states that the signer does not advocate the initiation of force to achieve political or social goals. During the mid-1980s and into the early 1990s, this membership category was called an \"instant\" membership, but these are referred to as \"signature members\". People joining the party are also asked to pay dues, which are on a sliding scale starting at $25 per year. Lifetime membership is granted with a $1,500 donation in one calendar year. Dues-paying members receive a subscription to the party's national newspaper, \"LP News\". Since 2006, membership in the party's state affiliates has been separate from membership in the national party, with each state chapter maintaining its own membership rolls.\nMost rights to participate in the governance of the party are limited to \"bylaws-sustaining members\" who have either purchased a lifetime membership or donated at least $25 within the past year. Most state parties maintain separate membership, which may be tied to either payment of dues to the state party or voter registration as a Libertarian, depending on the state's election laws.\nMembership trends.\nOver the past decade, membership in the Libertarian Party has experienced notable growth. According to reported figures, the party's membership increased by approximately 92% between 2008 and 2018. This growth reflects broader trends in political engagement among voters seeking alternatives to the two major parties.\nThe increase in membership has been accompanied by a rise in party activity at both local and national levels, including participation in elections, conventions, and grassroots organizing efforts. While the party remains smaller than the Democratic and Republican parties, its expanding membership base demonstrates sustained interest in libertarian political principles.\nPlatform.\nThe preamble outlines the party's goals: \"As Libertarians, we seek a world of liberty; a world in which all individuals are sovereign over their own lives and no one is forced to sacrifice his or her values for the benefit of others. [...] Our goal is nothing more nor less than a world set free in our lifetime, and it is to this end that we take these stands.\"\nThe platform emphasizes individual liberty in personal and economic affairs, avoidance of \"foreign entanglements\" and military and economic intervention in other nations' affairs, and free trade and migration. The party opposes gun control measures that restrict the rights of civilians to keep and bear arms. It calls for Constitutional limitations on government as well as the elimination of most state functions. It includes a \"Self-determination\" section which quotes from the Declaration of Independence and reads: \"Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of individual liberty, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to agree to such new governance as to them shall seem most likely to protect their liberty.\"\nThe party favors minimally regulated markets, a less powerful federal government, strong civil liberties (including LGBT rights, with the party supporting same-sex marriage), the liberalization of drug laws, separation of church and state, open immigration, non-interventionism and neutrality in diplomatic relations, free trade and free movement to all foreign countries and a more representative republic. In 2018, the Libertarian Party became the first in the United States to call for the decriminalization of sex work. Since 2022, the party has no official stance on abortion. Before this, the party's stance was ambiguous, supporting the prerogative of individual politicians and voters to vote their conscience, but \"de facto\" pro-choice since it called for government to stay out of the matter.\nThe Statement of Principles was written by John Hospers. The Libertarian Party's bylaws specify that a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448ths supermajority of delegates is required to change the Statement of Principles. Any proposed platform plank found by the Judicial Committee to conflict with the Statement requires approval by a three-fourths supermajority of delegates. Early platform debates included at the second convention whether to support tax resistance and at the 1974 convention whether to support anarchism. In both cases, a compromise was reached.\nSize and influence.\nInfluence.\nThe Libertarian Party has attracted influential politicians who attempt to sway the party's voting base. In May 2024, Donald Trump spoke at the Libertarian Party's convention in Washington D.C. with his speech focusing on libertarian issues such as his stances on anti-war policies, Bitcoin, and First and Second Amendment rights. This was the first time a current or former U.S. president had spoken at a Libertarian Party convention.\nPresidential candidate performance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe first Libertarian presidential candidate, John Hospers, received one electoral vote in 1972 when Roger MacBride, a Virginia Republican faithless elector pledged to Richard Nixon, cast his ballot for the Libertarian ticket. His vote for Theodora (\"Tonie\") Nathan as vice president was the first electoral college vote ever to be cast for a woman in a United States presidential election. MacBride became the Libertarian presidential nominee himself in 1976. This was the last time that the Libertarian Party won an electoral vote until 44 years later, in the 2016 presidential election, when Texas Republican faithless elector Bill Greene, who was pledged to cast his vote for Donald Trump, instead cast his vote for Libertarian Party member, 1988 presidential nominee, and former Republican representative Ron Paul for president.\nDuring the 2016 presidential election, Gary Johnson and vice presidential candidate Bill Weld received a record percentage of 3.3% of the popular vote (4,489,233 votes), getting 9.3% in New Mexico, where Johnson had previously been elected governor. In the 2012 presidential election, Johnson and running mate Jim Gray received 1,275,821 votes (1.0%).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Detailed presidential performance\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32045", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32045", "title": "University of Sussex", "text": "University in Brighton and Hove, England\nThe University of Sussex is a public research university located in Falmer, East Sussex, England. It lies mostly within the city boundaries of Brighton and Hove. Its large campus site is surrounded by the South Downs National Park, and provides convenient access to central Brighton away. The university received its royal charter in August 1961, the first of what later was called the plate glass university generation.\nMore than a third of its students are enrolled in postgraduate programmes and approximately a third of staff are from outside the United Kingdom. Sussex has a diverse community of nearly 20,000 students, with around one in three being foreign students, and over 1,000 academics, representing over 140 different nationalities. The annual income of the institution for 2023\u201324 was \u00a3379.6\u00a0million of which \u00a339.9 million was from research grants and contracts, with an expenditure of \u00a3291.3\u00a0million.&lt;ref name=\"Sussex Financial Statement 23/24\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSussex counts five Nobel Prize winners, 15 Fellows of the Royal Society, 10 Fellows of the British Academy, 24 fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences and a winner of the Crafoord Prize among its faculty. By 2011, many of its faculty members had also received the Royal Society of Literature Prize, the Order of the British Empire and the Bancroft Prize. Alumni include heads of states, diplomats, politicians, eminent scientists and activists.\nHistory.\n20th century.\nIn an effort to establish a university to serve Sussex, a public meeting was held in December 1911 at the Royal Pavilion in Brighton to discover ways to fund the construction of a university; the project was halted by World War I, and the money raised was used instead for books for the Municipal Technical College.\nThe idea was revived in the 1950s, and in June 1958 the government approved the corporation's scheme for a university at Brighton, to be the first of a new generation of what came to be known as plate glass universities. The university was established as a company in 1959, with a Royal Charter being granted on 16 August 1961. This was the first university to be established in the UK since the Second World War, apart from Keele University. The university's organisation broke new ground in seeing the campus divided into Schools of Study, with students able to benefit from a multidisciplinary teaching environment. Sussex would emphasise cross-disciplinary activity, so that students would emerge from the university with a range of background or 'contextual' knowledge to complement their specialist 'core' skills in a particular subject area. For example, arts students spent their first year taking sciences while science students took arts.This experimental interdisciplinary educational model was famously described by Professor Asa Briggs as pioneering \"a new map of learning\".\nThe university grew from 52 students in 1961\u201362 to 3,200 in 1967\u201368. After starting at Knoyle Hall in Brighton, the Falmer campus was gradually built with Falmer House opening in 1962. The campus was praised as gorgeously modernist and groundbreaking, receiving numerous awards. The student union, as is typical, organised events and concerts, bringing in acts like Pink Floyd, Jimi Hendrix and Chuck Berry to perform at the University Common Room.\nAcademically, Sussex was home to figures such as Asa Lord Briggs, Helmut Pappe, Gillian Rose, Christopher Freeman, Norman MacKenzie, Jennifer Platt and Tom Bottomore. In its first years, the university attracted a number of renowned academics such as Sir John Cornforth, John Maynard Smith, Martin Wight, David Daiches, Roger Blin-Stoyle and Colin Eaborn. Similarly, renowned scholars like Marcus Cunliffe, Gabriel Josipovici, Quentin Bell, Dame Helen Wallace, Stuart Sutherland and Marie Jahoda also became central figures at the university and founded many of its current departments. Additionally, a number of initiatives at the university were started at this time, such as the Subaltern Studies Group, founded by Ranajit Guha who was Reader in History at Sussex between 1962 and 1981.\nIn the late 1960s, the United Nations asked for science policy recommendations from a team of renowned academics at Sussex. The ensuing report became known as the Sussex Manifesto.\nSussex came to be identified with student radicalism. In 1973, a group of students prevented United States government adviser Samuel P. Huntington from giving a speech on campus, because of his involvement in the Vietnam War. Similarly, when the spokesperson for the US embassy, Robert Beers, visited to give a talk to students entitled 'Vietnam in depth' three students were waiting outside Falmer House and threw a bucket of red paint over the diplomat as he was leaving.\nIn both 1967 and 1969, Sussex won the television quiz \"University Challenge\".\nIn 1980, Sussex edged out the University of Oxford to become the university with the highest income from research grants and contracts.\n21st century.\nIn an attempt to appeal to a modern audience, the university chose in 2004 to cease using its coat of arms and to replace it with the \"US\" logo.\nIn 2011, Sussex celebrated its 50th anniversary and saw the production of a number of works including a book on the university's history and an oral history and photography project. The university launched its first major fundraising campaign, Making the Future, and gathered over \u00a351.3\u00a0million.\nIn March 2011, a sex trafficking ring, involving one of the university's Park Village accommodation flats, was uncovered after a university building manager received an email advertising sex services, eventually leading to the conviction of a British woman and 4 Hungarian men for blackmailing foreign women into working in illegal brothels across the country.\nThe university underwent a number of changes with the Sussex Strategic Plan 2009\u20132015, including the introduction of new academic courses, the opening of new research centres, the renovation and refurbishment of a number of its schools and buildings as well as the ongoing expansion of its student housing facilities.\nIn 2018, the university moved all of its investments out of fossil fuels (known as fossil fuel divestment) after a four-year student union run campaign.\nIn October 2021 a student campaign called for Kathleen Stock's dismissal. In October 2021, the university's vice-chancellor Professor Adam Tickell gave his support to Stock who has been accused of transphobia. \"The Times\" reported students have called for Stock's dismissal and claimed that she has been victimised. Following Tickell's statement, the Sussex branch of the University and College Union (UCU) called for an investigation into \"institutional transphobia\" at the University of Sussex. Students have accused the university management of being \"anti-student and pro-transphobia\". Taiwo Owatemi, the Shadow Minister for Women and Equalities, called UCU's statement \"strong and principled\".\nIn 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Sussex was one of few universities that returned to real-world teaching. Most lectures at other universities chose to remain online-only.\nIn March 2025, Sussex was fined \u00a3585,000 by the Office for Students (OfS), which said it had failed to uphold freedom of speech in its trans and non-binary equality policy statement passed in 2018. The policy stated that course materials should \"positively represent trans people\" and that \"transphobic propaganda\" would not be tolerated. The OfS gave the case of Kathleen Stock as an example of the \"chilling effect\" this had on expression of lawful views. Professor Sasha Roseneil, the university\u2019s vice chancellor claimed \"the way the OfS has conducted this investigation has been completely unacceptable, its findings are egregious and concocted, and the fine that is being imposed on Sussex is wholly disproportionate.\" The university initially said that it will legally challenge the penalty in the High Court but, as of November 2025 is yet to do so.\nCampus.\nThe University of Sussex is situated near the city of Brighton and Hove, next to the Stanmer Park reserve, and extends into the Lewes District in its eastern fringe. The closest train station is Falmer railway station, located at about nine minutes from Brighton station. The campus is also close to the medieval town of Lewes and is approximately an hour away from London. Located within the South Downs National Park, it is the only English university existing in a National Park.\nThe campus, designed by Sir Basil Spence, is next to the village of Falmer but mostly within the city boundaries of Brighton and Hove. It is close to the South Downs, which influenced Spence's design of the campus. In 1959, the Basil Spence and Partners company began planning and designing the campus, to be built over a 15-year period. In 1971, 17 buildings had been designed and built winning numerous awards including a medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects and a Civic Trust award. Spence expressed his awe at the beauty of the surrounding region and designed the campus as a stream of low buildings so as not to disturb the natural scenery around. Brick was chosen throughout as it was the dominant material used across Sussex. As the campus developed, Spence connected the buildings by a series of 'green, interlocking courtyards that he felt created a sense of enclosure'.\nThe campus is self-contained, with facilities including eights cafes/restaurants, a post office, a Co-op Food store, a market, a bank, a pharmacy, a health centre (including a dentist) and childcare facilities. Spence's designs were appreciated by architects; many of the campus buildings won awards. A number of features define these buildings, including the materials used and the fact that many of them have planted and tree-filled courtyards. The gatehouse-inspired Falmer House won a bronze medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects. In 1993, the buildings which made up the core of Spence's designs were given listed building status, with Falmer House being awarded the highest designation, Grade 1, as a building of \"exceptional interest\". A number of the original buildings are now Grade II listed buildings.\nThe Meeting House at the University of Sussex is a striking circular chapel designed by Spence and completed in 1966. Built from patterned brick with a dramatic, light-filled interior, it serves as a multi-faith space for worship, reflection, and events. Its distinctive modernist design makes it a landmark on the university\u2019s campus. In 1969 it won the Civic Trust award and was listed in 1993 alongside other buildings on the campus. Inside, adorning the organ loft, is a large, colourful tapestry designed by John Piper commissioned in 1976 to celebrate 10 years since the building was completed. It was inspired by the University\u2019s motto \u2018Be still, and know\u2019, which is taken from Psalm 46. Its colours echo the honeycomb of coloured glass panes.\nSussex laid claim to being the \"only English university located entirely within a designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty\". It is now entirely surrounded by the newly founded South Downs National Park.\nThe Gardner Arts Centre, another of Basil Spence's designs, was opened in 1969 as the first university campus arts centre. It had a 480-seat purpose-built theatre, a visual art gallery and studio space, and was frequently used for theatre and dance as well as showing a range of films on a modern cinema screen. The Centre closed in the summer of 2007: withdrawal of funding and the cost of renovating the building were given as the key reasons. Following an extensive refurbishment, the Centre reopened as the Attenborough Centre for the Creative Arts (ACCA) in the autumn of 2015, and a public performance programme started in Spring 2016. The centre is now a national arts and performance hub hosting various kinds of performances year-round.\nThe campus has facilities such as the Genome Damage and Stability Centre; the medical imaging equipment at the Brighton and Sussex Medical School (BSMS); and the university's Library, until 2013 the home of the Mass Observation Archive, which relocated to The Keep, a purpose-built archive facility nearby.\nLibrary.\nThe university's main library is at the centre of its campus. It was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 13 November 1964. The Royal Literary fund office is based at the Library, providing support for students around academic writing. The Library also houses a research support centre and a research hive for PhD students and research staff. There is also a Skills Hub, training facilities, a support centre, a caf\u00e9 and a Careers and Employability Centre.\nThere are also smaller libraries within individual schools and research centres, as well as The Keep.\nThe university holds a number of acclaimed collections and archives, mostly related to twentieth-century literary, political and cultural history. Collections include original manuscripts and first editions by Virginia Woolf, Jane Austen and Rudyard Kipling as well as The New Statesman Archive and the Mass-Observation Archive.\nOrganisation and administration.\nSchools of Studies.\nThe university was founded with the unusual structure of \"Schools of Study\" (ubiquitously abbreviated to \"schools\") rather than traditional university departments within arts and science faculties.\nIn the early 1990s, the university promoted the system by claiming \"[c]lusters of faculty [come] together within schools to pursue new areas of intellectual enquiry. The schools also foster broader intellectual links. \"Physics with Management Studies, Science and Engineering with European Studies, Economics with Mathematics\" all reach beyond conventional Arts/Science divisions.\" By this time the original schools had been developed somewhat and were:\nThere was also the Institute of Development Studies \"(IDS)\". This is still located on Sussex's campus, but is now a separate institution.\nIn 2001, as the university celebrated its 40th anniversary, the then Vice-Chancellor Alasdair Smith proposed major changes to the curriculum across the \"Arts schools\", and the senate agreed to structural changes which would create two Arts schools and a \"Sussex Institute\" in place of the five schools then in place. Corresponding changes would be made in Sciences.\nThe changes were finally implemented in September 2003. After discussion in senate and the schools, disciplinary departments which had been located across the different schools, were located firmly within one school, and undergraduates were offered straightforward degree subjects. The multi-disciplinarity provided by the school courses was now to be achieved through elective courses from other departments and schools.\nIn 2009 the university adopted a new organisational structure. The term \"Schools of Studies\" was retained, but each was headed by a \"Head of School\" rather than the traditional \"Dean\".\nIn 2020 the School of English, School of History, Art History and Philosophy, and School of Media, Film and Music were merged to create the School of Media, Arts and Humanities.\nThe schools as of 2020 are listed below.\nThe term \"department\" has been retained in some cases, where a school contains separate disciplines.\nNone of these changes have affected the Brighton and Sussex Medical School (BSMS).\nDoctoral School.\nThe Doctoral School supports PhD student and Post-docs across all schools and departments and supports PhD students and Post-Docs through the Sussex Research hive, the Researcher Development Program, funding schemes as well as its own partnerships.\nChancellors and Vice-Chancellors.\nThe current and fifth Chancellor of the university is Sanjeev Bhaskar, who succeeded Lord Attenborough in 2009.\nThe university has had nine Vice-Chancellors:\nFinances.\nIn the financial year ending 31 July 2024, Sussex had a total income of \u00a3379.6\u00a0million (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3380.1\u00a0million) and total expenditure of \u00a3291.3\u00a0million (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3345.1\u00a0million). Key sources of income included \u00a3224.6\u00a0million from tuition fees and education contracts (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3222.2\u00a0million), \u00a337.3\u00a0million from funding body grants (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a339.9\u00a0million), \u00a339.9\u00a0million from research grants and contracts (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a342\u00a0million), \u00a37.8\u00a0million from investment income (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a37.4\u00a0million) and \u00a34\u00a0million from donations and endowments (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a35.3\u00a0million).\nAt year end, Sussex had endowments of \u00a321.1\u00a0million (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a316.4\u00a0million) and total net assets of \u00a3505.5\u00a0million (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3414.7\u00a0million).\nAcademic profile.\nThe university, a member of the Erasmus charter, offers over 400 Undergraduate programs, over 210 Postgraduate taught programs and over 70 PhD programs. It is research-led, with around 1,000 teaching and research staff of which around 300 are research-only staff. Additionally, there are over 1200 PhD students at the university distributed across the different Schools. The university fees are at \u00a39,250 per year for home fee status undergraduates, the highest a university can charge in the United Kingdom.\nReputation and rankings.\nThe University of Sussex was ranked 30th in the UK and 201 - 250th in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2024. \"The Times/Sunday Times\" placed the university 45th nationally in 2026. The university was ranked 43rd in the UK by the 2026 Complete University Guide. The university was ranked 278th in the world according to the QS World University Rankings 2026.\nThe Complete University guide 2018 ranked Sussex as sixth in the UK for Graduate prospects and 1st in the South East (graduates getting into employment or further study immediately after graduation).\nIn subject rankings, it was ranked 1st in the world for development studies in 2021. Ranked 29th in the world in the 2018 Times Higher Education World University Rankings for the social sciences, 11th in Europe and 7th nationally. It ranked as 49th in the world for Law and 48th for Business and Economics. In the same year, it ranked 4th in the UK for Sociology, 7th for Geography, 4th for Politics and International Relations, 10th for Psychology and 2nd for Communication and Media Studies by the Times Higher Education rankings by subject.\nThe university also ranked in the top 100 in the world for the social sciences in the CWTS Leiden Ranking 2016 and in the top 150 in the world for Social Sciences in the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2016 and 90th best in the world for Psychological Sciences in the U.S. News &amp; World Report.\nThe QS World University Rankings by Subject for 2016, 2017 and 2018 placed the University 1st in the world for Development Studies. Further, it ranked in the world's top 100 for Anthropology, Sociology, Politics and International Studies, History, Geography, English Language and Literature and Communication and Media Studies in the QS 2018 rankings. Other top 150 subject rankings in the world include Education, Economics and Psychology.\nResearch.\nIn 2017, Sussex's research income was around \u00a365\u00a0million. This primarily came from funding body grants and research grants and contracts.\nIn addition to being home to Institute of Development Studies, Sussex has over 40 university research centres, over 15 strategic research centres and many smaller research clusters. IDS is ranked as 1st in the UK, 2nd International Development Think Tank and 4th university affiliated Think Tank in the world (out of 8,000 think tanks ranked) by the University of Pennsylvania Global Go To Think Tank Index Report 2017.\nSussex research centres include SPRU, the Science Policy Research Unit, which is ranked as 3rd best Science and technology Think Tank in the World (out of 8,000 think tanks ranked by the University of Pennsylvania Global Go To Think Tank Index Report 2017) Other notable centres include the STEPS Centre, the Centre for American Studies and the Sussex European Institute.\nThe university is one of the UK ESRC's 21 Centres for Doctoral Training, the only institutions accredited in 2010 and capable of receiving ESRC doctoral studentships and funding. The system was updated in 2016 and Doctoral Training Partnerships were established to replace the DTC. In this respect, Sussex is now a member of the Consortium of the Humanities and the Arts-South East England (CHASE) and the South East Network for Social Sciences.\nThe results of the Research Excellence Framework 2014 show that 98% of research activity at Sussex is categorised as 'world-leading' (28%), 'internationally excellent' (48%) or 'internationally recognised' (22%) in terms of originality, significance and rigour.\nSussex has a number of research collaborations with other Higher Education institutions as well as governmental and non-governmental organisations and institutes around the world. For example, the Harvard Sussex program is a long-standing research collaboration between Sussex and Harvard University focusing on public policy towards chemical and biological weapons. The CBW Conventions Bulletin is a quarterly newsletter published by the HSP. Sussex-Cornell Partnership, the Sussex-Bocconi-Renmin Intrapreneurship Hub and the Sussex-Lund Partnership in Middle Eastern and North African Studies are recent examples. Sussex also co-coordinates the Consortium for the Humanities and the Arts. Sussex is also one of the eight universities of the Tyndall Centre network.\nIn Europe, Sussex is one of the collaborating institutions of the Paul Scherrer Institute, the largest research institute in Switzerland, focusing on issues of technology and the natural sciences. Sussex is involved with many projects with the EU and with European countries. For example, BAR research is an Anglo-French collaboration between the Sussex, the East Sussex County Council and three French universities.\nNationally, Sussex is involved in a number of partnerships including the Nexus Network (A partnership between Sussex, University of Cambridge and the University of East Anglia) and CIED (a collaboration between Sussex, Oxford University and University of Manchester). The university is also a partner of the Metropolitan Police, with Demos (UK think tank) and Palantir Technologies.\nIn recent years, the institutes for the study of consciousness science, Centre for Advanced International Theory (CAIT), the institute for the study of corruption and the Middle East studies institute were opened at the university. The university also has a Genome Damage and Stability Centre, a nuclear magnetic resonance facility and a purpose-built apparatus in cryogenic research.\nIn terms of policy, Sussex is highly involved with the UK government, the UN and governments around the world. For example, the university is a UN Habitat partner. Nationally, the UK Trade Policy Observatory was set up at the university to offer the UK government, the UK industry as well as the public advice in addressing trade issues resulting from Brexit. The university is also one of the UK government's partner institutions on the Arctic Research Program. Similarly, SPRU and IDS are involved in policy recommendations with countries on all five continents.\nIn 2016, the Transformative Innovation Policy Consortium (TIPC) was set up as a collaboration between the university and the governments of Sweden, Norway, Finland, South Africa and Colombia to research social and economic issues.\nThe university is also home to a number of academic journals from the IDS Bulletin to The Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies (JEMS), Journal of Experimental Psychopathology, The World Trade Review, Journal of Banking and Finance, International Journal of Innovation Management, Journal of International Humanitarian Legal Studies, European Journal of International Relations and the Child and Family Social Work Journal, among many others.\nAdmissions.\nNew students entering the university in 2021 had an average of 133 points (the equivalent of AAB at A Level). According to the 2023 \"Times\" and \"Sunday Times\" Good University Guide, approximately 11% of Sussex's undergraduates come from independent schools.\nEducational partners.\nBrighton and Sussex Medical School (BSMS) results from a partnership between the University of Brighton and the University of Sussex. The school, the first medical school in the South East outside London, gained its licence in 2002 and opened in 2003. The Guardian ranked the medical school as 16th in the UK in 2018.\nThe Institute of Development Studies offers research, teaching and communications related to international development. IDS originated in 1966 as a research institute based at the university. It is financially and constitutionally independent under the status of a charitable company limited by guarantee.\nThe Centre for Research in Innovation Management, a research-based school of the University of Brighton, dates from 1990. It was located in the Freeman Centre building but has now moved to the University of Brighton campus.\nThe Sussex Innovation Centre, an on-campus commercial business centre, opened in 1996. It provides services for the formation and growth of technology- and knowledge-based companies in the South East. It offers a business environment to over 40 companies in the IT, biotech, media and engineering sectors.\nNationally, the university has a number of partner institutions across the UK including Bellerbys College, British and Irish Modern Music Institute (BIMM), University Centre Croydon (UCC, also known as Croydon College), Highbury College Portsmouth, International Study Centre (Study Group), Roffey Park Institute, University of Brighton and West Dean College. These partnerships include both validated courses (designed and delivered by the partner institution but awarded and quality assured by the university) and franchised courses (designed and assessed by the university, but delivered by another institution).\nStudy Group works in partnership with the university to provide the University of Sussex International Study Centre (ISC). It offers a course of academic subjects, study skills and English-language training for students who wish to study a degree at the university but who do not yet possess the necessary qualifications to start a degree. The ISC course provides students with English-language and academic skills to start at Sussex the following year. In 2018, ISC announced that they will increase their postgraduate and undergraduate offerings by adding 50 new courses across the pre-masters and pathway options on offer.\nThe British and Irish Modern Music Institute offers BA courses in Modern Musicianship \u2013 validated by the university \u2013 at its centres in London, Berlin, Hamburg, Brighton, Manchester, Bristol and Birmingham.\nInternationally, the university has over 160 partner institutions including the University of British Columbia, University of California, George Washington University, Georgetown University, University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina at Asheville, University of Pittsburgh, Purdue University, University of Rochester, State University of New York, University of Texas at Austin, University of Washington, Kyoto University, Peking University, Korea University, National Taiwan University (NTU), Universit\u00e9 Grenoble Alpes, Aix-Marseille Universit\u00e9, Paris-Sorbonne University, Sciences Po Aix, Sciences Po Paris, University of Strasbourg, Freie Universit\u00e4t Berlin, Humboldt-Universit\u00e4t zu Berlin and the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich. These are institutions where there are formal agreements for student exchange, research collaborations, staff and faculty mobility and study abroad schemes.\nStudent life.\nUniversity of Sussex Students' Union.\nSussex Students Union is the main body responsible for the representation of Sussex students. It runs two bars (Falmer Bar, which once hosted bands such as The Who, and Northfield Bar), two shops, a cafe and a number of other outlets and schemes (such as the buddy scheme). There are 261 student clubs and societies at Sussex, all functioning under the Student Union.\nLike many campus universities, many of the students studying at Sussex live in the city. Students are highly involved in Brighton's life, from its cultural scene to community service. In 2016, Sussex won the AGCAS award for Student engagement.\nIn 2017, Sussex was ranked as top in the UK for political scene (tied with Cambridge, Oxford, Manchester, Goldsmith and LSE).\nStudent support.\nA wide range of support is offered by the university, with key student support services (e.g. financial, counselling, careers, exceptional circumstances, disability support) offered via the Student Centre, which replaced the Student Life Centre in 2022. The building also acts as a hub for a wide range of student opportunities, such as employer fairs, academic skills workshops and wellbeing- and community-building activities.\nAll students at Sussex have access to a wide variety of Careers and employability support, in addition to the opportunities embedded in their degree programme. The Spirit of Sussex Award also encourages students to build their employability by recognising and recording their co-curricular achievements and skills.\nAccess and participation initiatives.\nLike most UK Universities, Sussex deliver a number of initiatives to improve equality of opportunity for home-fees students from underrepresented backgrounds to access and succeed in undergraduate higher education. These are delivered by teams including Widening Participation, who work with local schools and colleges, and many teams within the Student Experience division.\nThe University was previously known for its First-Generation Scholars scheme, an award-winning initiative to support students from lower-economic backgrounds and those who are the first to pursue higher education in their families. In 2017, Britain's Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn met some First-Generation Scholar students during his visit to the university. More recently, the Sussex Access Programme supports students from a diverse range of backgrounds including mature students, care-experienced and estranged students, and many others.\nStudent research.\nAt undergraduate level, Sussex runs a Junior Researcher scheme in which undergraduate students can receive funding and spend 8 weeks during their summer vacation doing research alongside Sussex researchers and academics. Additionally, a number of independent bursaries for undergraduates to conduct research projects exist within Schools and research centres. In parallel, a competitive International Junior researcher scheme exists to allow students from Sussex's institutional partners, such as Georgetown University, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, and the University of California, Santa Cruz to receive funding and come to Sussex to work on research projects alongside researchers and academics. Additionally, a number of research groups and networks incorporate advanced undergraduate students into their projects offering them the opportunity to both shadow and actively participate in ongoing research at the university.\nAt postgraduate level, Sussex offers MA, MS, MRes, PGCert, PGDip, CLNDIP and LLM degrees. All master's degrees are research based and master's students are incorporated with PhD students in the different research centres, clusters and networks across the university and many master's degrees are based in research centres instead of being based in University departments. Further, student research mobility schemes are in place to allow students to conduct research at other institutions across the world. The university has a number of research-oriented funding schemes (scholarships and fellowships) for master's students, including a Sussex Graduate Scholarship for current undergraduate students at the university. There are also country scholarships for postgraduate students applying from India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Malaysia and Vietnam.\nInternational students and opportunities.\nIn 2023-247, there were 17,765 students at Sussex, with just under 14,000 undergraduates and 4,000 postgraduates. In total, there are around 5,500 students from outside the UK, the majority of whom are postgraduates. One in five of its undergraduates study abroad at some point of their education: the majority of its undergraduate courses offer a study abroad year and/or placement. \nSussex students may also spend a year abroad as part of their degree, in a variety of European institutions through the Erasmus+ programme, as well as North America, Asia, Central and South America, Australia and North Africa.\nEnglish Language courses for speakers of other languages are provided by the Language Institute. \"English in the Vacation\" gives intensive practice in spoken and written English. An International Foundation Year offered by the ISC (Sussex University International Study Centre) offers direct routes to Sussex degrees.\nThe Sussex International Summer School runs for four and eight weeks starting in July, providing intensive courses. It is predominantly attended by foreign students. The ISS trips office provides excursions to prominent cities, theatres, and activities. Sussex is also home to the Fulbright Sussex Summer institute, a four-week academic program on British culture designed for American Students.\nThe International Study Centre, run by Study Group International at Sussex offers international Foundation courses, pre-masters and an International Year 1 scheme to prepare students for their degrees. The centre also offers a \"Pre-masters\" degree for international students.\nThe Sussex Student Union also runs a series of events in support of international students at Sussex. The union has a Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions policy in all its shops, bars and cafes.\nHousing.\nOverall, there are nine on-campus university managed accommodations, one off-campus university managed block of flats, one off-campus university managed study lodge and a number of university houses within Brighton and Hove. Around 5000 undergraduate and postgraduate students live in University-managed accommodation, but many live in private accommodation or with family members.\nAfter the initial campus opening, accommodation on campus was expanded in the 1970s with the construction of Kulukundis House, for students with physical disabilities, and the unusual split-level flats of East Slope, a development that included a social building with a porter's office and bar. Two newer accommodation areas were completed in the 2000s: one next to Falmer railway station, named Stanmer Court, and the other next to East Slope, opposite Bramber House, known as Swanborough. Northfield was constructed at the top end of campus, beyond Lewes Court, and opened in September 2011. In 2017, the old East Slope buildings were demolished to create up to date accommodation (also called East Slope) and a new Student Centre, which opened in phases between 2021 and 2022 \nIn 2020, the university announced that they plan to replace Park Village and Park Houses (excluding Norwich House) with the new West Slope development, as well as creating new facilities including a new library, cafe, supermarket, additional study spaces, and flexible green space. The first phase is projected to be completed by autumn 2022 and this work is projected to be fully completed by 2025. The new accommodation will provide approximately 1000 additional bedrooms. The university's Sustainability Action Plan released in June 2021 includes plans for increasing the energy efficiency of campus housing and ancillary facilities in an effort to reach net zero by 2035. The plan includes upgrading building energy management systems by August 2022 and assessing if the BREEAM Excellent environmental construction standards are sufficient for new construction by December 2022.\nSport.\nThe university has two sports centres on its campus: the Sussex Sports Centre and the Falmer Sports Complex. There is also one sports shop within the sports centre and one in the Falmer sports complex. The Falmer sports centre alone has over 40 acres of playing field. The university also has agreements with Freedom Leisure, granting its students access to sports centres across West Sussex.\nThe university competes in the following sports, usually with both men's and women's teams:\nThe Falmer Stadium, home to Brighton &amp; Hove Albion F.C., is located near the Sussex campus. A mutual relationship of benefits, including potential usage of the stadium's sporting facilities by the university, was established very early on.\nIn 2018, the university had 42 sports teams competing in the BUCS.\nThe Sussex Sports centre also runs a number of courses, from Yoga to Cycling challenges, as well as fundraisers, children's activities and specialized workshops for students and staff. The university also offers sports scholarships, including ones for basketball and Hockey.\nCampus media.\n\"University Radio Falmer\" (abbreviated to \"URF)\" is one of the first student radio stations in the country, founded in 1976. It now broadcasts via digital audio broadcasting and via the internet. The station is unplaylisted, and broadcasts twenty-four hours a day from its studio in the Grade I listed Falmer House. \"URF\" also publishes student articles, interviews and news on its website. It won a bronze award in the \"best scripted programming\" category in the 2008 UK Student Radio Awards. Alumni of the station include the former BBC Radio Director Helen Boaden, Sky News journalist Kit Bradshaw, and BBC News presenter Clive Myrie.\n\"The Badger\" is the Union's fortnightly newspaper and is written and designed entirely by Sussex students. The paper is available to students and staff during term-time, covering news and sport on campus, as well as comment pieces, features, lifestyle and arts coverage. It also publishes content online. \"The Badger\" began in October 1995, having formerly been known as \"Unionews\" since the 1970s. The paper has since covered a variety of stories, including several on-campus occupations and the expulsion of five Sussex students for involvement in protests.\nUniversity of Sussex Student Television (abbreviated to \"UniTV)\" is a student television channel, launched in September 2010. UniTV is a member of NaSTA (National Student Television Association) and has won 7 NaSTA awards in the past three years.\nNotable people.\nNotable staff.\nIn the sciences, Sussex counts among its past and present faculty five Nobel Prize winners: Sir Anthony Leggett, Sir Paul Nurse, Archer Martin, Sir John Cornforth and Sir Harry Kroto. John Maynard Smith, FRS, founding father of Sussex Biology was honoured with the Crafoord Prize and the Kyoto Prize for his contributions to Evolutionary Biology.\nThe university has 15 Fellows of the Royal Society. These include Geoffrey Cloke (Inorganic Chemistry); Michael F. Land (Animal Vision \u2013 Frink Medal); Michael Lappert (Inorganic Chemistry); John Murrell (Theoretical Chemistry); Laurence Pearl (Structural Biology) and Guy Richardson (Neuroscience). Additionally, two of its faculty have received the Leontief Prize: Michael Lipton and Mariana Mazzucato.\nIn the Humanities and Social sciences, there are ten members of faculty who have the distinction of being Fellows of the British Academy. Staff with FBAs include Donald Winch (economics), Peter Burke (historian), Craig Clunas, Peter France, Barry Supple, Margaret Boden, Pat Thane, John Barrell.\nOther prominent academics on the staff of the university have included: Geoffrey Bennington; Homi K. Bhabha (postcolonialism); Ranajit Guha (founder of Subaltern studies); Jonathan Dollimore (Renaissance literature, gender and queer studies); Katy Gardner (social anthropology); Gabriel Josipovici (Dante, the Bible); Jacqueline Rose (feminism, psychoanalysis); Nicholas Royle (modern literature and theory; deconstruction); Alan Sinfield (Shakespeare, sexuality, queer theory); Martin Rees, Baron Rees of Ludlow (Cosmologist); Brian Street (anthropology); John D. Barrow (Cosmologist); Leon Mestel (Astronomer); Gavin Ashenden (Senior Lecturer in English, University Chaplain, broadcaster and Chaplain to Queen Elizabeth II); Keith Pavitt (science and technology policy), and Christopher Freeman (Economist).\nCurrent notable staff (in addition to a number of those mentioned above) include philosopher Andy Clark, economist Richard Tol, psychologist Andy Field, neuroscientist Anil Seth, biologist Dave Goulson, sociologist Gerard Delanty, development economist Sir Richard Jolly, astrophysicist and writer John Gribbin, historian Robin Milner-Gulland, scholar Edward Timms, author Gabriel Josipovici, geographer Melissa Leach, psychologist Dame Lesley Fallowfield, psychologist Brian Bates, biologist Laurence Pearl, historian Maurice Howard, sociologist Jennifer Platt, Dame Denise Holt, policymaker Andy Stirling, political economist Mick Moore, pharmacist Bugewa Apampa, anthropologist Philip Proudfoot and experimental physicist Antonella De Santo.\nArms.\nThe university's coat of arms was officially granted on 15 March 1962. It built on Sussex's history and features two Saxon crowns and a sable (black) dolphin. The arms also features six martlets, a mythical bird without feet that traditionally represents continuous effort, as per the traditional emblem of East and West Sussex counties. On either side of the arms are two pelicans, head bowed down, each standing upon a book and supporting a staff.\nSince 2011, the coat of arms is only used by the graduation team and on official university degrees. For all other purposes, the US logo is used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32046", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32046", "title": "Up", "text": "Up most often refers to the relative direction opposed to down.\nUp or UP may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32047", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32047", "title": "Ur", "text": "Ancient Mesopotamian city-state\nUr ( or ) was a major Sumerian city-state in ancient Mesopotamia, located at the site of modern Tell el-Muqayyar () in Dhi Qar Governorate, southern Iraq. Although Ur was a coastal city near the mouth of the Euphrates on the Persian Gulf, the coastline has shifted and the site is now well inland, on the south bank of the Euphrates, southwest of Nasiriyah in modern-day Iraq. The city dates from the Ubaid period c.\u20093800\u00a0BC, and is recorded in written history as a city-state from the 26th century BC, its first recorded king being Mesannepada.\nThe city's patron deity was the moon god Nanna (Sin in Akkadian), and the name of the city is derived from UNUGKI, literally \"the abode (of Nanna)\". The site is marked by the partially restored ruins of the Ziggurat of Ur, which contained the shrine of Nanna, excavated in the 1930s. The temple was built in the 21st century BC (short chronology), during the reign of Ur-Nammu and was reconstructed in the 6th century BC by Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon.\nSociety and culture.\nArchaeological discoveries have shown that Ur was a major Sumerian urban center on the Mesopotamian plain. The discovery of Ur's Royal Tombs further confirmed this. These tombs, which date to the Early Dynastic IIIa period (approximately in the 25th or 24th century BC), contained many luxury items made of precious metals and semi-precious stones imported from long distances (Ancient Iran, Afghanistan, India, Asia Minor, the Levant and the Persian Gulf). This immense wealth shows Ur's economic importance during the Early Bronze Age.\nExcavation in the old city of Ur in 1929 revealed the Lyres of Ur, instruments similar to the modern harp but in the shape of a bull and with eleven strings.\nHistory.\nThe site consists of a mound, roughly 1200 by 800 metres with a height of about 20 metres above the plain. The mound is split by the remnants of an ancient canal into north and south portions. \nThe remains of a city wall are visible surrounding the site. The occupation size ranged from about 15 hectares in the Jemdet Nasr period to 90 hectares in the Early Dynastic period and then peaking in the Ur III period at 108 hectares and the Isin-Larsa period at 140 hectares, extending beyond the city walls. Subsequent period had varying lesser degrees of occupation.\nPrehistory.\nWhen Ur was founded, it was near the coastline of the Persian Gulf. Ur is thought, therefore, to have had marshy surroundings; irrigation would have been unnecessary, and the city's evident canals likely were used for transportation. Fish, birds, tubers, and reeds might have supported Ur economically without the need for an agricultural revolution sometimes hypothesized as a prerequisite to urbanization.\nPrehistoric Ubaid period.\nArchaeologists have discovered evidence of early occupation at Ur during the Ubaid period (c. 5500\u20133700 BC), a prehistoric period of Mesopotamia. The name derives from Tell al-'Ubaid where the earliest large excavation of Ubaid period material was conducted initially in 1919 by Henry Hall and later by Leonard Woolley.\nLater, a layer of soil covered the occupation levels from the Ubaid period. Excavators of the 1920s interpreted the layer of soil as evidence for the Great Flood of the Epic of Gilgamesh and Book of Genesis. It is now understood that the South Mesopotamian plain was exposed to regular floods from the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers, with heavy erosion from water and wind, which may have given rise to the Mesopotamian and derivative Biblical Great Flood stories.\nEarly Bronze Age.\nThere are various main sources informing scholars about the importance of Ur during the Early Bronze Age.\nEarly Dynastic period II.\nProto-cuneiform tablets from the Early Dynastic period, c. 2900 BC, have been recovered.\nEarly Dynastic period III.\nThe First Dynasty of Ur seems to have had great wealth and power, as shown by the lavish remains of the Royal Cemetery at Ur. The Sumerian King List provides a tentative political history of ancient Sumer and mentions, among others, several rulers of Ur. Mesannepada is the first king mentioned in the Sumerian King List, and appears to have lived in the 26th century BC. That Ur was an important urban centre already then seems to be indicated by a type of cylinder seal called the City Seals. These seals contain a set of Proto-Cuneiform signs which appear to be writings or symbols of the name of city-states in ancient Mesopotamia. Many of these seals have been found in Ur, and the name of Ur is prominent on them.\nAkkadian period.\nUr came under the control of the Semitic-speaking Akkadian Empire (c. 2334\u20132154 BC) founded by Sargon the Great between the 24th and 22nd centuries BC. This was a period when the Semitic-speaking Akkadians, who had entered Mesopotamia in approximately 3000 BC, gained ascendancy over the Sumerians, and indeed much of the ancient Near East.\nUr III period.\nAfter a short period of chaos following the fall of the Akkadian Empire the third Ur dynasty was established when the king Ur-Nammu came to power, ruling between c. 2047\u00a0BC and 2030\u00a0BC. During his rule, temples, including the Ziggurat of Ur, were built, and agriculture was improved through irrigation. His code of laws, the \"Code of Ur-Nammu\" (a fragment was identified in Istanbul in 1952) is one of the oldest such documents known, preceding the Code of Hammurabi by 300\u00a0years. He and his successor Shulgi were both deified during their reigns, and after his death he continued as a hero-figure: one of the surviving works of Sumerian literature describes the death of Ur-Nammu and his journey to the underworld.\nUr-Nammu was succeeded by Shulgi, the greatest king of the Third Dynasty of Ur, who solidified the hegemony of Ur and reformed the empire into a highly centralized bureaucratic state. Shulgi ruled for a long time (at least 42\u00a0years) and deified himself halfway through his rule.\nThe Ur empire continued through the reigns of three more kings with Akkadian names, Amar-Sin, Shu-Sin, and Ibbi-Sin. It fell around 1940\u00a0BC to the Elamites in the 24th regnal year of Ibbi-Sin, an event commemorated by the Lament for Ur.\nAccording to one estimate, Ur was the largest city in the world from c. 2030 to 1980\u00a0BC. Its population was approximately 65,000 (or 0.1 per cent share of global population then).\nMiddle Bronze Age.\nThe site was occupied in the Isin-Larsa and Old Babylonian periods. The city of Ur lost its political power after the demise of the Third Dynasty of Ur. Nevertheless, its important position which kept on providing access to the Persian Gulf ensured the ongoing economic importance of the city during the second millennium BC. The city came to be ruled by the Amorite first dynasty of Babylon which rose to prominence in southern Mesopotamia in the 19th century BC. During the Old Babylonian Empire, in the reign of Samsu-iluna, Ur was abandoned. It later became a part of the native Sealand Dynasty for several centuries.\nLate Bronze Age.\nIt then came under the control of the Kassites in the 16th century BC, and sporadically under the control of the Middle Assyrian Empire between the 14th and 11th centuries BC.\nIron Age.\nThe city, along with the rest of southern Mesopotamia and much of the Near East, Asia Minor, North Africa and southern Caucasus, fell to the north Mesopotamian Neo-Assyrian Empire from the 10th to late 7th centuries BC. From the end of the 7th century BC Ur was ruled by the so-called Chaldean Dynasty of Babylon. In the 6th century BC there was new construction in Ur under the rule of Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon. The last Babylonian king, Nabonidus, improved the ziggurat. However, the city started to decline from around 530\u00a0BC after Babylonia fell to the Persian Achaemenid Empire, and was no longer inhabited by the early 5th century BC. The demise of Ur was perhaps owing to drought, changing river patterns, and the silting of the outlet to the Persian Gulf.\nIdentification with the Biblical Ur.\nUr is possibly the city of Ur Kasdim mentioned in the Book of Genesis as the birthplace of the Jewish patriarch Abraham, traditionally believed to have lived some time in the 2nd millennium BC. There are, however, conflicting traditions and scholarly opinions identifying Ur Kasdim with the sites of \u015eanl\u0131urfa, Urkesh, Urartu, or Kutha.\nThe biblical Ur is mentioned four times in the Torah or Hebrew Bible (Tanakh in Hebrew), with the distinction \"of the Kasdim\"\u2014traditionally rendered in English as \"Ur of the Chaldees\". The Chaldeans had settled in the vicinity by around 850\u00a0BC, but were not extant anywhere in Mesopotamia during the 2nd millennium BC period when Abraham is traditionally held to have lived. The Chaldean dynasty did not rule Babylonia (and thus become the rulers of Ur) until the late 7th century BC, and held power only until the mid 6th century BC. The name is found in , , and . In , a single passage mentioning Ur is a paraphrase of \"Genesis.\"\nPope John Paul II wanted to visit the city according to the biblical tradition as part of his trip to Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian territories but the visit was cancelled due to a dispute between the Government of Saddam Hussein and representatives of the Holy See.\nIn March 2021, Pope Francis visited Ur during his journey through Iraq.\nArchaeology.\nIn 1625, the site was visited by Pietro Della Valle, who recorded the presence of ancient bricks stamped with strange symbols, cemented together with bitumen, as well as inscribed pieces of black marble that appeared to be seals. He retrieved several inscribed bricks. It was visited in 1835 by James Baillie Fraser and John Ross who provided a detailed description. In January 1850 William Loftus and H. A. Churchill visited the site and collected brick inscriptions. European archaeologists did not identify Tell el-Muqayyar as the site of Ur until Henry Rawlinson successfully deciphered some bricks from that location, brought to England by William Loftus.\nThe site was first excavated, on behalf of the British Museum and with instructions from the Foreign Office, by John George Taylor, British vice consul at Basra in 1853, 1854, and again in 1858. It had long been thought that Taylor only worked at the site in 1853 and 1854 but a 48 page handwritten report of his work there in 1858 has now come to light. Finds from the dig included a carved stone with integral handle, a plaque with woman's face, and a foundation cone of A'annepada. Taylor uncovered the Ziggurat of Ur and a structure with an arch later identified as part of the \"Gate of Judgment\". Among the finds were copies of a standard cylinder of Nabonidus, Neo-Babylonian ruler, mentioning the prince regent Belshar-uzur, usually thought to be the Belshazzar of the Book of Daniel in the Hebrew Bible. Between 1854 and 1918 locals excavated over two hundred tablets from the site, mostly from the temple \u00ca-nun-ma\u1e2b, of the moon god Sin. Built by the Ur III ruler Ur-Nammu, the ziggurat was later repaired by Isin ruler Ishme-Dagan early in the 2nd millennium BC. Stamped bricks on the ziggurat detail the rebuilding of the temple of Ningal by 14th century BC Kassite ruler Kurigalzu I.\nSome cuneiform tablets were found. Thirty four of these tablets were inadvertently mixed in with those excavated at Kutalla. Only in recent years has this error been recognized. Typical of the era, his excavations destroyed information and exposed the tell. Natives used the now loosened, 4,000-year-old bricks and tile for construction for the next 75\u00a0years, while the site lay unexplored, the British Museum having decided to prioritize archaeology in Assyria.\nThe site was considered rich in remains, and relatively easy to explore. After some soundings were made during a week in 1918 by Reginald Campbell Thompson, H. R. Hall worked the site for one season (using 70 Turkish prisoners of war) for the British Museum in 1919, laying the groundwork for more extensive efforts to follow. Some cuneiform tablets from the Isin-Larsa period were found, including omen and medical texts. They are now in the British Museum.\nExcavations from 1922 to 1934 were funded by the British Museum and the University of Pennsylvania and led by the archaeologist Sir Charles Leonard Woolley. The last two seasons focused on closing the site properly. A total of about 1,850 burials were uncovered, including 16 that were described as \"royal tombs\" containing many valuable artifacts, including the Standard of Ur. Most of the royal tombs were dated to about 2600 BC. The finds included the unlooted tomb of a queen thought to be Queen Puabi (formerly transcribed as Shub-ab), known from a cylinder seal found in the tomb, although there were two other different and unnamed seals found in the tomb. Many other people had been buried with her, in a form of human sacrifice. Near the ziggurat were uncovered the temple E-nun-mah and buildings E-dub-lal-mah (built for a king), E-gi-par (residence of the high priestess) and E-hur-sag (a temple building).\nOutside the temple area, many houses used in everyday life were found. Excavations were also made below the royal tombs layer: a layer of alluvial clay covered the remains of earlier habitation, including pottery from the Ubaid period, the first stage of settlement in southern Mesopotamia. Woolley later wrote many articles and books about the discoveries. One of Woolley's assistants on the site was the British archaeologist Max Mallowan.\nA number of royal inscriptions were found during the Woolley excavations. Numerous cuneiform tablets were also recovered. These included archives, temple and domestic, from the Early Dynastic and Sargonic periods, the Ur III period, Old and Middle Babylonian period, and the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods. Many literary and religious texts were also recovered.\nThe discoveries at the site reached the headlines in mainstream media in the world with the discoveries of the Royal Tombs. As a result, the ruins of the ancient city attracted many visitors. One of these visitors was the already famous Agatha Christie, who as a result of this visit ended up marrying Max Mallowan. During this time the site was accessible from the Baghdad\u2013Basra railway, from a stop called \"Ur Junction\".\nIn 2009, an agreement was reached for a joint University of Pennsylvania and Iraqi team to resume archaeological work at the site of Ur. Excavations began in 2015 under the direction of Elizabeth C Stone and Paul Zimansky of the State University of New York. In part of the section they planned to work (designated AH) they found that a large area had been leveled to build a modern reconstruction of the fictional \"House of Abraham\" and another area have been paved over for a Papal visit. The first excavation season was primarily to re-excavate Woolley's work in an Old Babylonian housing area with two new trenches for confirmation. Among the finds were a cylinder seal and balance pan weights. A number of cuneiform tablets were unearthed, a few Ur III period, a few from the Isin-Larsa period (including one from Rim-S\u00een I year 24), a few Old Babylonian period, and a number of Old Akkadian period. A similar though smaller dig was made in a Neo-Babylonian housing area.\n In the 2017 season an urban area adjacent to Wooleys very large AH area was excavated. The burial vault of a Babylonian general Abisum was found. Abisum is known from year 36 of Hammurabi into the reign of Samsu-iluna. Thirty cuneiform tablets were found around the vault and another 12 inside the tomb itself. A 3rd excavation season was conducted in 2019 (the University of Pennsylvania excavated in 2023 though nothing has yet been published of that work). A notable find was a large cuneiform tablet dated to the 6th year of Ur III ruler Ibbi-Sin on the swap of two large residences between private individuals (Munimah and Gayagama). One home was about 240 square meters and the other 423 square meters which is especially large for a home in that time.\nSome distance south of Area AH in 2017 and 2019 a German team of Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit\u00e4t M\u00fcnchen directed by Adelheid Otto excavated a large home of S\u00een-n\u0101d\u0101 (mid 19th century BC) chief administrator of the Temple of Ningal in the Isin-Larsa period. In levels below the final occupation were found tablets dating to Sin-Eribam and Silli-Adad, rulers of Larsa. They included a new copy of the Lament for Sumer and Ur.\nThe Royal Tomb Excavation.\nWhen the Royal Tombs at Ur were discovered, their size was unknown. Excavators started digging two trenches in the middle of the desert to see if they could find anything that would allow them to keep digging. They split into two teams \u2013 A and team B. Both teams spent the first few months digging a trench and found evidence of burial grounds by collecting small pieces of golden jewelry and pottery. This was called the \"gold trench\". After the first season of digging finished, Woolley returned to England. In Autumn, Woolley returned and started the second season. By the end of the second season, he had uncovered a courtyard surrounded by many rooms. In their third season of digging archaeologists had uncovered their biggest find yet, a building that was believed to have been constructed by order of the king, and a second building thought to be where the high priestess lived. As the fourth and fifth season came to a close, they had discovered so many items that most of their time was now spent recording the objects they found instead of actually digging objects. Items included gold jewelry, clay pots and stones. One of the most significant objects was the Standard of Ur. By the end of their sixth season they had excavated 1850 burial sites and deemed 17 of them to be \"Royal Tombs\". Some clay sealings and cuneiform tablet fragment were found in an underlying layer.\nWoolley finished his work excavating the Royal Tombs in 1934, uncovering a series of burials. Many servants were killed and buried with the royals, who he believed went to their deaths willingly. Computerized tomography scans on some of the surviving skulls have shown signs that they were killed by blows to the head that could be from the spiked end of a copper axe, which showed Woolley's initial theory of mass suicide via poison to be incorrect.\nInside Puabi's tomb there was a chest in the middle of the room. Underneath that chest was a hole in the ground that led to what was called the \"King's Grave\": PG-789. It was believed to be the king's grave because it was buried next to the queen. In this grave, there were 63 attendants who were all equipped with copper helmets and swords. It is thought to be his army buried with him. Another large room was uncovered, PG-1237, called the \"Great death pit\". This large room had 74 bodies, 68 of which were women. This was based on artifacts found with the bodies, weapons and whetstones in the case of males and simple, non-gold, jewelry in the case of females. There is some debate about the gender of one body. Two large ram statues were found in PG-1237 which are believed to be the remains of lyres. Several lyres were found just outside the entrance. The bodies were found to have perimortem blunt force injuries which caused their death. They also had skeleton markers for long term manual labor.\nMost of the treasures excavated at Ur are in the British Museum, the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology and the Baghdad Museum. At the Penn Museum the exhibition \"Iraq's Ancient Past\", which includes many of the most famous pieces from the Royal Tombs, opened to visitors in late Spring 2011. Previously, the Penn Museum had sent many of its best pieces from Ur on tour in an exhibition called \"Treasures From the Royal Tombs of Ur.\" It traveled to eight American museums, including those in Cleveland, Washington and Dallas, ending the tour at the Detroit Institute of Art in May 2011.\nSamples from two stratigraphic layers in the royal cemetery area, from before the royal burials, have been radiocarbon dated. The ED Ia layer dated to c. 2900 BC and the ED Ic layer to c. 2679 BC.\nCurrent status and preservation.\nThough some of the areas that were cleared during modern excavations have sanded over again, the Great Ziggurat is fully cleared and stands as the best-preserved and most visible landmark at the site. The famous Royal tombs, also called the Neo-Sumerian Mausolea, located about south-east of the Great Ziggurat in the corner of the wall that surrounds the city, are nearly totally cleared. Parts of the tomb area appear to be in need of structural consolidation or stabilization.\nThere are cuneiform (Sumerian writing) on many walls, some entirely covered in script stamped into the mud-bricks. The text is sometimes difficult to read, but it covers most surfaces. Modern graffiti has also found its way to the graves, usually in the form of names made with coloured pens (sometimes they are carved).\nThe Great Ziggurat itself has far more graffiti, mostly lightly carved into the bricks. The graves are completely empty. A small number of the tombs are accessible. Most of them have been cordoned off. The whole site is covered with pottery debris, to the extent that it is virtually impossible to set foot anywhere without stepping on some. Some have colours and paintings on them. Some of the \"mountains\" of broken pottery are debris that has been removed from excavations.\nPottery debris and human remains form many of the walls of the royal tombs area. In May 2009, the United States Army returned the Ur site to the Iraqi authorities, who hope to develop it as a tourist destination.\nSince 2009, the non-profit organization Global Heritage Fund (GHF) has been working to protect and preserve Ur against the problems of erosion, neglect, inappropriate restoration, war and conflict. GHF's stated goal for the project is to create an informed and scientifically grounded Master Plan to guide the long-term conservation and management of the site, and to serve as a model for the stewardship of other sites.\nSince 2013, the institution for Development Cooperation of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs DGCS and the SBAH, the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage of the Iraqi Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, have started a cooperation project for \"The Conservation and Maintenance of Archaeological site of UR\". In the framework of this cooperation agreement, the executive plan, with detailed drawings, is in progress for the maintenance of the Dublamah Temple (design concluded, works starting), the Royal Tombs\u2014Mausolea 3rd Dynasty (in progress)\u2014and the Ziqqurat (in progress). The first updated survey in 2013 has produced a new aerial map derived by the flight of a UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle) operated in March 2014. This is the first high-resolution map, derived from more than 100 aerial photograms, with an accuracy of 20\u00a0cm or less. A preview of the ortho-photomap of Archaeological Site of Ur is available online.\nTell Sakhariya.\nThe site (30\u00ba 58\u2019 33.84\u201d N by 46\u00ba 08\u2019 28.36\u201d E) was first noted, as Tell Abu Ba\u2019arura Shimal (\"Father of Sheep Droppings, North\"), as a Kassite period occupation (300 NE X 150 X 2.5. Cassite: 3.5 ha) during an archaeological survey of the region in the 1960s. The site, which lies 6.45 kilometers northeast of Ur, was excavated in a five week season from December to January 2011 \u2013 2012 by a joint Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage and the State University of New York at Stony Brook team led by Elizabeth Stone and Paul Zimansky. It was measured at about 250 meters by 200 meters with two high points, about 3.5 meters above the plain, separated by a saddle. Seven trenches were dug, some small, and three yielded simple slope wash. On the surface were found Kassite and Old Babylonian period ceramics and satellite imagery suggested the presence of a large square building and a number of other walls but the excavators found no building remains in surface or magnetic gradiometry surveys, or in the later trenches. Three occupational levels were determined. The top layer contained Kassite pottery fragments, a late Kassite kiln, and a number of late Kassite burials. The second held Sealand Dynasty ceramics along with lithic (grinding stones, cuboids and one balance weight), metal, floral and faunal (primarily cattle, sheep, and goats) remains. The excavators deemed the occupations to be repeated but transient. Neither level showed signs of formal or residential architecture.\nThe final, earliest level also lacked notable architecture but featured a very large mud or clay platform, made from clean material, devoid of sherds, bones, or other living debris. Coring to a depth of 4 meters (1 meter below the plain) failed to find the bottom of the platform. Part of the platform is underlain by a square baked brick pavement and remains of a fish pond were found. Two 5 meter by 10 meter trenches, 55 meters apart, were excavated in this platform. An inscribed brick of the first Ur III ruler Ur-Nammu (c. 2112-2094 BC) \"describing the construction of a barag - a pedestal or podium and a garden\" was found out of context. Also found were four fragmentary inscribed bricks (surface finds), three inscribed cones (one datable to Larsa ruler Rim-S\u00een I (c. 1822-1763 BC) year 15), and two Sumerian language cuneiform tablets. One tablet was from the early Kassite period and the other tablet was a receipt for copper utensils is dated to year 28 of Ur III ruler Shulgi (c.\u20092094-2046 BC). After this\nexcavation season a nearby prison was expanded by the Iraqi government blocking access to the site and precluding further campaigns. It has been proposed as the site of Ur III Ga\u2019e\u0161. The ziggurat at Ur can be seen from the summit of the site.\nGa\u2019e\u0161.\nBased on the archaeology the site of Tell Sakhariya has been proposed as the Ur III period city of Ga\u2019e\u0161 (ga-e\u0161ki and ga-e\u01615ki), site of the Akiti festival of Nanna/Sin, held every year for 11 days in the seventh month of the year and 7 days in the first month of the year. The festival began at Nanna\u2019s temple in Ur and ended in Ga\u2019e\u0161, possibly traveling via a canal. The temple of Nanna/Sin there was called the Karzida (kar-zi-da) was located at Ga\u2019e\u0161 (the names Karzida and Ga\u2019e\u0161 appear to have been used interchangeably for the city). The 36th year name of Ur III ruler Shulgi read \"Year Nanna of Ga\u2019e\u0161 was brought into his temple\" and the 9th year name of Ur III ruler Amar-Sin read \"Year En-Nanna-Amar-Sin-kiagra, was installed for the third time as en-priestess of Nanna of Ga\u2019e\u0161 / of Karzida\". Amar-Sin established a Giparu (nunnery) for the en-priestess of Nanna at Karzida saying \"he caused En-aga-zi-ana, his beloved priestess (en), to enter there\". When the en-priestess died she was buried a with \"golden crown (aga), which is followed by five other golden objects\". From tablets found at Ur it is known that wrestling competitions were held at Ga\u2019e\u0161 reading \"for the \u2018house of wrestling\u2019 in the Akiti (building), issued in Ga\u2019e\u0161, during the Akiti month\" and \"100 liters of ordinary beer, the beer for the \u2018house of wrestling\u2019 \u2026 issued in Ga\u2019e\u0161\", for example. All that is known with certainty about its location is that it lay one day's journey from Ur and was on a canal. A sketch in a 1990's paper concerning the Iturungal canal placed Ga\u2019e\u0161 in a location corresponding to Tell Sakhariya. It has been suggested that Ga\u2019e\u0161 was mentioned in Early Dynastic II period administrative texts. The final textual mention of was from the time of Larsa ruler Sin-Iddinam (c. 1849-1843 BC) a cone reading \"Sm-i[ddinam], mighty man, [s]on [born] in Ga\u2019e\u0161 provider of U[r], king of Lars[a], king of the land of S[umer] and Akkad] ...\". Apparently Ga\u2019e\u0161 had a gate tower based on a text from Drehem \"1 fattened sheep for the great gate tower in Ga\u2019e\u0161\" dating to the reign of Su-Sin.\nOne of the \"Temple Hymns\" of Enheduanna, the daughter of Sargon of Akkad (c.\u20092334-2279 BC), is dedicated to Ga\u2019e\u0161 and the Karzida temple of Nanna/Sin there.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Shrine, great sanctuary?, founded at a cattle-pen, \u2018Small\u2019 city, . . . . of Suen Karzida, your interior is a . . . . place, your foundation is holy and clean, Shrine, your Gipar is founded in purity, Your door is (of) strong copper, set up at a great place, Cattle-pen (filled with) the lowing (of the cows), like a young bull you . . . the horn,Your prince, the lord of heaven, standing in the . . . ., At noon (like the sun) radiating . . . ., O Karzida, he, A\u0161imbabbar, has placed the house upon your . . . . has taken his place on your dais. The house of Nanna in Ga\u2019e\u0161\"\nGa\u2019e\u0161 was also mentioned in the Sumerian literary composition Lament for Sumer and Ur\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... Mighty strength was set against the banks of the Id-nuna-Nanna canal. The settlements of the E-danna of Nanna, like substantial cattle-pens, were destroyed. Their refugees, like stampeding goats, were chased (?) by dogs. They destroyed Gae\u0161 like milk poured out to dogs, and shattered its finely fashioned statues. 'Alas, the destroyed city, my destroyed house,' Its sacred \u011cipar of en priesthood was defiled. Its en priestess was snatched from the \u011cipar and carried off to enemy territory. A lament was raised at the dais that stretches out toward heaven. Its heavenly throne was not set up, was not fit to be crowned (?).\"\nAnd in another composition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"O, sanctuary, big chamber built like ? a stall, mighty beaming city of Suen, Karzida, your interior is a powerful place, your foundation is holy and clean. O, sanctuary, your \u011cipar is established in purity, your door is copper, something (very) strong, established in the Underworld. O, cattle-pen, which rai[ses] the horns like a breeding bull, your prince, the lord of heaven standing in ... joy. ... at midday and ... O Karzida, A\u0161imbabbar, a house has established in your holy space and took (his) residence in your sanctuary!\"\nList of rulers.\nThe \"Sumerian King List (SKL)\" gives a list of only thirteen rulers from three dynasties of Ur. The once supposed second dynasty of Ur may have never existed. The first dynasty of Ur may have been preceded by one other dynasty of Ur (the \"Kalam dynasty\") unnamed on the \"SKL\"\u2014which had extensive influence over the area of Sumer and apparently led a union of south Mesopotamian polities. This predynastic period of Ur may include at least two rulers out of the first eight on this list (Meskalamdug and Akalamdug). The following list should not be considered complete:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32048", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32048", "title": "Urho Kekkonen", "text": "Finnish politician (1900\u20131986)\nUrho Kaleva Kekkonen (; 3 September 1900 \u2013 31 August 1986), often referred to by his initials UKK, was a Finnish politician who served as the eighth and longest-serving president of Finland from 1956 to 1982. He also served as prime minister (1950\u20131953, 1954\u20131956), and held various other cabinet positions. He was the third and most recent president from the Agrarian League/Centre Party. Head of state for nearly 26 years, he dominated Finnish politics for 31 years overall. Holding a large amount of power, he won his later elections with little opposition and has often been classified as an autocrat.\nAs president, Kekkonen continued the \"active neutrality\" policy of his predecessor President Juho Kusti Paasikivi that came to be known as the Paasikivi\u2013Kekkonen doctrine, under which Finland was to retain its independence while maintaining good relations and extensive trade with members of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact. Critical commentators referred to this policy of appeasement pejoratively as Finlandization. He is credited by Finnish historians for his foreign and trade policies, which allowed Finland's market economy to keep pace with Western Europe even with the Soviet Union as a neighbor, and for Finland to gradually take part in the European integration process. On the other hand, his perceived hunger for power, his divide-and-rule attitude in domestic politics and the lack of genuine political opposition, especially during the latter part of his presidency, significantly weakened Finnish democracy during his presidency. Kekkonen was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1962 for his \"tireless efforts and success at keeping peace and security in the Nordic countries, and therefore contributing to civic peace and reconciliation in the World\". He was also considered a potential candidate for the prize on later occasions.\nNarrowly elected in the 1956 presidential election, Kekkonen consolidated power by successfully presenting himself as an indispensable \"guarantor\" of Soviet relations in a tense and politically unstable period. He was reelected in 1962 in the aftermath of the Note Crisis and the withdrawal of the main opposition candidate. Kekkonen typically favoured appointing \"popular front\" cabinets composed of centrist and left-wing parties trusted by the Soviet Union while leaving out the major right-wing National Coalition Party. He was elected to a third six-year term in 1968 and achieved the height of his power in the 1970s; in 1973, an emergency law extending his term by four years passed the Parliament with 170 votes for and only 28 against. In 1975, considered the peak year of his career, Kekkonen hosted the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in Helsinki and resolved a domestic political crisis by pressuring party leaders into joining a new \"popular front\" cabinet in front of television cameras. He was elected to his fourth and final term by an overwhelming margin in 1978, but his health and mental faculties visibly deteriorated, forcing him to submit his resignation in late 1981 and retire. After Kekkonen's presidency, the reform of the Constitution of Finland was initiated by his successors to increase the power of the Parliament and the prime minister at the expense of the president and to introduce a term limit.\nKekkonen was a member of the Parliament of Finland from 1936 until his rise to the presidency. Either prior, during or between his premierships, he served as minister of justice (1936\u201337, 1944\u201346, 1951), minister of the interior (1937\u201339, 1950\u201351), speaker of the Finnish Parliament (1948\u201350) and minister of foreign affairs (1952\u201353, 1954). In addition to his extensive political career, he was a lawyer by education, a policeman and athlete in his youth, a veteran of the Finnish Civil War, and an enthusiastic writer. During World War II, his anonymous reports on the war and foreign politics received a large audience in the \"Suomen Kuvalehti\" magazine. Even during his presidency, he wrote humorous, informal columns (\"causerie\") for the same magazine, edited by his long-time friend Ilmari Turja, under several pseudonyms.\nBiography.\nFamily history.\nThe Kekkonens are an old Savonian family. The ancestors of Urho Kekkonen most likely settled in the Savonia region before the 16th century. Although it is not known where the Kekkonens came to Savonia from, there has been speculation that they are from Karelia as people with the name were known to have lived in certain settlements of the Karelian Isthmus for centuries. Kekkonen himself thought it possible that the family might instead originate from Western Finland, for example from Tavastia, where there have been place names connected to their surname from as early as the 15th century. His seventh-great-grandfather Tuomas Kekkonen (born ca. 1630) is first mentioned in documents in Pieks\u00e4m\u00e4ki in 1673. He was probably from either Kangasniemi or Joroinen.\nTwelve generations of Urho Kekkonen's ancestors were peasants from eastern Finland. The paternal side of Kekkonen's family practised slash-and-burn agriculture and the maternal side stayed on their own site. Kekkonen's paternal grandfather Eenokki was part of a landless group grown in the 19th century and lived on temporary work and working as a farmworker. Although Urho Kekkonen never met his grandfather (Urho was 9 years old when Eenokki died), he often drew on his teachings, as their shared one belief about working: a man must be greedy for work.\nAfter serving in several houses Eenokki Kekkonen married Anna-Liisa Koskinen. They had four sons, named Taavetti, Johannes, Alpertti and Juho. Juho Kekkonen, the youngest son of the family, who had gone travelling from the family's home in Korvenm\u00f6kki in the village of Koivuj\u00e4rvi, was the father of Urho Kekkonen. Aatu Pylv\u00e4n\u00e4inen, Urho Kekkonen's maternal grandfather, who worked as a farmer at the Tarkkala farm in Kangasniemi, married Amanda Manninen in the summer of 1878 when she was only 16 years old. Their children, three daughters and three sons, were Emilia, Elsa, Siilas, Tyyne, Eetu, and Samuel.\nAs the son of a poor family, Juho Kekkonen had to go to work in the forest and ended up at a log working ground in Kangasniemi in 1898. Emilia Pylv\u00e4n\u00e4inen herded cattle there, on the shores of the Haahkala lands, where Juho Kekkonen worked with other loggers. The two youngsters got to know each other and they married in 1899. The couple moved to Otava, where Juho Kekkonen got a job at the Koivusaha sawmill of Halla Oy. He was later appointed the head of forestry work and caretaker of the logging business.\nThe couple moved to Pielavesi along with the working grounds, where Juho Kekkonen bought a smoke hut which he later repaired and expanded into a proper house. He built a chimney in the house shortly before the birth of his first son Urho. Because of the beautiful alders growing behind the house, the house became known as \"Lepikon torppa\" (lit.\u2009'croft of alders'). There was a smoke sauna in the yard, where Urho Kekkonen was born on 3 September 1900. The family lived in Lepikon torppa for six years and Urho Kekkonen's sister Siiri was born in 1904. The family moved along with Juho Kekkonen's forestry work to Kuopio in 1906 and to Lapinlahti in 1908. The family had to live modestly but did not suffer from poverty. The youngest child of the family, Jussi, was born in 1910.\nEarly life.\nThe son of Juho Kekkonen and Emilia Pylv\u00e4n\u00e4inen, Urho Kekkonen was born at \"Lepikon Torppa\" (\"the Lepikko torp\"), a small cabin located in Pielavesi, in the Savo region of Finland, and spent his childhood in Kainuu. His family were farmers (though not poor tenant farmers, as some of his supporters later claimed). His father was originally a farm-hand and forestry worker who rose to become a forestry manager and stock agent at Halla Ltd. Claims made that Kekkonen's family had lived in a rudimentary farmhouse with no chimney were later proved to be false\u2014a photograph of Kekkonen's childhood home had been retouched to remove the chimney. His school years did not go smoothly. During the Finnish Civil War, Kekkonen fought for the White Guard (Kajaani chapter), fighting in the battles of Kuopio, Varkaus, Mouhu, and Viipuri, and taking part in mop-up operations, including leading a firing squad in Hamina. He later admitted to having killed a man in battle, but wrote in his memoirs that he was randomly selected by his company commander to follow a squad escorting ten prisoners, where the squad turned out to be a firing squad, and then to give the actual order to aim and fire. He had to complete further military service after the war, which he did in a car battalion from 1919 to 1920, finishing as a sergeant.\nIn independent Finland, Kekkonen first worked as a journalist in Kajaani then moved to Helsinki in 1921 to study law. While studying he worked for the security police EK between 1921 and 1927, where he became acquainted with anti-communist policing. During this time he also met his future wife, Sylvi Salome Uino (12 March 1900 \u2013 2 December 1974), a typist at the police station. They had two sons, Matti (1928\u20132013) and Taneli (1928\u20131985). Matti Kekkonen served as a Centre Party member of Parliament from 1958 to 1969, and Taneli Kekkonen worked as an ambassador in Belgrade, Athens, Rome, Malta, Warsaw and Tel Aviv.\nKekkonen had a reputation as a heavy-handed, violent interrogator during his years in the security police. Conversely, he described himself as taking the role of a humane \"good cop\" to balance out his older and more abusive colleagues. Some of the communists he interrogated confirmed the latter account, while others accused him of having been particularly violent. Later, as a minister in the 1950s, he is said to have visited and made peace with a communist he had \"beaten up\" in an interrogation in the 1920s. Explaining the contradiction of these statements, author says Kekkonen's interrogation methods evolved over time: \"He learned that the fist is not always the most efficient tool, but that booze, sauna and chatting are much better means of obtaining information.\" These revelatory experiences would significantly influence his career and approach to politics later on. Kekkonen eventually had to resign from the EK after criticising his superiors.\nIn 1927 Kekkonen became a lawyer and worked for the Association of Rural Municipalities until 1932. Kekkonen took a Doctor of Laws degree in 1936 at the University of Helsinki where he was active in the Pohjois-Pohjalainen Osakunta, a student nation for students from northern Ostrobothnia, and editor-in-chief of the student newspaper \"Ylioppilaslehti\" in the period 1927\u20131928. He was also an athlete whose greatest achievement was to become the Finnish high jump champion in 1924 with a jump of . He was best at the standing jump.\nEarly political career.\nA nationalist at heart, Kekkonen's ideological roots lay in the student politics of newly independent Finland and in the radicalism of the right-wing. He joined the Academic Karelia Society (\"Akateeminen Karjala-Seura\"), an organisation favouring Finland's annexation of East Karelia, but resigned from it in 1932 along with over 100 other moderate members because of the organisation's support for the 1932 far-right M\u00e4nts\u00e4l\u00e4 rebellion. According to Johannes Virolainen, a longtime Agrarian and Centrist politician, some Finnish right-wingers hated and mocked Kekkonen for the decision and cast him as a power-hungry opportunist. Kekkonen chaired Suomalaisuuden Liitto, another nationalist organisation, from 1930 to 1932. He also published articles in its magazine, \"Suomalainen Suomi\" (), which was later renamed as \"Kanava\".\nKekkonen spent long periods of time in late-Weimar-era Germany between 1931 and 1933 while working on his dissertation and there witnessed the rise of Adolf Hitler. This alerted him to far-right radicalism and apparently led him to publish \"Demokratian itsepuolustus\" (Self-Defense of Democracy), a political pamphlet warning about the danger, in 1934. In 1933 he joined the Agrarian League (later renamed the Centre Party), became a civil servant at the Ministry of Agriculture and made his first unsuccessful attempt at getting elected to the Finnish Parliament.\nKekkonen successfully stood for parliament a second time in 1936 whereupon he became Justice Minister, serving from 1936 to 1937. During his term, he enacted the \"Tricks of Kekkonen\" (\"Kekkosen konstit\"), an attempt to ban the right-wing, radical Patriotic People's Movement (\"Is\u00e4nmaallinen Kansanliike\", IKL). In the end, this effort was found illegal and halted by the Supreme Court. Kekkonen was also Minister of the Interior from 1937 to 1939. \nHe was not a member of the cabinets during the Winter War or the Continuation War. In March 1940, in a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the Finnish Parliament, he voted against the Moscow peace treaty. During the Continuation War, Kekkonen served as director of the Karelian Evacuees' Welfare Centre from 1940 to 1943 and as the Ministry of Finance's commissioner for coordination from 1943 to 1945, tasked with rationalising public administration. By that time, he had become one of the leading politicians within the so-called Peace opposition which advocated withdrawing from the war, having concluded that Germany, and consequently Finland, would lose. In 1944, he again became Minister of Justice, serving until 1946, and had to deal with the war-responsibility trials. Kekkonen was a Deputy Speaker of the Parliament 1946\u20131947, and was Speaker from 1948 to 1950.\nIn the 1950 Presidential election, Kekkonen was the candidate of the Finnish Agrarian League. He conducted a vigorous campaign against incumbent President Juho Kusti Paasikivi to finish third in the first and only ballot, receiving 62 votes in the electoral college, while Paasikivi was reelected with 171. After the election, Paasikivi appointed Kekkonen Prime Minister where in all his five cabinets, he emphasised the need to maintain friendly relations with the Soviet Union. Known for his authoritarian personality, he was ousted in 1953 but returned as Prime Minister from 1954 to 1956. Kekkonen also served as Minister of Foreign Affairs for periods in 1952\u20131953 and 1954, concurrent with his prime ministership.\nPresident of Finland.\nOverview.\nDuring Kekkonen's term, the balance of power between the Finnish Government and the President tilted heavily towards the President. In principle and formally, parliamentarism was followed with governments nominated by a parliamentary majority. However, Kekkonen-era cabinets were often in bitter internal disagreement and alliances formed broke down easily. New cabinets often tried to reverse their predecessors' policies. Kekkonen used his power extensively to nominate ministers and to compel the legislature's acceptance of new cabinets. Publicly and with impunity, he also used the old boy network to bypass the government and communicate directly with high officials. Only when Kekkonen's term ended did governments remain stable throughout the entire period between elections.\nNevertheless, during Kekkonen's presidency, a few parties were represented in most governments \u2014 mainly the Centrists, Social Democrats, and Swedish People's Party \u2014 while the People's Democrats and Communists were often in government from 1966 onwards.\nThroughout his time as president, Kekkonen did his best to keep political adversaries in check. The Centre Party's rival National Coalition Party was kept in opposition for 20 years despite good election performances. The Rural Party (which had broken away from the Centre Party) was treated similarly. On a few occasions, parliament was dissolved for no other reason than that its political composition did not please Kekkonen. Despite his career in the Centre Party, his relation to the party was often difficult. There was a so-called \"K-linja\" (\"K policy\", named after Urho Kekkonen, Ahti Karjalainen and Arvo Korsimo), which promoted friendly relations and bilateral trade with the Soviet Union. Kekkonen consolidated his power within the party by placing supporters of the \"K-linja\" in leading roles. Various Centre Party members to whose prominence Kekkonen objected often found themselves sidelined, as Kekkonen negotiated directly with the lower level. Chairman of the Centre Party, Johannes Virolainen, was threatened by Kekkonen with the dissolution of parliament when Kekkonen wanted to nominate SDP's Sorsa instead of Virolainen as Prime Minister. Kekkonen's so-called \"Mill Letters\" were a continuous stream of directives to high officials, politicians, and journalists. Yet Kekkonen by no means always used coercive measures. Some prominent politicians, most notably Tuure Junnila (NCP) and Veikko Vennamo (Rural Party), were able to brand themselves as \"anti-Kekkonen\" without automatically suffering his displeasure as a consequence.\nFirst term (1956\u201362).\nIn the presidential election of 1956, Kekkonen defeated the Social Democrat Karl-August Fagerholm 151\u2013149 in the electoral college vote. The campaign was notably vicious, with many personal attacks against several candidates, especially Kekkonen. The tabloid gossip newspaper \"Sensaatio-Uutiset\" (\"Sensational News\") accused Kekkonen of fistfighting, excessive drinking and extramarital affairs. The drinking and womanizing charges were partly true. At times, during evening parties with his friends, Kekkonen got drunk, and he had at least two longtime mistresses.\nAs president, Kekkonen continued the neutrality policy of President Paasikivi, which came to be known as the Paasikivi\u2013Kekkonen line. From the beginning, he ruled with the assumption that he alone was acceptable to the Soviet Union as Finnish President. Evidence from defectors like Oleg Gordievsky and files from the Soviet archives show that keeping Kekkonen in power was indeed the main objective of the Soviet Union in its relations with Finland.\nIn August 1958, Karl-August Fagerholm's third cabinet, a coalition government led by the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and including Kekkonen's party Agrarian League, was formed. The Communist front SKDL was left out. This irritated the Soviet Union because of the inclusion of ministers from SDP's anti-Communist wing, namely V\u00e4in\u00f6 Leskinen and Olavi Lindblom. They were seen by the Soviet Union as puppets of the anti-Communist SDP chair V\u00e4in\u00f6 Tanner, who had been convicted in the war-responsibility trials. Kekkonen had warned against this but was ignored by SDP. The Night Frost Crisis, as coined by Nikita Khrushchev, led to Soviet pressure against Finland in economic matters. Kekkonen sided with the Soviet Union, working behind the scenes against the cabinet; Fagerholm's cabinet consequently resigned in December 1958. The Finnish Foreign Ministry ignored United States offers for help as promised by Ambassador John D. Hickerson in November 1958. The crisis was resolved by Kekkonen in January 1959, when he privately travelled to Moscow to negotiate with Khrushchev and Andrei Gromyko. The crisis established Kekkonen as having the extra-constitutional authority to determine which parties may participate in government, effectively restricting the free parliamentary formation of governing coalitions for many years ahead.\nThe second time the Soviets helped Kekkonen was in the Note Crisis in 1961. The most widely held view of the Note Crisis is that the Soviet Union acted to ensure Kekkonen's reelection. Whether Kekkonen himself had organized the incident and to what extent remains debated. Several parties competing against Kekkonen had formed an alliance, \"Honka-liitto\", to promote Chancellor of Justice Olavi Honka, a non-partisan candidate, in the 1962 presidential elections. Kekkonen had planned to foil the \"Honka-liitto\" by calling an early parliamentary election and thus forcing his opponents to campaign against each other and together simultaneously. However, in October 1961, the Soviet Union sent a diplomatic note proposing military \"consultations\" as provided by the Finno-Soviet Treaty. As a result, Honka dropped his candidacy, leaving Kekkonen with a clear majority (199 of 300 electors) in the 1962 elections. In addition to support from his own party, Kekkonen received the backing of the Swedish People's Party and the Finnish People's Party, a small classical liberal party. Furthermore, the conservative National Coalition Party quietly supported Kekkonen, although they had no official presidential candidate after Honka's withdrawal. Following the Note Crisis, genuine opposition to Kekkonen disappeared, and he acquired an exceptionally strong\u2014later even autocratic\u2014status as the political leader of Finland.\nKekkonen's policies, especially towards the USSR, were criticised within his own party by Veikko Vennamo, who broke off his Centre Party affiliation when Kekkonen was elected president in 1956. In 1959, Vennamo founded the Finnish Rural Party, the forerunner of the nationalist True Finns.\nSecond term (1962\u201368).\nIn the 1960s Kekkonen was responsible for a number of foreign-policy initiatives, including the Nordic nuclear-free zone proposal, a border agreement with Norway, and a 1969 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The purpose of these initiatives was to avoid the enforcement of the military articles in the Finno-Soviet Treaty which called for military co-operation with the Soviet Union. Kekkonen thereby hoped to strengthen Finland's moves toward a policy of neutrality. Following the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, pressure for neutrality increased. Kekkonen informed the Soviet Union in 1970 that if it was no longer prepared to recognise Finland's neutrality, he would not continue as president, nor would the Finno-Soviet Treaty be extended.\nThird term (1968\u201378).\nKekkonen was re-elected for a third term in 1968. That year, he was supported by five political parties: the Centre Party, the Social Democrats, the Social Democratic Union of Workers and Smallholders (a short-lived SDP faction), the Finnish People's Democratic League (a communist front), and the Swedish People's Party. He received 201 votes in the electoral college, whereas the National Coalition party's candidate finished second with 66 votes. Vennamo came third with 33 votes. Although Kekkonen was re-elected with two-thirds of the vote, he was so displeased with his opponents and their behaviour that he publicly refused to stand for the presidency again. Vennamo's bold and constant criticisms of his presidency and policies especially infuriated Kekkonen, who labelled him a \"cheat\" and \"demagogue\".\nInitially, Kekkonen had intended to retire at the end of this term, and the Centre Party already began to prepare for his succession by Ahti Karjalainen. However, Kekkonen began to see Karjalainen as a rival instead, and eventually rejected the idea.\nTerm extension (1973).\nOn 18 January 1973, the Finnish Parliament extended Kekkonen's presidential term by four years with a Derogation law (an \"ad hoc\" law made as an exception to the constitution). By this time, Kekkonen had secured the backing of most political parties, but the major right-wing National Coalition Party, which Kekkonen had opposed, was still skeptical and stood in the way of the required 5/6 majority. Concurrently, Finland was negotiating a free-trade agreement with the EEC, a deal that was seen as vital by Finnish industry, as the United Kingdom, an important buyer of Finnish exports, had left the European Free Trade Association to become a member of the EEC. Kekkonen implied that only he personally could satisfy the Soviet Union that the deal would not threaten Soviet interests. The tactic secured National Coalition support for the term extension. The elimination of any significant opposition and competition meant he became Finland's \"de facto\" political autocrat. His power reached its zenith in 1975 when he dissolved parliament and hosted the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in Helsinki with the assistance of a caretaker government.\nFourth term (1978\u201382).\nAfter nine political parties supported Kekkonen's candidacy in the 1978 presidential election, including the Social Democratic, Centre and National Coalition parties, no serious rivals remained. He humiliated his opponents by not appearing in televised presidential debates and went on to win 259 out of the 300 electoral college votes, with his nearest rival, Raino Westerholm of the Christian Union, receiving only 25.\nAccording to Finnish historians and political journalists, there were at least three reasons why Kekkonen clung on to the Presidency. First, he did not believe that any of his successor candidates would manage Finland's Soviet foreign policy well enough. Second, until at least the summer of 1978, he considered there was room for improvement in Finnish-Soviet relations and that his experience was vital to the process. This is exemplified by the use of his diplomatic skills to reject the Soviet Defence Minister Dmitriy Ustinov's offer to arrange a joined Soviet-Finnish military exercise.\nThird, he believed that by working for as long as possible he would remain healthy and live longer. Kekkonen's most severe critics, such as Veikko Vennamo, claimed that he remained President so long mainly because he and his closest associates were power-hungry. In 1980 Kekkonen was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize.\nLater life and death.\nFrom December 1980 onwards, Kekkonen suffered from an undisclosed disease that appeared to affect his brain functions, sometimes leading to delusional thoughts. He had begun to suffer occasional brief memory lapses as early as the autumn of 1972; they became more frequent during the late 1970s. Around the same time, Kekkonen's eyesight deteriorated so much that for his last few years in office, all of his official papers had to be typed in block letters. Kekkonen had also suffered from a failing sense of balance since the mid-1970s and from enlargement of his prostate gland since 1974. He was also subject to occasional violent headaches and suffered from diabetes from the autumn of 1979. Rumors about his declining health had begun to circulate in the mid to late 1970s, but the press attempted to silence these rumors to respect the president's privacy.\nAccording to biographer Juhani Suomi, Kekkonen gave no thought to resigning until his physical condition began to deteriorate in July 1981. The 80-year-old president then began to seriously consider resigning, most likely in early 1982. Prime Minister Mauno Koivisto finally dealt a defeat to Kekkonen in 1981. In April, Koivisto did what no one else had dared to during Kekkonen's presidency by stating that under the constitution, the prime minister and cabinet were responsible to Parliament, not to the President. Kekkonen asked Koivisto to resign, but he refused. This is generally seen as the death knell of the Kekkonen era; Kekkonen, who felt that he had lost a significant amount of his authority, never fully recovered from the shock caused by this event.\nHistorians and journalists debate the precise meaning of this dispute. According to Seppo Zetterberg, Allan Tiitta, and Pekka Hyv\u00e4rinen, Kekkonen wanted to force Koivisto to resign to decrease his chances of succeeding him as president. In contrast, Juhani Suomi believed the dispute involved scheming between Koivisto and rival prospective presidential candidates. Kekkonen at times criticised Koivisto for making political decisions too slowly and for his vacillation, especially for speaking too unclearly and philosophically.\nKekkonen became ill in August during a fishing trip to Iceland. He went on medical leave on 10 September, before finally resigning due to ill health on 26 October 1981. There is no report available about his illness, as the papers have been moved to an unknown location, but it is commonly believed that he suffered from vascular dementia, probably due to atherosclerosis.\nKekkonen withdrew from politics during his final years. He died at Tamminiemi on August 31, 1986, three days before his 86th birthday, and was buried with full honours. His heirs restricted access to his diaries and later an \"authorised\" biography by Juhani Suomi was commissioned, the author subsequently defending the interpretation of the history therein and denigrating most other interpretations. Critics have questioned the value of this work; the historian Hannu Rautkallio considered the biography little else than a \"commercial project\" designed for selling books rather than aiming for historical accuracy.\nLegacy.\nSome of Kekkonen's actions remain controversial in modern Finland, and disputes continue about how to interpret many of his policies and actions. He often used what was termed the \"Moscow card\" when his authority was threatened, but he was not the only Finnish politician with close relations to Soviet representatives. Kekkonen's authoritarian behavior during his presidential term was one of the main reasons for the reforms of the Finnish Constitution in 1984\u20132003. Under these, the powers of Parliament and the prime minister were increased at the expense of presidential power. Several of the changes were initiated by Kekkonen's successors.\nAlthough controversial, his policy of neutrality allowed trade with both the Communist and Western blocs. The bilateral trade policy with the Soviet Union was lucrative for many Finnish businesses. His term saw a period of high sustained economic growth and increasing integration with the West. He negotiated entrance into EFTA and thus was an early beginner for Finnish participation in European integration, which later culminated in full membership in the EU and the euro. He remained highly popular during his term, even though such a profile approached that of a cult of personality towards the end of his term. He is still popular among many of his contemporaries, particularly in his own Centre Party.\nHonours.\nForeign honours.\nFormer socialist states:\nFormer (now-defunct) states:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32049", "revid": "700033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32049", "title": "Utrecht (disambiguation)", "text": "Utrecht is a city in the Netherlands.\nUtrecht may also refer to:\nIn history:\nOutside the Netherlands:\nOther uses:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32051", "revid": "16034661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32051", "title": "Ultrafilter lemma", "text": ""}
{"id": "32052", "revid": "11435369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32052", "title": "Unisa", "text": "Unisa, UNISA, or UniSA may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32053", "revid": "50578919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32053", "title": "Utrecht University", "text": "Public research university in the Netherlands\nUtrecht University (UU; , formerly \"Rijksuniversiteit Utrecht\") is a public research university in Utrecht, Netherlands. Established 26\u00a0 1636 ()\u00a0(1636--), it is one of the oldest universities in the Netherlands. In 2024, it had an enrollment of 39,008 students, and employed 8,929 faculty members and staff. More than 600 PhD degrees were awarded and 8,314 scientific articles were published. The university's 2024 budget was \u20ac2.9 billion, consisting of \u20ac1.258 billion for the university (income from work commissioned by third parties is 365 million euros) and \u20ac1.643 billion for the University Medical Center Utrecht.\nThe university's interdisciplinary research targets life sciences, pathways to sustainability, dynamics of youth, and institutions for open societies. Utrecht University is led by the University Board, consisting of Wilco Hazeleger (Rector Magnificus), Anton Pijpers (chair), Margot van der Starre (Vice Chair) and Niels Vreeswijk (Student Assessor). Close ties are harboured with other institutions internationally through its membership in the Coimbra Group (CG), the League of European Research Universities (LERU), the Utrecht Network and the European University Association (EUA).\nHistory.\nUtrecht University was founded on 26 March 1636. It has its roots in the Illustrious School of Utrecht, founded two years earlier in 1634, which was elevated to the status of university in 1636. The influential professor of theology Gisbertus Voetius delivered the inaugural speech, and Bernardus Schotanus (professor of law and mathematics) became the university's first rector magnificus. Anna Maria van Schurman, who became the university's first female student, was invited to write a Latin poem for the inauguration. Initially, only a few dozen students attended classes at the university. Seven professors worked in four faculties: philosophy, which offered all students an introductory education, and three higher-level faculties (theology, medicine and law).\nUtrecht University flourished in the seventeenth century, and contributed significantly to the Dutch Golden Age, despite competition with the older universities, such as Leiden (1575) and Groningen (1614). Leiden, in particular, proved a strong competitor and made further improvement necessary; a rivalry that persists to this day. A botanical garden was built on the grounds of the present Sonnenborgh Observatory, and three years later the added an astronomical observatory. The university attracted many students from abroad (especially from Germany, England and Scotland). They witnessed the intellectual and theological battle fought between proponents of the new philosophy (Ren\u00e9 Descartes lived for a few years in Utrecht) and proponents of the strict Reformed theologian Voetius. They also witnessed the teachings of renowned Dutch jurist, Johannes Voet, a university alumnus and professor of law, whose works remain highly authoritative in modern Roman-Dutch law.\nIn 1806, the French occupying authorities of the Netherlands downgraded Utrecht University to an \"\u00e9cole secondaire\" (high school), but after the establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1813 it regained its former status. Leiden, Leuven, Groningen, Utrecht and Ghent were the five universities () of the new state. Two of the universities (Leuven and Ghent) became part of the new Belgian state after their respective provinces separated from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1830. As a result, Utrecht University remained one of only three Dutch universities. During the French occupation, King Louis Napoleon ordered the construction of a palace in the centre of Utrecht, which eventually became the University Library City Centre.\nUtrecht University played a prominent role in the golden age of Dutch science. Around 1850 the \"Utrechtian School\" of science formed, with Pieter Harting, Gerardus J. Mulder, Christophorus H. D. Buys Ballot and Franciscus Donders among the leading scientists. They introduced the educational laboratory (\"onderwijslaboratorium\") as a practical learning place for their students. The National Veterinary School (Dutch: \"Rijks Veeartsenijschool\") became Utrecht University's Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in 1918.\nAs the university grew, the academic buildings in the historic city centre were unable to meet the university's increasing need for space. Therefore, starting from the 1960s, a significant part of the university moved to the De Uithof campus, which occupies the easternmost part of the city and is located south of De Bilt. However, the university continued to retain its academic buildings and presence in the historic city centre.\nThe university is represented in the \"Stichting Academisch Erfgoed\", a foundation with the goal of preserving the university's heritage and collections.\nOrganisation.\nThe university consists of seven faculties, which offer 58 undergraduate degree programmes and over 150 graduate programmes.\nThere are also three interfaculty units:\nCampus.\nThe two large faculties of Humanities and Law &amp; Governance are situated in the inner city of Utrecht. The other five faculties and most of the administrative services are located in Utrecht Science Park De Uithof, a campus area on the outskirts of the city. University College Utrecht, along with the Utrecht School of Economics, are situated in the former Kromhout Kazerne, which used to be a Dutch military base. University College Roosevelt is located off-campus in the city of Middelburg in the south-west of the Netherlands.\nInternational rankings.\nIn the 2024 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU), the University of Utrecht was ranked 55th globally, the highest in the Netherlands but down from 40th in 2003. Top subjects include public administration (2nd), water resources (10th), and pharmacy (10th). Other notable rankings are in Earth sciences (11th), veterinary sciences (16th), psychology (16th), oceanography (17th), law (29th), education (38th), environmental science and engineering: (41st), geography: (42th), atmospheric science: (45th), public health: (45th), biological sciences (51-75), clinical medicine (51-75), medical technology (51-75), economics (51-75), physics (76-100), ecology (76-100), biotechnology (76-100).\nIn the 2024 U.S. News &amp; World Report Best Global Universities Ranking, Utrecht University was ranked 46th in the world. Its top-performing subjects included microbiology (6th), geosciences (14th), meteorology and atmospheric sciences (15th), surgery (18th), infectious diseases (21st), public health (21st), education and educational research (22nd), psychiatry/psychology (22nd), pharmacology and toxicology (25th), plant and animal science (28th), radiology, nuclear medicine, and medical imaging (31st), cardiac and cardiovascular systems (42nd), water resources (45th), marine biology (46th), environment/ecology (46th), cell biology (48th), immunology (53rd), and biology and biochemistry (60th).\nIn the 2023 Times Higher Education World University Rankings, the university was ranked 66th. Best-ranked subjects were education (24th), psychology (26th), medicine and dentistry (67th), biological sciences (63rd), veterinary sciences (63rd), physical sciences (59th), and law (36th).\nIn the 2025 QS World University Rankings by subject, the rankings are as follows: veterinary science (8th), geophysics (17th), geology (19th), public administration (22nd), geography (22nd), Earth &amp; marine sciences (27th), psychology (30th), pharmacy &amp; pharmacology (44th), life sciences and medicine (48th), environmental sciences (48th), education (51st), biological sciences (61st), medicine (64th), law (73rd), natural sciences (84th), nursing (51-100), development studies (51-100).\nIn 2024 the analytics company Clarivate ranked Utrecht University 44th in the world and 7th in Europe, with 29 highly cited researchers in the top 1% by citations for their field(s) and publication year in the Web of Science over the past decade.\nUtrecht University was also mentioned in the BlueSky Ranking Of University Rankings 2025/26 published by Matt Symonds, co-founder of QS. BlueSky Ranking Of University Rankings considers the aggregation of the performance of schools across four major rankings: AWRU, QS, THE, and USNWR. In this ranking, Utrecht University was placed 58th worldwide, 19th in Europe, and 2nd in the Netherlands.\nAffiliations.\nUtrecht University is a member of:\nUtrecht University operates strategic international partnership with KU Leuven, University College London, Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Toronto, University of Sydney.\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nUtrecht University counts a number of distinguished scholars among its alumni and faculty, including 12 Nobel Prize, 1 Pulitzer Prize, 2 Wolf Prize, 2 National Medal of Science, 22 Spinoza Prize and 4 Stevin Prize laureates. The university counts several heads of state and government amongst its graduates, including: 4 members of Dutch royal house, 6 Prime Ministers of the Netherlands, 6 foreign heads of state or government, and 35 Ministers of the Cabinet of the Netherlands.\nUtrecht University alumni have won a total of 13 gold Olympic medals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32054", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32054", "title": "Union for Europe of the Nations", "text": "Former national-conservative political group of the European Parliament\nUnion for Europe of the Nations (UEN) was a national-conservative, Eurosceptic political group that operated in the European Parliament between 1999 and 2009. At its height in February 2008, it had 44 MEPs. UEN was affiliated with the Alliance for Europe of the Nations political party.\nUEN was formed as the successor of the Union for Europe group. Its members were parties such as the Rally for France, Italian National Alliance and Lega Nord, Irish Fianna F\u00e1il, and Polish Law and Justice. After the 2009 European Parliament election, UEN was dissolved due to its member parties opting to switch to other groups.\nHistory.\nUEN was formed on 20 July 1999 for the 5th European Parliament, supplanting the earlier Union for Europe. Its member parties Fianna F\u00e1il (FF) and the National Alliance (AN) were the driving forces behind the group, despite their being alone in the group in their support for the proposed European Constitution. Gianfranco Fini, leader of AN, was a member of the Convention which drafted the Constitution, while Bertie Ahern, leader of FF, negotiated the treaty as President of the European Council in 2004.\nUEN was a heterogeneous group: broadly Eurosceptic and national-conservative, it included some parties which were either uncomfortable with this characterisation or eventually evolved into something different. More specifically, FF was a \"catch all\" centre-right party and later joined the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe, AN was a conservative party which eventually joined the European People's Party through The People of Freedom, and Lega Nord was supportive of a \"Europe of Regions\".\nAfter the 2009 European elections the group officially had 35 members but this figure included parties such as AN and FF, which had already committed to leave. UEN members migrated to other groups after the elections in June 2009 and before the Seventh European Parliament term started on 14 July 2009. FF had already left for the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) Group, For Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK and Law and Justice MEPs went to the European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR Group), and Lega Nord, the Danish People's Party and Order and Justice MEPs went to Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) Group. With this loss of members, the UEN group was dissolved by default.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32055", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32055", "title": "Urology", "text": "Medical specialty on the urinary and reproductive systems\nUrology (from Greek \u03bf\u1f56\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \"ouron\" \"urine\" and \"-logia\" \"study of\"), also known as genitourinary surgery, is the branch of medicine that focuses on surgical and medical diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. Organs under the domain of urology include the kidneys, adrenal glands, ureters, urinary bladder, urethra, and the male reproductive organs (testes, epididymides, vasa deferentia, seminal vesicles, prostate, and penis).\nThe urinary and reproductive tracts are closely linked, and disorders of one often affect the other. Thus a major spectrum of the conditions managed in urology exists under the domain of genitourinary disorders. Urology combines the management of medical (i.e., non-surgical) conditions, such as urinary-tract infections and benign prostatic hyperplasia, with the management of surgical conditions such as bladder or prostate cancer, kidney stones, congenital abnormalities, traumatic injury, and stress incontinence.\nUrological techniques include minimally invasive robotic and laparoscopic surgery, laser-assisted surgeries, and other scope-guided procedures. Urologists receive training in open and minimally invasive surgical techniques, employing real-time ultrasound guidance, fiber-optic endoscopic equipment, and various lasers in the treatment of multiple benign and malignant conditions. Urology is closely related to (and urologists often collaborate with the practitioners of) oncology, nephrology, gynaecology, andrology, pediatric surgery, colorectal surgery, gastroenterology, and endocrinology.\nUrology is one of the most competitive and highly sought surgical specialties for physicians, with new urologists comprising less than 1.5% of United States medical-school graduates each year.\nUrologists are physicians which have specialized in the field after completing their general degree in medicine. Upon successful completion of a residency program, many urologists choose to undergo further advanced training in a subspecialty area of expertise through a fellowship lasting an additional 12 to 36 months. Subspecialties may include: urologic surgery, urologic oncology and urologic oncological surgery, endourology and endourologic surgery, urogynecology and urogynecologic surgery, reconstructive urologic surgery (a form of reconstructive surgery), minimally-invasive urologic surgery, pediatric urology and pediatric urologic surgery (including adolescent urology, the treatment of premature or delayed puberty, and the treatment of congenital urological syndromes, malformations, and deformations), transplant urology (the field of transplant medicine and surgery concerned with transplantation of organs such as the kidneys, bladder tissue, ureters, and, recently, penises), voiding dysfunction, paruresis, neurourology, and androurology and sexual medicine. Additionally, some urologists supplement their fellowships with a master's degree (2\u20133 years) or with a Ph.D. (4\u20136 years) in related topics to prepare them for academic as well as focused clinical employment.\nTraining.\nUnited States.\nAs of 2022, there are 146 residency programs that offered 356 categorical positions. Urology is one of the early match programs, with results given to applicants by early February (6 weeks before NRMP match). Applications are accepted starting Sep 1, with some programs accepting applications until early Jan.\nIt is a relatively competitive specialty to match into, with only 65.6% of US seniors matching in the 2022 match cycle. The number of positions has grown from 278 in 2012 to 356 in 2022. Matching is significantly more difficult for IMGs and students who have a year or more off before residency - match rates were 27% and 55% respectively in 2012.\nThe medical school environment may also be a factor. A study in 2012 also showed after an analysis of match rates from schools between 2005 and 2009 that 20 schools sent more than 15 students into urology (1 standard deviation above the median), with Northwestern University sending 44 students over those five years.\nAfter urology residency, there are seven subspecialties recognized by the AUA (American Urological Association):\nAustralia.\nTraining is completed through the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS). The program requires six years of full-time training (for those who commenced prior to 2016), or five years for those who commenced after 2016. The program is accredited by the Australian Medical Council.\nNepal.\nIn Nepal, the formal urologist degree awarded is MCh (Magister Chirurgiae). This is a three years course post masters and includes thesis and a mandatory publication. This degree is awarded after completing MBBS (four and half year plus a one-year rotatory internship) and MS (Mastery of surgery) in general surgery (three years course). Till now two universities Tribhuvan University and Kathmandu University as well as two Autonomous institutes BP Koirala Institute of health sciences and National Academy of Medical Sciences (Bir Hospital) run the MCh Urology programme. This degree is equivalent to Clinical PhD and called as \"Chikitsa Bidhyabaridhi\" by Tribhuvan University (Government University) and is considered to be the highest degree among the surgical discipline degrees.\nEthiopia.\nIn Ethiopia, in 2001, there were only five qualified urologists. All trained abroad, in countries like India, Tanzania and Hungary. Before this chapter all urology cases were managed by general surgeons. The only urological unit in the country was at Tikur Anbessa Tertiary Hospital. The services provided included ESWL and endo-urology. The urology training program was started in 2009 with a curriculum for general surgeons which had a three-year training program. Up to 2019, six urologists have graduated by this program for general surgeons. The first residency program started accepting general practitioners in 2010 for a five-year program. The first two years were trainings in general surgery, the next three years were dedicated urology training program, which included the same three-year training as of the general surgeons three year curriculum. It started with two residents who graduated in 2015 with a certificate in specialty of urology. Up to 2019, seventeen urologists have graduated from this five-year residency program. From the start these programs in 2009 up to 2019, a total of 23 urologists have been trained in Tikur Anbessa Tertioary Hospital. As of 2020, there were 26 trainees in the programme. All of the urologists who graduated from Tikur Anbessa Tertioary Hospital were as of 2020 working in different parts of the country.\nSubdisciplines.\nAs a medical discipline that involves the care of many organs and physiological systems, urology can be broken down into several subdisciplines. At many larger academic centers and university hospitals that excel in patient care and clinical research, urologists often specialize in a particular sub discipline.\nEndourology.\nEndourology is the branch of urology that deals with the closed manipulation of the urinary tract. It has lately grown to include all minimally invasive urologic surgical procedures. As opposed to open surgery, endourology is performed using small cameras and instruments inserted into the urinary tract. Transurethral surgery has been the cornerstone of endourology. Most of the urinary tract can be reached via the urethra, enabling prostate surgery, surgery of tumors of the urothelium, stone surgery, and simple urethral and ureteral procedures. Recently, the addition of laparoscopy and robotics has further subdivided this branch of urology.\nLaparoscopy.\nLaparoscopy is a rapidly evolving branch of urology and has replaced some open surgical procedures. Robot-assisted surgery of the prostate, kidney, and ureter has been expanding this field. Today, many prostatectomies in the United States are carried out by so-called robotic assistance. This has created controversy, however, as robotics greatly increase the cost of surgery and the benefit for the patient may or may not be proportional to the extra cost. Moreover, current (2011) market situation for robotic equipment is a de facto monopoly of one publicly held corporation which further fuels the cost-effectiveness controversy.\nUrologic oncology.\nUrologic oncology concerns the surgical treatment of malignant genitourinary diseases such as cancer of the prostate, adrenal glands, bladder, kidneys, ureters, testicles, and penis, as well as the skin and subcutaneous tissue and muscle and fascia of those areas (that particular subspecialty overlaps with dermatological oncology and related areas of oncology). The treatment of genitourinary cancer is managed by either a urologist or an oncologist, depending on the treatment type (surgical or medical). Most urologic oncologists in Western countries use minimally invasive techniques (laparoscopy or endourology, robotic-assisted surgery) to manage urologic cancers amenable to surgical management.\nNeurourology.\nNeurourology concerns nervous system control of the genitourinary system, and of conditions causing abnormal urination. Neurological diseases and disorders such as a stroke, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and spinal cord injury can disrupt the lower urinary tract and result in conditions such as urinary incontinence, detrusor overactivity, urinary retention, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia. Urodynamic studies play an important diagnostic role in neurourology. Therapy for nervous system disorders includes clean intermittent self-catheterization of the bladder, anticholinergic drugs, injection of Botulinum toxin into the bladder wall and advanced and less commonly used therapies such as sacral neuromodulation.\nLess marked neurological abnormalities can cause urological disorders as well\u2014for example, abnormalities of the sensory nervous system are thought by many researchers to play a role in disorders of painful or frequent urination (e.g. painful bladder syndrome also known as interstitial cystitis).\nPediatric urology.\nPediatric urology concerns urologic disorders in children. Such disorders include cryptorchidism (undescended testes), congenital abnormalities of the genitourinary tract, enuresis, underdeveloped genitalia (due to delayed growth or delayed puberty, often an endocrinological problem), and vesicoureteral reflux.\nAndrology.\nAndrology is the medical specialty that deals with male health, particularly relating to the problems of the male reproductive system and urological problems that are unique to men such as prostate cancer, male fertility problems, and surgery of the male reproductive system. It is the counterpart to gynaecology, which deals with medical issues that are specific to female health, especially reproductive and urologic health.\nReconstructive urology.\nReconstructive urology is a highly specialized field of male urology that restores both structure and function to the genitourinary tract. Prostate procedures, full or partial hysterectomies, trauma (auto accidents, gunshot wounds, industrial accidents, straddle injuries, etc.), disease, obstructions, blockages (e.g., urethral strictures), and occasionally, childbirth, can necessitate reconstructive surgery. The urinary bladder, ureters (the tubes that lead from the kidneys to the urinary bladder) and genitalia are other examples of reconstructive urology.\nFemale urology.\nFemale urology is a branch of urology dealing with overactive bladder, pelvic organ prolapse, and urinary incontinence. Many of these physicians also practice neurourology and reconstructive urology as mentioned above. Female urologists complete a 1\u20133-year fellowship after completion of a 5\u20136-year urology residency. Thorough knowledge of the female pelvic floor together with intimate understanding of the physiology and pathology of voiding are necessary to diagnose and treat these disorders. Depending on the cause of the individual problem, a medical or surgical treatment can be the solution. Their field of practice heavily overlaps with that of urogynecologists, physicians in a sub-discipline of gynecology, who have done a three-year fellowship after a four-year OBGYN residency.\nJournals and organizations.\nThere are a number of peer-reviewed journals and publications about urology, including \"The Journal of Urology\", \"European Urology\", the \"African Journal of Urology\", \"British Journal of Urology International\", \"BMC Urology\", \"Indian Journal of Urology\", \"Nature Reviews Urology\", and \"Urology\".\nThere are national organizations such as the American Urological Association, the American Association of Clinical Urologists, European Association of Urology, the Large Urology Group Practice Association (LUGPA), and The Society for Basic Urologic Research. Urology is also included under the auspices of the International Continence Society.\nTeaching organizations include the European Board of Urology, as well as the Vattikuti Urology Institute in Detroit, which also hosts an annual International Robotic Urology Symposium devoted to new technologies. The American non-profit IVUMed teaches urology in developing countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32056", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32056", "title": "Useless languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "32057", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32057", "title": "Ubbi dubbi language", "text": ""}
{"id": "32058", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32058", "title": "Upper Iowa University", "text": "Private university in Fayette, Iowa, US\nUpper Iowa University (UIU) is a private university in Fayette, Iowa, United States. It enrolls around 3,000 students and offers distance education programs that include centers in the U.S., an online program, an independent study program, and formerly had centers in Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia.\nUpper Iowa offers undergraduate and graduate degree programs with 29 undergraduate majors, including art, business, conservation management, education, human services, information technology, liberal arts, math, nursing, psychology, science, and 6 graduate programs. It operates on two eight-week terms per semester, allowing students to take two classes per term. It is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission.\nUIU is the only NCAA Division II Athletics Program in the state of Iowa and a member of the Great Lakes Valley Conference (GLVC).\nHistory.\nIn 1854, Elizabeth Alexander, a pioneer living near what is now Fayette, Iowa, proposed the idea of a college to her husband, Robert, who donated $10,000 toward the cause. Their son-in-law, Samuel Robertson, donated $5,000 and of land. In 1856, the first Board of Trustees meeting was held; articles of Incorporation were adopted; and classes began January 7, 1857. The university was affiliated with the Methodist Church until 1928.\nIn 1861, a company of male students and faculty members enlisted in the Army to fight in the American Civil War. Student-soldiers participated in 17 major battles, carrying a flag hand-sewn by UIU women students. In 1917, UIU male students joined the armed forces during World War I, while women students organized American Red Cross classes on campus; the UIU gym became a barracks, and the athletic field was the scene of military drills. By 1920, a systematic program of extension work throughout northeast Iowa had begun, with Upper Iowa referred to as \"a pioneer in the field.\" Those students who joined the service to fight in World War II took advantage of the G.I. Bill to complete their education, which dramatically increased Upper Iowa enrollment between 1947 and 1950. Record enrollments were also seen after the Vietnam War (1952\u20131970).\nIn 1972, Upper Iowa launched an external degree program that included Independent Study and Online Programs. In 1978, Darcy C. Coyle was named president, a post in which he served until 1984, when he became President Emeritus.\nIn 1984 to present, UIU expanded to open locations across the U.S. Upper Iowa was approved by the Higher Learning Commission to offer graduate degrees in 1995, and in 1999 started its International Program by establishing centers in Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, and Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.\nIt was also during 1994 to 2003 that UIU underwent an aggressive landscaping and building renovation that brought changes to its Fayette campus. This included the construction of Lee Tower Residence Halls, the acquisition of a new physical plant building and the construction of a recreation center. In 2004, the new Andres Center for Business and Education was built, and Alan G. Walker was appointed the 20th president of the university. During summer 2009, the largest capital improvement project broke ground on the Fayette campus \u2014 $75 million \u2014 which will include a new student center, suite-style housing, and a Liberal Arts academic building.\nIn May 2023, in response to a worsening financial situation, the university cut its academic programs in sociology, information systems, information technology, intensive English and sports administration, several of its sports programs and two of its satellite campuses. The university's accreditor issued a public disclosure notice to warn the public about the university's financial distress.\nUIU Campus and town of Fayette.\nUpper Iowa's traditional residential campus is in Fayette, Iowa; a small town of 1,200 residents in the county of the same name, in far northeast Iowa. In 1984, the former Fayette Community School District merged with the larger North Fayette County Community Schools, headquartered in the nearby county seat town of West Union. In 2018, North Fayette itself merged with the Valley Community School District, to form the North Fayette Valley Community Schools, leaving Fayette with neither an elementary nor a secondary school. Consequently, Fayette is one of the few communities in the nation with a university but no public school within its boundaries.\nThe Fayette campus is primarily for undergraduate students, but a master's degree in education is also offered, along with two-week IXEL classes in the summer. Students can choose from 40 majors, with the most popular being Elementary Education and Teaching, Marketing/Marketing Management, General, and Natural Resources/Conservation. The Pleggenkuhle Prairie, donated by the Pleggenkuhle family to UIU, is of virgin prairie northwest of Hawkeye. It is used as a teaching tool for students to learn about the prairie ecosystem and to conduct prescribed burns and research projects at the site.\nAcademics.\nUpper Iowa University is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission. It has a chapter of the Alpha Chi National College Honor Society.\nDistance education.\nUpper Iowa Distance Education includes 15 center locations across the U.S. in Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Louisiana and Wisconsin, an Independent Study program, as well as an Online Program recognized by GetEducated.com Best Buy Rankings since 2007 and the Online Education Database (OEDb) Online College Rankings since 2007.\nUIU Center locations offer the flexibility of evening and weekend classes with a classroom experience. Independent Study and Online programs offer education \"anywhere, anytime.\" Over 40 undergraduate courses and graduate degrees (MPA, MBA, MHEA) are offered, with the option of mixing classroom and online courses.\nInternational program.\nUpper Iowa University has two international education centers located in the Pacific Rim. UIU offers undergraduate programs in business, communication and psychology to learners in Hong Kong and Malaysia. Through on-site faculty, faculty exchange, and visiting lecturers, UIU offers a program with a high level of academic rigor and quality.\nIn addition, UIU also offers a full on-line Master of Business Administration program with global access for students, as well as study abroad opportunities.\nRankings.\nUpper Iowa University was ranked by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in the category for 2017 Best Online Bachelor's Programs - 128th\nAthletics.\nUpper Iowa athletic teams are the Peacocks. The university is a member of the Division II level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Great Lakes Valley Conference (GLVC) since the 2023\u201324 academic year. The Peacocks previously competed in the Iowa Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (IIAC; now currently known as the American Rivers Conference since the 2018\u201319 academic year) of the NCAA Division III ranks from 1922\u201323 to 2002\u201303, and the Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference (NSIC) from 2006\u201307 to 2022\u201323. Their colors are blue and white.\nUpper Iowa competes in 22 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports began baseball, basketball, bowling, cross country, football, golf, soccer, track &amp; field and wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, bowling, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis, track &amp; field and volleyball; and co-ed sports include cheerleading, dance, eSports, spirit squad and shotgun sports.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32059", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32059", "title": "Unitarian Universalism", "text": "Non-creedal liberal religious movement\nUnitarian Universalism (UUism or UU) is a liberal religious tradition characterized by its commitment to theological diversity, inclusivity, and social justice. Unitarian Universalists do not adhere to a single creed or doctrine. Instead, they are unified by shared covenants across congregations based on foundational values and principles centered on love and pluralistic worship.\nThe beliefs of individual Unitarian Universalists range widely and are often contextual to the congregation. Founded upon Christian teachings, modern Unitarian Universalists can draw upon diverse theological and philosophical thought, including from religious humanism, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Taoism, neopaganism, atheism, agnosticism, New Age, and teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Worship can take place in churches, fellowships, congregations, and societies. Unitarian Universalists state that from these traditions comes a deep regard for intellectual freedom and inclusive love. Congregations and members seek inspiration and derive insight from all major world religions and as such do not have an official, unified corpus of sacred texts.\nThe development of Unitarian Universalism can be traced back to Protestantism and liberal Christianity through the Unitarianism and Christian Universalism traditions. The modern Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was formed in 1961 through the consolidation of the American Unitarian Association, established in 1825, and the Universalist Church of America, established in 1793. The UUA is headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts, and serves churches mostly in the United States. A group of thirty Philippine congregations is represented as a sole member within the UUA. The Canadian Unitarian Council (CUC) became an independent body in 2002. The UUA and CUC were two of the seventeen members of the now defunct International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (1995\u20132021).\nHistory.\nPuritan roots and Congregationalist background.\nUnitarian Universalism was formed from the consolidation in 1961 of two historically separate Christian denominations, the Universalist Church of America and the American Unitarian Association, both based in the United States; the new organization formed in this merger was the Unitarian Universalist Association. At the time of the North American consolidation, Unitarians and Universalists diverged beyond their roots in liberal Christian theology. They draw from a variety of religious traditions. Individuals may or may not self-identify as Christians or subscribe to Christian beliefs. Unitarian Universalist congregations and fellowships tend to retain some Christian traditions, such as Sunday worship with a sermon and the singing of hymns. The extent to which the elements of any particular faith tradition are incorporated into personal spiritual practice is a matter of individual choice for congregants, in keeping with a creedless, non-dogmatic approach to spirituality and faith development.\nNew England Unitarians evolved from the Pilgrim Fathers' Congregational Christianity, which was based on a literal reading of the Bible. Liberalizing Unitarians rejected the Trinitarian belief in the tri-personal godhead: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost/Spirit. Instead, they asserted a unitary notion of God. In addition, they rejected the doctrine of original sin, moving away from the Calvinism of the Congregationalists.\nNew England Universalists rejected the Puritan forefathers' emphasis on the select few, the Elect, who were supposed to be saved from eternal damnation by a just God. Instead Universalists asserted that all people will eventually be reconciled with God.\nUniversalism.\nUniversalists claim a long history, beginning with several Church Fathers, though some modern scholars question whether these church fathers taught the defining doctrine of Universalism (universal salvation).\nThis core doctrine asserts that through Christ every single human soul shall be saved, leading to the \"restitution of all things\" (apocatastasis). In 1793, Universalism emerged as a distinct denomination of Christianity in the United States, eventually called the Universalist Church of America. Early American advocates of universal salvation such as Elhanan Winchester, Hosea Ballou and John Murray taught that all souls would achieve salvation, sometimes after a period resembling purgatory. Christian Universalism denies the doctrine of everlasting damnation, and proclaims belief in an entirely loving God who will ultimately redeem all human beings.\nUnitarianism.\nAccording to Spanish physician, Michael Servetus, he studied the Bible and concluded that the concept of the Trinity, as traditionally conceived, was not biblical. His books \"On the Errors of the Trinity\" and \"Christianismi Restitutio\" caused much uproar. Servetus was eventually arrested, convicted of heresy, and burned at the stake in Geneva in 1553.\nThe term \"Unitarian\" entered the English language via Henry Hedworth, who applied it to the teachings of Laelio Sozzini and the Polish Socinians. Unitarian churches were formally established in Transylvania and Poland (by the Socinians) in the second half of the 16th century. There, the first doctrines of religious freedom in Europe were established (in the course of several diets between 1557 and 1568, see Edict of Torda) under the jurisdiction of John Sigismund, King of Hungary and Prince of Transylvania, the only Unitarian monarch. The early Unitarian church not only rejected the Trinity, but also the pre-existence of Christ as well as, in many cases, predestination and original sin as put forward by Augustine of Hippo, and the substitutionary atonement of Christ developed by Anselm of Canterbury and John Calvin. There were several different forms of Christology in the beginnings of the Unitarian movement; ultimately, the dominant Christology became psilanthropism: that Jesus was a man, but one with a unique relationship to God.\nGreat Britain.\nInfluenced by the Socinian doctrine of the Polish Brethren, the Unitarian minister Samuel Clarke (1675\u20131729) revised the \"Book of Common Prayer\", removing the Trinitarian Nicene Creed and references to Jesus as God. Theophilus Lindsey also revised the \"Book of Common Prayer\" to allow a more tolerant, free Unitarian interpretation. Neither cleric was charged under the Blasphemy Act 1697 that made it an \"offense for any person, educated in or having made profession of the Christian religion, by writing, preaching, teaching or advised speaking, to deny the Holy Trinity\". The Act of Toleration (1689) gave relief to English Dissenters, but excluded Unitarians. The efforts of Clarke and Lindsey met with substantial criticism from the more conservative clergy and laity of the Church of England. In response, in 1774, Lindsey applied for registration of the Essex House as a \"Dissenting place of worship\" with the assistance of barrister John Lee. On the Sunday following the registration\u2014April 17, 1774\u2014the first true Unitarian congregation discreetly convened in the provisional Essex Street Chapel. In attendance were Lee, Joseph Priestley and the agent of the Massachusetts Colony, Benjamin Franklin. Priestley also founded a reform congregation, but, after his home was burned down in the Priestley Riots, fled with his wife to America, where he became a leading figure in the founding of the church on American soil.\nOnce laity and clergy relaxed their vehement opposition to the Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813, which finally allowed for protections of dissenting religions, the British and Foreign Unitarian Association was founded in 1825. It has its headquarters in Essex Hall, successor to Lindsey's Essex House. Two that have been significant in national life are the Cross Street Chapel in Manchester and, Newington Green Unitarian Church in north London. Unitarian congregations in Britain meet under the auspices of the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. There are 170 communities of Unitarians across Britain. The Chief Officer of the British Unitarians was Liz Slade as of 2024.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the Unitarian movement began primarily in the Congregational parish churches of New England, which were part of the state church of Massachusetts. These churches, whose buildings may still be seen in many New England town squares, trace their roots to the division of the Puritan colonies into parishes for the administration of their religious needs. In the late 18th century, conflict grew within some of these churches between Unitarian and Trinitarian factions. In 1805, Unitarians gained key faculty positions at Harvard. In 1819 William Ellery Channing preached the ordination sermon for Jared Sparks in Baltimore, outlining the Unitarian position. The American Unitarian Association was founded as a separate denomination in 1825.\nBy coincidence and unknown to both parties, the AUA was formed on the same day\u2014May 26, 1825\u2014as the British and Foreign Unitarian Association.\nIn the 19th century, under the influence of Ralph Waldo Emerson (who had been a Unitarian minister) and other transcendentalists, Unitarianism began its long journey from liberal Protestantism to its more pluralist form.\nIntegration, 1825\u20131961.\nAfter the schism in the Congregational Churches resulting in the foundation (1825) of the American Unitarian Association, some of those churches remained within the Congregational fold and became member congregations of the Congregational organization (later the United Church of Christ), while others voted to become Unitarian. Some of the latter eventually became part of the Unitarian Universalist Association (formed in 1961) during a consolidation of the Unitarian and Universalist churches. Universalist churches in contrast followed a different path, having begun as independent congregations beyond the bounds of the established Puritan churches entirely. The UUA and the United Church of Christ cooperate jointly on social justice initiatives such as the Sexuality Education Advocacy Training project.\nIn 1961, the American Unitarian Association (AUA) was consolidated with the Universalist Church of America (UCA), thus forming the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA). In the same year, the Canadian Unitarian Council (CUC) formed. The Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was given corporate status in May 1961 under special acts of legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of New York.\nIn 1998, the Canadian Unitarian Council and Unitarian Universalist Association dissolved their financial accord, although they continue to cooperate. The CUC had come into being at Meadville Lombard Theological School in 1961. However the continual decline of denominational churches and the almost complete failure of the Universalist movement in Canada had caused the formation of the Council to prompt a plan to merge with the UUA. Opposition to Liberal religious freedom relaxed, so that by 2002 it was agreed to increase autonomy and funding. The amalgamation proved troublesome for the Canadians, a small minority largely ignored, with only 45 congregations and 5,200 members\u2014the Americans were insensitive to cultural differences.\nBeliefs and practices.\nDiversity of beliefs and scriptures.\nAccording to the Unitarian Universalist Association, Unitarian Universalism is a religion marked by freedom, reason, and acceptance. As such, Unitarian Universalists practice a non-creedal religion that does not require one to believe in any particular belief or doctrine. Rather than sharing common beliefs, Unitarian Universalists are united by a common history, the affirmation of each person's individual spiritual quest, and a covenant to uphold the community's shared spiritual values. As such, Unitarian Universalists vary greatly in their beliefs, and a plurality of beliefs often defines Unitarian Universalist congregations.\nUnitarian Universalists are encouraged to engage in their own unique spiritual journey and to follow their conscience in their beliefs. Unitarian Universalism is seen as compatible with other spiritual paths, and individual Unitarian Universalists are encouraged to engage in their own spiritual journey, whatever the path. Unitarian Universalists are not required to renounce previous faith traditions to join a Unitarian Universalist congregation. As a result, individual practitioners may simultaneously identify as Unitarian Universalists and other faith traditions.\nAlthough Unitarian Universalism draws its roots from Christian sources, contemporary Unitarian Universalists in North America view their religion as multifaith and drawing on a variety of sources, both religious and secular. Unitarian Universalism encourages its members to draw on the world's religions as well as the words and deeds of prophetic people as inspiration for their spiritual journeys. Although members are cautioned to be aware of possible cultural appropriation of traditions that do not belong to them, Unitarian Universalists are encouraged to find wisdom in a diverse spectrum of religions, customs, and cultures from around the world.\nHumanism and beliefs about divinity.\nAlthough the predecessors of Unitarian Universalism, Unitarianism and Universalism, find their origin in unorthodox beliefs about the nature of the Christian God, modern Unitarian Universalists hold a variety of views about the nature and existence of deity. Most Unitarian Universalist congregations take no formal stance on whether or not a god or gods exist but leave it up to individual members to decide for themselves what they believe. Unitarian Universalists may be atheists, agnostics, and theists. Among those Unitarian Universalists who use language of divinity, both monotheism and polytheism are common, and Unitarian Universalists hold a variety of beliefs about the nature of the divine.\nThe diversity of beliefs about divinity in Unitarian Universalism can be accounted for because of the influence of religious humanism on the movement in the late nineteenth century. Although Unitarian Universalists believe that anyone can be a Humanist, regardless of their position on the use of the language of divinity, the rise of religious humanism within Unitarian Universalism enables members to be able to further question the existence and nature of the divine through its encouragement towards reason. Fifteen of the thirty-four signers of Humanist Manifesto I were Unitarians and one was a Universalist. Unitarian Universalists were also a significant presence among the signers of Humanist Manifestos II and III.\nToday, the majority of Unitarian Universalists in North America identify as Humanists. Although Humanism is seen as an evolving philosophy where the limits of science and reason are recognized, its tenets continue to play a large role in the thought of Unitarian Universalist congregations. Unitarian Universalist Humanists hold that the naturalism of their Humanism encourages individuals to recognize the awe, beauty, and wonder of the natural world and recognize the interdependence between humans and other beings.\nCovenant.\nIn the absence of shared beliefs, Unitarian Universalists often see their religion as a covenantal (as opposed to a creedal) one. Unitarian Universalists see covenants as the promises that bind congregations, communities, and individuals together in a community. In Unitarian Universalism, covenants are mutual promises among individuals and communities about how they will behave and engage with each other. Covenants help create trust and care among Unitarian Universalists and in their congregations.\nRather than creating things people have to do, covenants in Unitarian Universalist communities create freedom by helping members know what to expect from each other. In the words of Unitarian Universalist minister Alice Blair Wesley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...authentic human freedom is of necessity, lawful freedom, and because we receive the possibility of freedom as a gift of the way things are, an authentic covenant is: a glad promise to live freely together, insofar as we are able, in accordance with the laws of reality that make our freedom possible. This is true whether the agreement is between just two, as in a union of marriage, or whether the agreement is among millions, as in a free nation, or whether the agreement is among members who gather to be a free congregation.\nThe use of covenants in the Unitarian Universalist community dates back to 1646 and the creation of the Cambridge Platform by the Congregational churches of colonial New England, some of whom would later become Unitarians, predecessors of modern Unitarian Universalists. The Platform was the first formal declaration of the principles of church order and governance in colonial North America. Today, many Unitarian Universalist congregations create their own covenants, often called covenants of right relations, to lay out the principles of their congregations formally.\nPrinciples.\nIn the United States, members of the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) covenanted together via the seven Principles and Purposes, formerly a part of Article II of the UUA bylaws. These Principles and Purposes were statements of shared values that Unitarian Universalist congregations agreed to uphold:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese principles, first adopted in 1960 and later revised in 1984 and 1985, proved so popular that many Unitarian Universalists came to see them as a wisdom source in and of themselves and a guide for participation in Unitarian Universalist congregations.\nIn June, 2024, the UUA's General Assembly voted to replace the 7 principles in Article II of the UUA bylaws with a new covenant of 7 values. The central value is love. The other 6 are: interdependence, equity, transformation, pluralism, generosity, and justice.\nIn Canada, members of the Canadian Unitarian Council affirm the seven principles along with an eighth principle: \"Individual and communal action that accountably dismantles racism and systemic barriers to full inclusion in ourselves and our institutions.\"\nIn the Philippines, where Unitarian Universalism is much more theistically oriented, member congregations of the Unitarian Universalist Church of the Philippines affirm the seven principles, but with the addition of their own first principle: \"There is God. God is love.\"\nJustice.\nUnitarian Universalism believes that actions taken to make the world a better place are more important than what a person actually believes, as espoused by a common slogan in Unitarian Universalist congregations, \"Deeds, not creeds.\" They hold that belief divorced from action does not change the world and that good intentions often lead to a worse situation in the long term. Unitarian Universalist thinkers have long recognized the need to bring belief and action together and encourage their members to go into the larger world and improve it.\nBecause of this importance of action, Unitarian Universalists have long been involved in social, economic, and environmental justice movements, both through organizations created by Unitarian Universalists and through local, regional, national, and international grassroots organizing. Many Unitarian Universalists see this work as inseparable from their Unitarian Universalist faith and see their participation in justice movements as a deeply important part of their religious faith.\nHistorically, the Unitarian Universalist Association's predecessor movements, Unitarianism and Universalism, saw members involved in abolitionism, women's suffrage, pacifism, temperance, and prison reform. Today, Unitarian Universalists are deeply involved in causes such as racial justice and the Black Lives Matter movement, LGBTQ movements, feminism and women's rights, immigration justice, reproductive rights, climate justice, and economic inequality.\nWorship and practices.\nDiversity of practices.\nThe Unitarian belief that reason, and not creed, defines the search for truth, and the Universalist belief that God embraces all people equally has led to the current Unitarian Universalist belief that truth and spiritual meaning can be found in all faiths. This is reflected in the wide array of spiritual practices found among Unitarian Universalists today. Many Unitarian Universalist congregations include Buddhist-style meditation groups, Jewish Seder, Yom Kippur and Passover dinners, \"iftaar\" meals (marking the breaking of Ramadan fast for Muslims), and Christmas Eve/Winter Solstice services. Children's and youth's religious education classes teach about the divinity of the world and the sanctity of world religions. One of its more popular curricula, Neighboring Faiths (formerly Church Across the Street), takes middle and high school participants to visit the places of worship of many faith traditions including a Hindu temple, a Reform or Orthodox synagogue, and a Catholic church.\nThere is great variety among Unitarian Universalist congregations, with some favoring particular religious beliefs or forms of worship over others, with many more home to an eclectic mix of beliefs. Regardless of their orientation, most congregations are fairly open to differing beliefs, though not always with various faith traditions represented to the same degree.\nDiversity of congregations.\nThere is a wide variety in how congregations conceive of themselves, calling themselves \"churches\", \"societies\", \"fellowships\", \"congregations\", or eschew the use of any particular descriptor. Many use the name \"Unitarian Universalist\", (and a few \"Universalist Unitarian\"), having gradually adopted this formulation since consolidation in 1961. Others use names that reflect their historic roots by keeping the historical designation \"Unitarian\" or \"Universalist\" (e.g. \"First Unitarian Church\"). A few congregations use neither (e.g. Unity Temple). For some congregations, the name can be a clue to their theological orientation. For others, avoidance of the word \"church\" indicates a desire to distance itself from traditional Christian theology. Sometimes the use of another term may simply indicate a congregation's lay-led or relatively new status. However, some Unitarian Universalist congregations have grown to appreciate alternative terms such as \"fellowship\" and retained them even though they have grown much larger or lost features sometimes associated with their use (such as, in the case of fellowships, a traditionally lay-led worship model).\nAlso of note is that there are many more people who identify as Unitarian Universalist on surveys than those who attend Unitarian Universalist congregations (by a factor of four in a recent survey), reflecting those who have never joined (and lapsed members) but nonetheless consider themselves part of the Unitarian Universalist movement.\nElevator speeches.\nIn 2004, \"UU World\" magazine asked for contributions of \"elevator speeches\" explaining Unitarian Universalism. These are short speeches that could be made in the course of an elevator ride to those who knew nothing of the religion. Here are examples of the speeches submitted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Unitarian Universalist congregations, we gather in community to support our individual spiritual journeys. We trust that openness to one another's experiences will enhance our understanding of our own links with the divine, with our history, and with one another.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Most Unitarian Universalists believe that nobody has a monopoly on all truth, or ultimate proof of the truth of everything in any one belief. Therefore, one's own truth is unprovable, as is that of others. Consequently, we should respect the beliefs of others, as well as their right to hold those beliefs. Conversely, we expect that others should respect our right to our own beliefs. Several UU's then, would likely hold as many different beliefs. Other beliefs they may hold in common are a respect for others, for nature, and for common decency, leading to a particular caring for the poor, the weak and the downtrodden. As a result, issues of justice, including social justice are held in common among most.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's a blessing each of us was born; It matters what we do with our lives; What each of us knows about God is a piece of the truth; We don't have to do it alone.\nWorship and ritual.\nAs in theology, Unitarian Universalist worship and ritual are often a combination of elements derived from other faith traditions alongside original practices and symbols. In form, church services might be difficult to distinguish from those of a Protestant church, but they vary widely among congregations.\nSymbols.\nThe most common symbol of Unitarian Universalism is the flaming chalice, often framed by two overlapping rings that many interpret as representing Unitarianism and Universalism (the symbol has no official interpretation). The chalice itself has long been a symbol of liberal religion, and indeed liberal Christianity (the Disciples of Christ also use a chalice as their denomination symbol). The flaming chalice was initially the logo of the Unitarian Service Committee during the Second World War. It was created by Austrian artist Hans Deutsch. The holy oil burning in it is a symbol of helpfulness and sacrifice.\nNevertheless, other interpretations have been suggested, such as the chalice used by the followers of Czech Jan Hus, which was supposedly reverential of Eastern Orthodox traditions; although Hus's early National Church was intrinsically an evangelical Protestant. In some agnostic historiographies the flaming chalice displayed a vague resemblance to a cross in some stylized representations, relying on the sepulchral traditions of the Hospitallers. Many Unitarian Universalist congregations light a chalice at the beginning of worship services. Other symbols include an off-center cross within a circle (a Universalist symbol associated with the Humiliati movement in the 1950s, a group of reformist, liturgically minded clergy seeking to revive Universalism).\nOther symbols include a pair of open hands releasing a dove.\nServices of worship.\nReligious services are usually held on Sundays and most closely resemble the form and format of Protestant worship in the Reformed tradition. Services at a vast majority of congregations follow a structure that focuses on a sermon or presentation by a minister, a lay leader of the congregation, or an invited speaker. Sermons may cover a wide range of topics. Since Unitarian Universalists do not recognize a particular text or set of texts as primary or inherently superior, inspiration can be found in many different religious or cultural texts as well as the personal experiences of the minister.\nThe service also includes hymn-singing, accompanied by organ, piano, or other available instruments, and possibly led by a song leader or choir. The most recent worship songbook published by the denomination, \"Singing the Journey\" contains 75 songs and is a supplement to the older \"Singing the Living Tradition\" which contains readings as well. Hymns typically sung in Unitarian Universalist services come from a variety of sources\u2014traditional hymn tunes with new or adapted lyrics, spirituals, folk songs from various cultures, or original compositions by Unitarian Universalist musicians are just a few. Instrumental music is also a common feature of the typical worship service, including preludes, offertory music, postludes, or music for contemplation.\nPastoral elements of the service may include a time for sharing Joys and Sorrows/Concerns, where individuals in the congregation are invited to light a candle or say a few words about important events in their personal lives. Many also include a time of meditation or prayer, led by the minister or service leader, both spoken and silent. Responsive readings and stories for children are also typical. Many congregations also allow for a time at the end of the service, called \"talk back\", where members of the congregation can respond to the sermon with their own insights and questions, or even disagree with the viewpoint expressed by the minister or invited speaker.\nMany Unitarian Universalist congregations no longer observe the Christian sacraments of baptism, communion, or confirmation, at least in their traditional forms or under their traditional names. Congregations that continue these practices under their more traditional names are often federated churches or members of the Council of Christian Churches within the Unitarian Universalist Association (CCCUUA), or may have active chapters associated with the Unitarian Universalist Christian Fellowship or similar covenant groups. \"Child dedications\" often replace more traditional infant baptisms (such \"dedications\" are sometimes practiced even in \"orthodox\" Christian communities that do not baptize infants for theological reasons). Annual celebrations of Water Communion and Flower Communion may replace or supplement Christian-style communion (though many pluralist and Christian-oriented congregations may celebrate or otherwise make provisions for communion on Christian holy days). Confirmation may be replaced by a \"Coming of Age\" program, in which teenagers explore their individual religious identity, often developing their own credo. After they have completed exploring their spiritual beliefs, they write a speech about it which they then personally deliver to the congregation.\nServices can vary widely between congregations, and can incorporate dancing, contemporary music and poetry, readings taken from secular fiction or original works by congregants.\nPolitics.\nHistorical politics of Unitarians and Universalists.\nIn the 19th century, Unitarians and Universalists were active in abolitionism, the women's movement, the temperance movement, and other social reform movements. The second women's rights convention was held at the First Unitarian Church of Rochester, New York. Additionally, four Presidents of the United States were Unitarians: John Adams, John Quincy Adams, Millard Fillmore, and William Howard Taft.\nPolitics of Unitarian Universalists.\nHistorically, Unitarian Universalists have often been active in political causes, notably the civil rights movement, the LGBT rights movement, the social justice movement, and the feminist movement.\nSusan B. Anthony, a Unitarian and Quaker, was extremely influential in the women's suffrage movement. Unitarian Universalists and Quakers still share many principles. It is therefore common to see Unitarian Universalists and Quakers working together.\nUnitarian Universalists were and are still very involved in the fight to end racism in the United States. John Haynes Holmes, a Unitarian minister and social activist at The Community Church of New York\u2014Unitarian Universalist was among the founders of both the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909 and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), chairing the latter for a time. James J. Reeb, a minister at All Souls Church, Unitarian, in Washington, D.C., and a member of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, was clubbed in Selma, Alabama on March 8, 1965, and died two days later of massive head trauma. Two weeks after his death, Viola Liuzzo, a Unitarian Universalist civil rights activist, was murdered by white supremacists after her participation in the protest march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama. The Selma to Montgomery marches for voting rights are best known for Bloody Sunday, which refers to March 7, 1965, the most violent of the three marches.\nThe past head of the Unitarian Universalist Association 2001\u20132009, William G. Sinkford, is African-American, making Unitarian Universalism one of the first traditionally white denominations to be headed by a member of a racial minority.\nWhile political liberals make up a clear majority of Unitarian Universalists, the movement aspires to diversity, and officially welcomes congregants regardless of their political views. Politically conservative Unitarian Universalists point out that neither theological liberalism nor the Principles and Purposes of the UUA require liberal politics. Like the beliefs of Unitarian Universalists, politics are decided by individuals, not by congregations or the denomination.\nSeveral congregations have undertaken a series of organizational, procedural and practical steps to become acknowledged as a \"Welcoming Congregation\": a congregation which has taken specific steps to welcome and integrate gay, lesbian, bisexual &amp; transgender (LGBT) members. Unitarian Universalist ministers perform same-sex unions and now same-sex marriages where legal (and sometimes when not, as a form of civil protest). On June 29, 1984, the Unitarian Universalists became the first major church \"to approve religious blessings on homosexual unions.\" Unitarian Universalists have been in the forefront of the work to make same-sex marriages legal in their local states and provinces, as well as on the national level. Gay men, bisexuals, and lesbians are also regularly ordained as ministers, and a number of gay, bisexual, and lesbian ministers have, themselves, now become legally married to their partners. In May 2004, Arlington Street Church, in Boston, Massachusetts, was the site of the first state-sanctioned same-sex marriage in the United States. The official stance of the UUA is for the legalization of same-sex marriage\u2014\"Siding with Love\". In 2004 UU minister Debra Haffner of The Religious Institute on Sexual Morality, Justice, and Healing published \"An Open Letter on Religious Leaders on Marriage Equality\" to affirm same-sex marriage from a multi-faith perspective. In December 2009, Washington, D.C., Mayor Adrian Fenty signed the bill to legalize same-sex marriage for the District of Columbia in All Souls Church.\nUnitarian Universalists for Polyamory Awareness engages Unitarian Universalist ministers and other leaders to educate them on polyamory. At the 2015 UUA General Assembly, the Association's non-discrimination rule was amended to include the category of \"family and relationship structures\"; the UUA has yet to take specific follow-up action on this, however.\nMany congregations are heavily involved in projects and efforts aimed at supporting environmental causes and sustainability. These are often termed \"seventh principle\" activities because of the seventh principle quoted above.\nControversies.\nExternal.\nLack of formal creed.\nIn May 2004, Texas Comptroller Carole Keeton Strayhorn ruled that Unitarian Universalism was not a \"religion\" because it \"does not have one system of belief\", and stripped the Red River Unitarian Universalist Church in Denison, Texas, of its tax-exempt status. However, within weeks, Strayhorn reversed her decision.\nConfusion with other groups.\nThere are separate movements and organizations who hold to classical Unitarian or Christian universalist Christian theology and neither belong to the Unitarian Universalist Association nor consider themselves Unitarian Universalists. The American Unitarian Conference and the Christian Universalist Association are the two most significant organizations representing these theological beliefs today. Christians who hold these beliefs tend to consider themselves the true Unitarians or Universalists and heirs of the theological legacy of the original American Unitarian Association or Universalist Church of America, and they do not wish to be confused with Unitarian Universalists. The Unity Church is another denomination that is often confused with Unitarian Universalism.\nBoy Scouts of America.\nIn 1992, the UUA published statements opposing the BSA's policies of discriminating against homosexuals, atheists, and agnostics; and in 1993, the UUA updated the curriculum guidance of its \"Religion in Life\" emblems program for young people in scouting to include criticism of the BSA policies. On account of the published criticism, in 1998 the BSA withdrew its recognition of UUA's Religion in Life emblem program. Subsequently, the UUA removed the objectionable material from the program curriculum and the BSA renewed recognition of the Religion in Life program. Later, the UUA issued internal, supplemental material to emblems-program workbooks that included general statements critical of discrimination on bases of sexual orientation or personal religious viewpoint. When the BSA learned of those (internal) statements it again withdrew recognition of the UUA Religion in Life emblems program.\nIn 2004, the Unitarian Universalist Scouters Organization (UUSO), a group not affiliated with the UUA, established their \"Living Your Religion\" emblems program for UU-BSA scouts. Without the knowledge or approval of the UUA, the program was approved by the BSA Religious Relationships committee in 2005. Upon being notified of the UUSO program the UUA issued a statement (March 16, 2005) clarifying that UUSO was not an affiliate organization of the UUA and asserting that, contrary to reports otherwise, UU congregations were still awarding the UUA Religion in Life emblem to their youth members in BSA Scouts\u2014whose emblems then were worn on the Scouts' uniforms without complaint from the BSA. Further, the statement made clear that the UUA still maintained its criticism of both the BSA's ongoing discrimination against gay Scouts and gay Scout leaders and the BSA requirement of a religious litmus test for membership.\nLater events made these issues moot: In 2013, BSA opened its membership to gay youth, followed by opening membership to gay adults in 2015, which policy changes resolved the main UUA objection to supporting BSA. The UUSO dissolved in 2015 and by 2016, via a memorandum of understanding, the UUA religious emblems program was again formally recognized by BSA.\nInternal.\nLanguage of reverence.\nDuring the presidency of William Sinkford, debate roiled the Unitarian Universalist (U.U.) movement over his call to return to, or to re-create, an authentic Unitarian Universalist \"language of reverence.\" Sinkford suggested that as Unitarian Universalists abandoned traditional religious language they would relinquish, to others, religion's words of power. These other religionists would proceed to dictate their meanings of religious words and language, including scripture, in the public sphere. He advocated that Unitarian Universalists should regain their proper seat at the interfaith table by making this language their own. In response, others saw his idea as an effort to return Unitarian Universalist congregations to more orthodox Christian worship patterns. Indeed, some were concerned that it might be a call to oppose the growing influence among UUs of humanism and atheism, the adherents of which would be made unwelcome within the community. Sinkford denied such motives, citing the words of Unitarian Universalist humanists as examples of what he meant by \"language of reverence\".\nThe growth of humanism among Unitarian Universalists stemmed in part from the congregational commitment to reach a universal audience while educating U.U. folk in biblical literacy, many of whom were born into families that eschewed or minimized religious or moral catechisms. (In addition to humanists, these people comprehend atheists and theists, agnostics, skeptics and seekers, non-member affiliates, the religion-alienated and others among the larger UU congregation.)\nThe debate saw the publication of a book by the UUA Beacon Press, written by former UUA President John Buehrens and titled \"Understanding the Bible: An Introduction for skeptics, seekers, and religious liberals\". Meant to serve as a kind of handbook to be read alongside the Bible, it provides interpretative strategies from a liberal religious perspective for the reader to engage in conversation about the Bible\u2014what it says and what it means today. Positive engagement is intended rather than to relinquish all public conversation to others over interpretation of the Bible. Another important work by Buehrens, with Forrest Church, is \"A Chosen Faith: An Introduction to Unitarian Universalism\", in which the authors present the many sources of the Unitarian Universalist faith.\nBorrowing from other religions.\nThe \"borrowing\" of religious rituals from other faith traditions by Unitarian Universalists was discussed at the Unitarian Universalist General Assembly in 2001 during a seminar titled \"Cultural Appropriation: Reckless Borrowing or Appropriate Cultural Sharing\" by the Religious Education Dept, UUA. Of particular discussion was the borrowing rituals and practices that are sacred to specific tribes or using spiritual practices without real context.\nRacism.\nInternal controversy over the hiring of the UUA's Southern Region Lead (a white man from outside the region was hired rather than a Latina woman who resided within the region) led to resignations and apologies in 2017. UUA President Peter Morales, the denomination's first Latino president, resigned amid criticism of his failure to address the diversity controversies. The three co-presidents who took over commissioned a \"racism audit\" to address white supremacy within the denomination. In April 2018, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the UUA \"in the past year has been asked to help resolve 15 congregational conflicts involving religious professionals of color\".\nNumber of members.\nAs of 2020, the UUA had 1,027 Unitarian Universalist member congregations in the United States and some congregations outside the US. In 2011, it had two congregations in the U.S. Virgin Islands, 19 in Canada, six in other countries, plus 28 multi-denominational member congregations: 17 in Massachusetts, four in Illinois, three in New Hampshire, two in Vermont, and one each in Maine and Washington, D.C. Seven of the ten U.S. states with the most congregations are also among the most populous states; the state with the most congregations and members is Massachusetts; Vermont is No.\u00a01 relative to its total population. As of December\u00a02023 there are 42\u00a0Unitarian Universalist congregations and emerging groups in Canada affiliated with the CUC.\nIn 1956, Sam Wells wrote, \"Unitarians and Universalists are considering merger which would have total U.S. membership of ( in the world)\". In 1965 Conkin wrote, \"In 1961, at the time of the merger, membership [in the United States] was 104,821 in 651\u00a0congregations, and the joint membership soared to its historically highest level in the mid-1960s (an estimated ) before falling sharply back in the 1970s\u00a0...\". According to the 2008 \"Yearbook of American &amp; Canadian Churches\", the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations claimed 214,738\u00a0members in 2002.\nIn the United States, the American Religious Identification Survey reported \u00a0members describing themselves as Unitarian Universalist in 2001, an increase from reported in a similar survey in 1990. The highest concentrations are in New England and around Seattle, Washington.\nThe U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, conducted in 2007 by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life and featuring a sample size of over , puts the proportion of American adults identifying as Unitarian Universalist at 0.3%.\nThe 2001 Canadian census done by Statistics Canada put Canadian Unitarians at 17,480, and the September\u00a02007 membership statistics from the CUC show they had at that time 5,150\u00a0official members. In 2015, the CUC reported 3,804 members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32060", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32060", "title": "Unfalsifiable", "text": ""}
{"id": "32061", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32061", "title": "Urea cycle", "text": "Set of biochemical reactions\nThe urea cycle (also known as the ornithine cycle) is a cycle of biochemical reactions that produces urea (NH2)2CO from ammonia (NH3). Animals that use this cycle, mainly amphibians and mammals, are called ureotelic.\nThe urea cycle converts highly toxic ammonia to urea for excretion. This cycle was the first metabolic cycle to be discovered by Hans Krebs and Kurt Henseleit in 1932, five years before the discovery of the TCA cycle. The urea cycle was described in more detail later on by Ratner and Cohen. The urea cycle takes place primarily in the liver and, to a lesser extent, in the kidneys.\nFunction.\nAmino acid catabolism results in waste ammonia. All animals need a way to excrete this product. Most aquatic organisms, or ammonotelic organisms, excrete ammonia without converting it. Organisms that cannot easily and safely remove nitrogen as ammonia convert it to a less toxic substance, such as urea, via the urea cycle, which occurs mainly in the liver. Urea produced by the liver is then released into the bloodstream, where it travels to the kidneys and is ultimately excreted in urine. The urea cycle is essential to these organisms, because if the nitrogen or ammonia is not eliminated from the organism it can be very detrimental. In species including birds and most insects, the ammonia is converted into uric acid or its urate salt, which is excreted in solid form. Further, the urea cycle consumes acidic waste carbon dioxide by combining it with the basic ammonia, helping to maintain a neutral pH.\nReactions.\nThe entire process converts two amino groups, one from NH4+ and one from aspartate, and a carbon atom from HCO3-, to the relatively nontoxic excretion product urea. This occurs at the cost of four \"high-energy\" phosphate bonds (3 ATP hydrolyzed to 2 ADP and one AMP). The conversion from ammonia to urea happens in five main steps. The first is needed for ammonia to enter the cycle and the following four are all a part of the cycle itself. To enter the cycle, ammonia is converted to carbamoyl phosphate. The urea cycle consists of four enzymatic reactions: one mitochondrial and three cytosolic. This uses 6 enzymes.\nThe reactions of the urea cycle\n1 -ornithine&lt;br&gt;2 carbamoyl phosphate&lt;br&gt;3 -citrulline&lt;br&gt;4 argininosuccinate&lt;br&gt;5 fumarate&lt;br&gt;6 -arginine&lt;br&gt;7 urea&lt;br&gt; -Asp -aspartate&lt;br&gt;CPS-1 carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I&lt;br&gt;OTC Ornithine transcarbamoylase&lt;br&gt;ASS argininosuccinate synthetase&lt;br&gt;ASL argininosuccinate lyase&lt;br&gt;ARG1 arginase 1\nFirst reaction: entering the urea cycle.\nBefore the urea cycle begins ammonia is converted to carbamoyl phosphate. The reaction is catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I and requires the use of two ATP molecules. The carbamoyl phosphate then enters the urea cycle.\nOverall reaction equation.\nIn the first reaction, NH4+ + HCO3- is equivalent to NH3 + CO2 + H2O.\nThus, the overall equation of the urea cycle is:\nSince fumarate is obtained by removing NH3 from aspartate (by means of reactions 3 and 4), and PPi + H2O \u2192 2 Pi, the equation can be simplified as follows:\nNote that reactions related to the urea cycle also cause the production of 2 NADH, so the overall reaction releases slightly more energy than it consumes. The NADH is produced in two ways:\nWe can summarize this by combining the reactions:\nThe two NADH produced can provide energy for the formation of 5 ATP (cytosolic NADH provides 2.5 ATP with the malate-aspartate shuttle in human liver cell), a net production of two high-energy phosphate bond for the urea cycle. However, if gluconeogenesis is underway in the cytosol, the latter reducing equivalent is used to drive the reversal of the GAPDH step instead of generating ATP.\nThe fate of oxaloacetate is either to produce aspartate via transamination or to be converted to phosphoenolpyruvate, which is a substrate for gluconeogenesis.\nRegulation.\n\"N\"-Acetylglutamic acid.\nThe synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate and the urea cycle are dependent on the presence of \"N\"-acetylglutamic acid (NAcGlu), which allosterically activates CPS1. NAcGlu is an obligate activator of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. Synthesis of NAcGlu by \"N\"-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) is stimulated by both Arg, allosteric stimulator of NAGS, and Glu, a product in the transamination reactions and one of NAGS's substrates, both of which are elevated when free amino acids are elevated. So Glu not only is a substrate for NAGS but also serves as an activator for the urea cycle.\nSubstrate concentrations.\nThe remaining enzymes of the cycle are controlled by the concentrations of their substrates. Thus, inherited deficiencies in cycle enzymes other than do not result in significant decreases in urea production (if any cycle enzyme is entirely missing, death occurs shortly after birth). Rather, the deficient enzyme's substrate builds up, increasing the rate of the deficient reaction to normal.\nThe anomalous substrate buildup is not without cost, however. The substrate concentrations become elevated all the way back up the cycle to NH4+, resulting in hyperammonemia (elevated [NH4+]P).\nAlthough the root cause of NH4+ toxicity is not completely understood, a high [NH4+] puts an enormous strain on the NH4+-clearing system, especially in the brain (symptoms of urea cycle enzyme deficiencies include intellectual disability and lethargy). This clearing system involves and , which decrease the 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and Glu pools. The brain is most sensitive to the depletion of these pools. Depletion of 2OG decreases the rate of TCAC, whereas Glu is both a neurotransmitter and a precursor to GABA, another neurotransmitter.\nLink with the citric acid cycle.\nThe urea cycle and the citric acid cycle are independent cycles but are linked. One of the nitrogen atoms in the urea cycle is obtained from the transamination of oxaloacetate to aspartate. The fumarate that is produced in step three is also an intermediate in the citric acid cycle and is returned to that cycle.\nUrea cycle disorders.\nUrea cycle disorders are rare and affect about one in 35,000 people in the United States. Genetic defects in the enzymes involved in the cycle can occur, which usually manifest within a few days after birth. The recently born child will typically experience varying bouts of vomiting and periods of lethargy. Ultimately, the infant may go into a coma and develop brain damage. New-borns with UCD are at a much higher risk of complications or death due to untimely screening tests and misdiagnosed cases. The most common misdiagnosis is neonatal sepsis. Signs of UCD can be present within the first 2 to 3 days of life, but the present method to get confirmation by test results can take too long. This can potentially cause complications such as coma or death.\nUrea cycle disorders may also be diagnosed in adults, and symptoms may include delirium episodes, lethargy, and symptoms similar to that of a stroke. On top of these symptoms, if the urea cycle begins to malfunction in the liver, the patient may develop cirrhosis. This can also lead to sarcopenia (the loss of muscle mass). Mutations lead to deficiencies of the various enzymes and transporters involved in the urea cycle, and cause urea cycle disorders. If individuals with a defect in any of the six enzymes used in the cycle ingest amino acids beyond what is necessary for the minimum daily requirements, then the ammonia that is produced will not be able to be converted to urea. These individuals can experience hyperammonemia, or the build-up of a cycle intermediate.\nIndividual disorders.\nAll urea cycle defects, except OTC deficiency, are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. OTC deficiency is inherited as an X-linked recessive disorder, although some females can show symptoms. Most urea cycle disorders are associated with hyperammonemia, however argininemia and some forms of argininosuccinic aciduria do not present with elevated ammonia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32062", "revid": "28358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32062", "title": "Usedom Peninsula", "text": ""}
{"id": "32064", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32064", "title": "Universal Time Coordinated", "text": ""}
{"id": "32065", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32065", "title": "Ugo Nespolo", "text": "Italian painter and sculptor\nUgo Nespolo (born 29 August 1941 in Mosso, Biella) is an Italian artist, painter, sculptor, filmmaker and writer. He lives and works in Turin.\nLife and works.\nNespolo graduated at the Accademia Albertina di Belle Arti of Turin with Enrico Paulucci and obtained a degree in Modern Literature at the University of Turin, with a thesis on Semiology.\nHis career as an artist started in the 1960s. His work was influenced by Pop Art, which was becoming popular in Italy in those years, conceptual art, Arte Povera and Fluxus. He had a chance to see and appreciate closely these movements during a trip to the United States in 1967. He would then continue to regularly visit the States, where he would spend long periods of time, especially during the 1980s. Irony and transgression became key element in Nespolo's art and characterised his work for many years to come.\nSince 2010 he has been member of the Honour Committee of \"Immagine &amp; Poesia\", an artistic literary movement founded in Turin, with the patronage of Aeronwy Thomas (Dylan Thomas's daughter). In 2016 he signed the pptArt Manifesto, an international art movement that promote many notable initiatives like the Corporate Art Awards.\nCinema.\nIn the mid-1960s Nespolo started to work with experimental cinema. His first film, \"Grazie, mamma Kodak\", is from 1966. His friends and fellow artists such as Lucio Fontana, Enrico Baj, Michelangelo Pistoletto and others appeared regularly in his films. Nespolo's second film, \"A.G.\" (1968), documents the visit to Turin of Allen Ginsberg. In 2001 he directed \"Film/a/TO\", with the main character role played by Edoardo Sanguineti. Nespolo's films have been exhibited in institutions like the Beaubourg in Paris, the Philadelphia Museum of Modern Art, Warsaw's Filmoteka Polska and Ferrara's Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna. Nespolo has produced and directed about twenty films over forty years.\nApplied arts.\nIn the 1980s, Nespolo made ceramics and blown glass objects, created over fifty posters for exhibitions and other events, did advertising campaigns for \"Campari\" and \"Azzurra\" and realised title sequences for shows on the Italian national broadcast television RAI. In 2002, Nespolo was appointed artistic coordinator for the \"Metropolitana di Torino\", with the aim of realising the first \"underground museum of modern art\". Several underground stations are decorated with his glass etchings and images.\nTheatre.\nIn 1986 Nespolo had the possibility of designing the stage sets for Ferruccio Busoni\u2019s opera \"Turandot\" at Connecticut Grand Opera, Stamford, the first of several theatre works he made in the following years, such as the sets and costumes for Paisiello's \"Don Chisciotte\" at the Teatro dell'Opera di Roma in 1990 and for Donizetti's \"L'elisir d'amore\", a production for the Rome Opera, the Paris Opera and the Lausanne Opera, Li\u00e8ge and Metz in 1995. In 2007, he designed stage and costumes for Puccini's \"Madama Butterfly\" at the Festival Puccini 2007 in Torre del Lago.\nPalio and traditions.\nNespolo was appreciated also for his work with \"Palios\". In 1998, he was committed the \"Palio\" for the \"Giostra della Quintana\", Ascoli Piceno. In 2000, he was awarded for his work for \"Palio di Asti\" and in 1991 and 2009 for the \"Palio\" of the \"Giostra della Quintana\" in Foligno. He was chosen to design the \"Palio\" (\"Drappellone\" or banner) at the \"Palio dell'Assunta\" in August 2007.\nSelected exhibitions.\nNespolo's works covering his whole production have been presented or hosted in major national and international exhibitions.\nA selected list of exhibitions and venues is the following:\nFilmography.\nNespolo's filmography includes:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32066", "revid": "39435755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32066", "title": "Ulster", "text": "Traditional province in the north of Ireland\nUlster (; or ; or \"Ulster\") is one of the four historical provinces of Ireland, located in the northern part of the island. It is made up of nine counties, with six of these comprising Northern Ireland (a part of the United Kingdom), while the remaining three are in the Republic of Ireland.\nIt is the second-largest (after Munster) and second-most populous (after Leinster) of Ireland's four traditional provinces, with Belfast being its biggest city. Unlike the other provinces, Ulster has a high percentage of Protestants, making up almost half of its population. English is the main language and Ulster English the main dialect. A minority also speak Irish, and there are (Irish-speaking regions) in County Donegal which is home to a quarter of the total Gaeltacht population of the Republic of Ireland. There are also large Irish-speaking networks in southern County Londonderry and in the Gaeltacht Quarter, Belfast. Ulster-Scots is also spoken extensively in the counties Antrim, Down, Londonderry, Tyrone and Donegal. Lough Neagh, in the east, is the largest lake in the British Isles, while Lough Erne in the west is one of its largest lake networks. The main mountain ranges are the Mournes, Sperrins, Blue Stack (Croaghgorms) and Derryveagh Mountains.\nHistorically, Ulster lay at the heart of the Gaelic world made up of Gaelic Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man. According to tradition, in ancient Ireland it was one of the fifths () ruled by a , or 'king of over-kings'. It is named after the overkingdom of Ulaid, in the east of the province, which was in turn named after the Ulaid folk. The other overkingdoms in Ulster were Airg\u00edalla and Ailech. After the Norman invasion of Ireland in the twelfth century, eastern Ulster was conquered by the Anglo-Normans and became the Earldom of Ulster. By the late fourteenth century the Earldom had collapsed and the O'Neill dynasty had come to dominate most of Ulster, claiming the title King of Ulster. Ulster became the most thoroughly Gaelic and independent of Ireland's provinces. Its rulers resisted English encroachment but were defeated in the Nine Years' War (1594\u20131603). King James I then colonised Ulster with English-speaking Protestant settlers from Great Britain, in the Plantation of Ulster. This led to the founding of many of Ulster's towns. The inflow of Protestant settlers and migrants also led to bouts of sectarian violence with Catholics, notably during the 1641 rebellion and the Armagh disturbances.\nAlong with the rest of Ireland, Ulster became part of the United Kingdom in 1801. In the early twentieth century, moves towards Irish self-rule were opposed by many Ulster Protestants, sparking the Home Rule Crisis. In the last all Ireland election (1918 Irish general election) counties Donegal and Monaghan returned large Sinn F\u00e9in (nationalist) majorities. Sinn F\u00e9in candidates ran unopposed in Cavan. Fermanagh and Tyrone had Sinn F\u00e9in/Nationalist Party (Irish Parliamentary Party) majorities. The other four Counties of Ulster had Unionist Party majorities. The home rule crisis and the subsequent Irish War of Independence led to the partition of Ireland under the Government of Ireland Act 1920. Six Ulster counties became Northern Ireland, a self-governing territory within the United Kingdom, while the rest of Ireland became the Irish Free State, now the Republic of Ireland.\nThe term \"Ulster\" has no official function for local government purposes in either state. However, for the purposes of , \"Ulster\" is used to refer to the three counties of Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan only, which are given country sub-division code \"IE-U\". The name is also used by various organisations such as cultural and sporting bodies.\nTerminology.\nUlster's name ultimately derives from the , a group of tribes that once dwelt in this part of Ireland. The Norsemen knew the province as , the or 'land' (a word borrowed from Irish) of the ; this was then taken into English as \"Ullister\" or \"Ulvester\", and later contracted to \"Ulster\". Another, less probable explanation is that the suffix -\"ster\" represents the Old Norse element ('place'), found in names like Lybster and Scrabster in Scotland.\nUlster is still known as in Irish, meaning the province (literally 'fifth') of the . has historically been anglicised as \"Ulagh\" or \"Ullagh\" and Latinised as or . The latter two have yielded the terms \"Ulidian\" and \"Ultonian\". The Irish word for someone or something from Ulster is , and this can be found in the surnames MacNulty, MacAnulty, and Nulty, which all derive from , meaning 'son of the Ulsterman'.\nNorthern Ireland is often referred to as \"Ulster\", despite including only six of Ulster's nine counties. This usage is most common among people in Northern Ireland who are unionist, although it is also used by the media throughout the United Kingdom. Some Irish nationalists object to the use of Ulster in this context.\nGeography and political sub-divisions.\nUlster has a population of just over two\u00a0million people and an area of . About 62% of the area of Ulster is in the UK while the remaining 38% is in the Republic of Ireland. Ulster's biggest city, Belfast, has an urban population of over half a million inhabitants, making it the second-largest city on the island of Ireland and the 10th largest urban area in the UK. \nSix of Ulster's nine counties, Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone, including the former parliamentary boroughs of Belfast and Londonderry, form Northern Ireland which remained part of the United Kingdom after the partition of Ireland in 1921. Three Ulster counties \u2013 Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan \u2013 form part of the Republic of Ireland. About half of Ulster's population lives in counties Antrim and Down. Across the nine counties, according to the aggregate UK 2011 Census for Northern Ireland, and the ROI 2011 Census for counties Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan, there is a Roman Catholic majority over Protestant of 50.8% to 42.7%.\nWhile the traditional counties continue to demarcate areas of local government in the Republic of Ireland, this is no longer the case in Northern Ireland. Since 1974, the traditional counties have a ceremonial role only. Local government in Northern Ireland is now demarcated by 11 districts.\nCounty-based sub-divisions.\nCounties shaded in grey are in the Republic of Ireland.\nCounties shaded in pink are in Northern Ireland.\nLargest settlements.\nSettlements in Ulster with at least 14,000 inhabitants, listed in order of population:\nEconomy.\nThe GDP of the province of Ulster is around \u20ac50\u00a0billion. Salary levels are the lowest on the island of Ireland.\nPhysical geography.\nThe biggest lake in the British Isles, Lough Neagh, lies in eastern Ulster. The province's highest point, Slieve Donard (), stands in County Down. The most northerly point in Ireland, Malin Head, is in County Donegal, as are the sixth-highest () sea cliffs in Europe, at Slieve League, and the province's largest island, Arranmore. The most easterly point in Ireland is also in Ulster, in County Down, and the most westerly point in the UK is in County Fermanagh. The longest river in the British Isles, the Shannon, rises at the Shannon Pot in County Cavan with underground tributaries from County Fermanagh. Volcanic activity in eastern Ulster led to the formation of the Antrim Plateau and the Giant's Causeway, one of Ireland's three UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Ulster also has a significant drumlin belt. The geographical centre of Ulster lies between the villages of Pomeroy and Carrickmore in County Tyrone. In terms of area, County Donegal is the largest county in all of Ulster.\nTransport.\nAir.\nThe province's main airport is Belfast International Airport (popularly called Aldergrove Airport), which is located at Aldergrove, 11.5 miles northwest of Belfast near Antrim. George Best Belfast City Airport (sometimes referred to as \"the City Airport\" or \"the Harbour Airport\") is another, smaller airport which is located at Sydenham in Belfast. The City of Derry Airport is located at Eglinton, east of the city of Derry. There is also Donegal Airport (), popularly known as Carrickfinn Airport, which is located in The Rosses.\nRail.\nRailway lines are run by NI Railways (NIR). Belfast to Bangor and Belfast to Lisburn are strategically the most important routes on the network with the greatest number of passengers and largest profit margins. The Belfast-Derry railway line connecting Derry~Londonderry railway station, via Coleraine, Ballymoney, Ballymena and Antrim, with Lanyon Place and Belfast Grand Central is a noted scenic route. Belfast is also connected with Carrickfergus and Larne Harbour, Portadown, Newry and onwards, via the Enterprise service jointly operated by NIR and Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann, to Dublin Connolly.\nThe main railway lines linking to and from Belfast Grand Central and Belfast Lanyon Place are:\nOnly five Irish counties, all in Southern and Western Ulster, currently have no mainline railway. The historic Great Northern Railway of Ireland connected them. They are Cavan, Monaghan, Fermanagh, Tyrone and Donegal. A plan to re-link Sligo and Derry through Donegal has been postponed until at least 2030.\nLanguages and dialects.\nMost people in Ulster speak English. English is taught in all schools in the province; Irish (') is taught in all schools in the counties that are part of the Republic, and in schools in Northern Ireland, almost exclusively in the Roman Catholic and Irish-medium sectors. In responses to the 2001 census in Northern Ireland 10% of the population had \"some knowledge of Irish\" and 4.7% could \"speak, read, write and understand\" Irish. Large parts of County Donegal are Gaeltacht areas where Irish is the first language and some people in west Belfast also speak Irish, especially in the \"Gaeltacht Quarter\". The dialect of Irish most commonly spoken in Ulster (especially throughout Northern Ireland and County Donegal) is ' or Donegal Irish, also known as \"\" or Ulster Irish. Donegal Irish has many similarities to Scottish Gaelic. Polish is the third most common language. Ulster Scots dialects, sometimes known by the neologism \"Ullans\", are also spoken in Counties Down, Antrim, Londonderry and Donegal.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nUlster is one of the four Irish provinces. Its name derives from the Irish language (), meaning 'fifth of the Ulaidh', named for the ancient inhabitants of the region.\nThe province's early story extends further back than written records and survives mainly in legends such as the Ulster Cycle.\nThe archaeology of Ulster, formerly called Ulandia, gives examples of \"ritual enclosures\", such as the Giant's Ring near Belfast, which is an earth bank about 590\u00a0feet (180 m) in diameter and 15\u00a0feet (4.5 m) high, in the centre of which there is a dolmen.\nThe Boyne and its tributary the Blackwater were the traditional southern boundary of the province of Ulster and appear as such in the . According to historian Francis John Byrne the Ulaid 'possibly still ruled directly in Louth as far as the Boyne in the early seventh century' when Congal C\u00e1ech made a bid for the kingship of Tara. In 637, the Battle of Moira, known archaically as the Battle of Magh Rath, was fought by the Gaelic High King of Ireland Domhnall II against his foster son King Congal C\u00e1ech of Ulster, supported by his ally Domhnall the Freckled () of Dalriada. The battle was fought near the Woods of Killultagh, just outside the village of Moira in what would become County Down. It was allegedly the largest battle ever fought on the island of Ireland, and resulted in the death of Congal and the retreat of Domhnall Brecc.\nIn early medieval Ireland, a branch of the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill, the of the province of Ailech, gradually eroded the territory of the province of Ulaidh until it lay east of the River Bann. The would make (most of which forms modern County Tyrone) their base. Among the High Kings of Ireland were \u00c1ed Findliath (died 879), Niall Gl\u00fandub (died 919), and Domnall ua N\u00e9ill (died 980), all of the Cen\u00e9l nE\u00f3gain. The province of Ulaidh would survive restricted to the east of modern Ulster until the Norman invasion in the late 12th century. It would only once more become a province of Ireland in the mid-14th century after the collapse of the Norman Earldom of Ulster, when the O'Neills who had come to dominate the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill stepped into the power vacuum and staked a claim for the first time the title of \"king of Ulster\" along with the Red Hand of Ulster symbol. This symbol is rooted in ancient Gaelic Culture to symbolise a great warrior. It was then that the provinces of Ailech, Airgialla, and Ulaidh would all merge largely into what would become the modern province of Ulster.\nDomnall Ua Lochlainn (died 1121) and Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn (died 1166) were of this dynasty. The Meic Lochlainn were in 1241 overthrown by their kin, the clan \u00d3 N\u00e9ill (see O'Neill dynasty). The \u00d3 N\u00e9ill's were from then on established as Ulster's most powerful Gaelic family.\nThe \u00d3 Domhnaill (O'Donnell) dynasty were Ulster's second most powerful clan from the early thirteenth-century through to the beginning of the seventeenth-century. The O'Donnells ruled over T\u00edr Chonaill (most of modern County Donegal) in West Ulster.\nAfter the Norman invasion of Ireland in the twelfth century, the east of the province fell by conquest to Norman barons, first De Courcy (died 1219), then Hugh de Lacy (1176\u20131243), who founded the Earldom of Ulster based on the modern counties of Antrim and Down.\nIn the 1600s Ulster was the last redoubt of the traditional Gaelic way of life, and following the defeat of the Irish forces in the Nine Years War (1594\u20131603) at the battle of Kinsale (1601), Elizabeth I's English forces succeeded in subjugating Ulster and all of Ireland.\nThe Gaelic leaders of Ulster, the O'Neills and O'Donnells, finding their power under English suzerainty limited, decamped \"en masse\" in 1607 (the Flight of the Earls) to Roman Catholic Europe. This allowed the English Crown to plant Ulster with more loyal English and Scottish planters, a process which began in earnest in 1610.\nPlantations and civil wars.\nThe Plantation of Ulster () was the organised colonisation (or plantation) of Ulster by people from Great Britain (especially Presbyterians from Scotland). Private plantation by wealthy landowners began in 1606, while the official plantation controlled by King James I of England (who was also King James VI of Scots) began in 1609. All land owned by Irish chieftains, the \u00d3 Neills and \u00d3 Donnells (along with those of their supporters), who fought against the English Crown in the Nine Years War, were confiscated and used to settle the colonists. The Counties Tyrconnell, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan, Coleraine and Armagh comprised the official Colony. However, most of the counties, including the most heavily colonised Counties Antrim and Down, were privately colonised. These counties, though not officially designated as subject to Plantation, had suffered violent depopulation during the previous wars and proved attractive to Private Colonialists from nearby Britain. The efforts to attract colonists from England and Scotland to the Ulster Plantation were considerably affected by the existence of British colonies in the Americas, which served as a more attractive destination for many potential emigrants.\nThe official reason for the Plantation is said to have been to pay for the costly Nine Years' War, but this view was not shared by all in the English government of the time, most notably the English Crown-appointed Attorney-General for Ireland in 1609, Sir John Davies:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A barbarous country must be first broken by a war before it will be capable of good government; and when it is fully subdued and conquered, if it be not well planted and governed after the conquest, it will eftsoons return to the former barbarism.\nThe Plantation of Ulster continued well into the 18th century, interrupted only by the Irish Rebellion of 1641. This Rebellion was initially led by Sir Phelim O'Neill (), and was intended to overthrow British rule rapidly, but quickly degenerated into attacks on colonists, in which dispossessed Irish slaughtered thousands of the colonists. In the ensuing wars (1641\u20131653, fought against the background of civil war in England, Scotland and Ireland), Ulster became a battleground between the Colonialists and the native Irish. In 1646, an Irish army under command by Owen Roe O'Neill () inflicted a defeat on a Scottish Covenanter army at Benburb in County Tyrone, but the native Irish forces failed to follow up their victory and the war lapsed into stalemate. The war in Ulster ended with the defeat of the native army at the Battle of Scarrifholis, near Newmills on the western outskirts of Letterkenny, County Donegal, in 1650, as part of the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland conducted by Oliver Cromwell and the New Model Army, the aim of which was to expel all native Irish to the province of Connaught.\nForty years later, in 1688\u20131691, the Williamite War was fought, the belligerents of which were the Williamites and Jacobites. The war was partly due to a dispute over who was the rightful claimant to the British Throne, and thus the supreme monarch of the nascent British Empire. However, the war was also a part of the greater War of the Grand Alliance, fought between King Louis XIV of France and his allies, and a European-wide coalition, the Grand Alliance, led by Prince William of Orange and Emperor Leopold I of the Holy Roman Empire, supported by the Vatican and many other states. The Grand Alliance was a cross-denominational alliance designed to stop French eastward colonialist expansion under Louis XIV, with whom King James II was allied.\nThe majority of Irish people were \"Jacobites\" and supported James II due to his 1687 Declaration of Indulgence or, as it is also known, The Declaration for the Liberty of Conscience, that granted religious freedom to all denominations in England and Scotland and also due to James II's promise to the Irish Parliament of an eventual right to self-determination. However, James II was deposed in the Glorious Revolution, and the majority of Ulster Colonialists (Williamites) backed William of Orange. Both the Williamite and Jacobite armies were religiously mixed; William of Orange's own elite forces, the Dutch Blue Guards had a papal banner with them during the invasion, many of them being Dutch Roman Catholics.\nAt the start of the war, Irish Jacobites controlled most of Ireland for James II, with the exception of the Williamite strongholds at Derry and at Enniskillen in Ulster. The Jacobites besieged Derry from December 1688 to July 1689, ending when a Williamite army from Britain relieved the city. The Williamites based in Enniskillen defeated another Jacobite army at the battle of Newtownbutler on 28 July 1689. Thereafter, Ulster remained firmly under Williamite control and William's forces completed their conquest of the rest of Ireland in the next two years. The war provided Protestant loyalists with the iconic victories of the Siege of Derry, the Battle of the Boyne (1 July 1690) and the Battle of Aughrim (12 July 1691), all of which the Orange Order commemorate each year.\nThe Williamites' victory in this war ensured British rule in Ireland for over 200 years. The Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland excluded most of Ulster's population from having any Civil power on religious grounds. Roman Catholics (descended from the indigenous Irish) and Presbyterians (mainly descended from Scottish colonists) both suffered discrimination under the Penal Laws, which gave full political rights only to Anglican Protestants (mostly descended from English settlers). In the 1690s, Scottish Presbyterians became a majority in Ulster, due to a large influx of them into the Province.\nEmigration.\nConsiderable numbers of Ulster-Scots (who became commonly known as \"Scots-Irish\" in America) emigrated to the North American colonies throughout the 18th century (160,000 settled in what would become the United States between 1717 and 1770 alone).\nDisdaining (or forced out of) the heavily English regions on the Atlantic coast, most groups of Ulster-Scots settlers crossed into the \"western mountains\", where their descendants populated the Appalachian regions and the Ohio Valley. Here they lived on the frontiers of America, carving their own world out of the wilderness. The Scots-Irish soon became the dominant culture of the Appalachians from Pennsylvania to Georgia. Author (and US Senator) Jim Webb puts forth a thesis in his book \"Born Fighting\" to suggest that the character traits he ascribes to the Scots-Irish such as loyalty to kin, mistrust of governmental authority, and a propensity to bear arms, helped shape the American identity.\nIn the United States Census, 2000, 4.3\u00a0million Americans claimed Scots-Irish ancestry. The areas where the most Americans reported themselves in the 2000 Census only as \"American\" with no further qualification (e.g. Kentucky, north-central Texas, and many other areas in the Southern US) are largely the areas where many Scots-Irish settled, and are in complementary distribution with the areas which most heavily report Scots-Irish ancestry.\nAccording to the Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups, 400,000 people in the US were of Irish birth or ancestry in 1790 when the first US Census counted 3,100,000 white Americans. According to the encyclopaedia, half of these Irish Americans were descended from Ulster, and half from the other three provinces of Ireland.\nRepublicanism, rebellion and communal strife.\nMost of the 18th century saw a calming of sectarian tensions in Ulster. The economy of the province improved, as small producers exported linen and other goods. Belfast developed from a village into a bustling provincial town. However, this did not stop many thousands of Ulster people from emigrating to British North America in this period, where they became known as \"Scots Irish\" or \"Scotch-Irish\".\nPolitical tensions resurfaced, albeit in a new form, towards the end of the 18th century. In the 1790s many Roman Catholics and Presbyterians, in opposition to Anglican domination and inspired by the American and French revolutions joined in the United Irishmen movement. This group (founded in Belfast) dedicated itself to founding a non-sectarian and independent Irish republic. The United Irishmen had particular strength in Belfast, Antrim and Down. Paradoxically however, this period also saw much sectarian violence between Roman Catholics and Protestants, principally members of the Church of Ireland (Anglicans, who practised the British state religion and had rights denied to both Presbyterians and Roman Catholics), notably the \"Battle of the Diamond\" in 1795, a faction fight between the rival \"Defenders\" (Roman Catholic) and \"Peep O'Day Boys\" (Anglican), which led to over 100 deaths and to the founding of the Orange Order. This event, and many others like it, came about with the relaxation of the Penal Laws and Roman Catholics began to be allowed to purchase land and involve themselves in the linen trade (activities which previously had involved many onerous restrictions). Protestants, including some Presbyterians, who in some parts of the province had come to identify with the Roman Catholic community, used violence to intimidate Roman Catholics who tried to enter the linen trade. Estimates suggest that up to 7000 Roman Catholics suffered expulsion from Ulster during this violence. Many of them settled in northern Connacht. These refugees' linguistic influence still survives in the dialects of Irish spoken in County Mayo, which have many similarities to Ulster Irish not found elsewhere in Connacht. Loyalist militias, primarily Anglicans, also used violence against the United Irishmen and against Roman Catholic and Protestant republicans throughout the province.\nIn 1798 the United Irishmen, led by Henry Joy McCracken, launched a rebellion in Ulster, mostly supported by Presbyterians. But the British authorities swiftly put down the rebellion and employed severe repression after the fighting had ended. In the wake of the failure of this rebellion, and following the gradual abolition of official religious discrimination after the Act of Union in 1800, Presbyterians came to identify more with the State and with their Anglican neighbours, due to their civil rights now being respected by both the state and their Anglican neighbours.\nThe 1859 Ulster Revival was a major Christian revival that spread throughout Ulster.\nIndustrialisation, Home Rule and partition.\nIn the 19th century, Ulster had the only large-scale industrialisation and became the most prosperous province on the island. In the latter part of the century, Belfast briefly overtook Dublin as the island's largest city. Belfast became famous in this period for its huge dockyards and shipbuilding \u2013 and notably for the construction of the RMS \"Titanic\". Sectarian divisions in Ulster became hardened into the political categories of \"unionist\" (supporters of the Union with Britain; mostly, but not exclusively, Protestant) and \"nationalist\" (advocates of repeal of the 1800 Act of Union, usually, though not exclusively, Roman Catholic). Northern Ireland's current politics originate from these late 19th century disputes over Home Rule that would have devolved some powers of government to Ireland. At least a dozen large scale sectarian disturbances/riots occurred in Belfast during the 19th century. Ulster Protestants usually opposed Home Rule \u2014 fearing for their religious rights calling it \"Rome Rule\" in an autonomous Roman Catholic-dominated Ireland and also not trusting politicians from the agrarian south and west to support the more industrial economy of Ulster. This lack of trust, however, was largely unfounded as during the 19th and early 20th century important industries in the southernmost region of Cork included brewing, distilling, wool and like Belfast, shipbuilding.\nThousands of unionists, led by the Dublin-born barrister Sir Edward Carson and James Craig, signed the \"Ulster Covenant\" of 1912 pledging to resist Home Rule. This movement also set up the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF). In April 1914, the UVF assisted with the landing of 30,000 German rifles with 3,000,000 rounds at Larne by blockading authorities. (See Larne gunrunning). The Curragh Incident showed it would be difficult to use the British army to enforce home rule from Dublin on Ulster's unionist minority.\nIn response, Irish republicans created the Irish Volunteers, part of which became the forerunner of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) \u2013 to seek to ensure the passing of the Home Rule Bill. Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, 200,000 Irishmen, both Southern and Northern, of all religious sects volunteered to serve in the British Army. This had the effect of interrupting the armed stand-off in Ireland. As the war progressed, in Ireland, opposition to the War grew stronger, reaching its peak in 1918 when the British government proposed laws to extend conscription to all able bodied Irishmen during the Conscription Crisis.\nIn the aftermath of World War I, the political party Sinn F\u00e9in (\"Ourselves\") won the majority of votes in the 1918 Irish general election, this political party pursued a policy of complete independent self-determination for the island of Ireland as outlined in the Sinn F\u00e9in campaign Manifesto of 1918, a great deal more than the devolved government/Home Rule advocated by the (I.P.P) Irish Parliamentary Party. Following the Sinn F\u00e9in victory in these elections the Irish Declaration of Independence was penned and Irish republicans launched a guerrilla campaign against British rule in what became the Irish War of Independence (January 1919 \u2013 July 1921). The fighting in Ulster during the Irish War of Independence generally took the form of street battles between Protestants and Roman Catholics in the city of Belfast. Estimates suggest that about 600 civilians died in this communal violence, the majority of them (58%) Roman Catholics (see The Troubles (1920\u20131922)). The IRA remained relatively quiescent in Ulster, with the exception of the south Armagh area, where Frank Aiken led it. A lot of IRA activity also took place at this time in County Donegal and the City of Derry, where one of the main Republican leaders was Peadar O'Donnell. Hugh O'Doherty, a Sinn F\u00e9in politician, was elected mayor of Derry at this time. In the First D\u00e1il, which was elected in late 1918, Eoin Mac N\u00e9ill served as the Sinn F\u00e9in T.D. for Londonderry City.\n1920 to present.\nPartition of Ireland, first mooted in 1912, was introduced with the enactment of the Government of Ireland Act 1920, which gave a form of \"Home rule\" self-government to two areas, Southern Ireland, with its capital at Dublin, and \"Northern Ireland\", consisting of six of Ulster's central and eastern counties, both within a continuing United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Dissatisfaction with this led to the Irish War of Independence, which formally ceased on 11 July 1921. Low-level violence, however, continued in Ulster, causing Michael Collins in the south to order a boycott of Northern products in protest at attacks on the Nationalist community there. The Partition was effectively confirmed by the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 6 December 1921. One of the primary stipulations of the treaty was the transformation of Ireland into a self-governing British dominion called the Irish Free State (which later became the sovereign Republic of Ireland), but with the option of a continuation of the home rule institution of Northern Ireland, still within the United Kingdom, if the Northern Ireland Parliament (already in existence) chose to opt out of the Irish Free State. All parties knew that this was certain to be the choice of the Ulster Unionists who had a majority in the parliament, and immediately on the creation of the Free State they resolved to leave it.\nFollowing the Anglo Irish treaty, the exact border between the new dominion of the Irish Free State and the future Northern Ireland, if it chose to opt out, was to be decided by the Irish Boundary Commission. This did not announce its findings until 1925, when the line was again drawn around six of Ulster's nine counties, with no change from the partition of 1920.\nElectorally, voting in the six Northern Ireland counties of Ulster tends to follow religious or sectarian lines; noticeable religious demarcation does not exist in the South Ulster counties of Cavan and Monaghan in the Republic of Ireland. County Donegal is largely a Roman Catholic county, but with a large Protestant minority. Generally, Protestants in Donegal vote for the political party Fine Gael (\"Family of the Irish\"). However, religious sectarianism in politics has largely disappeared from the rest of the Republic of Ireland. This was illustrated when Erskine H. Childers, a Church of Ireland member and Teachta D\u00e1la (TD, a member of the lower house of the National Parliament) who had represented Monaghan, won election as President after having served as a long-term minister under Fianna F\u00e1il Taoisigh \u00c9amon de Valera, Se\u00e1n Lemass and Jack Lynch.\nThe Orange Order freely organises in counties Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan, with several Orange parades taking place throughout County Donegal each year. The only major Orange Order march in the Republic of Ireland takes place every July in the village of Rossnowlagh, near Ballyshannon, in the south of County Donegal.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], Northern Ireland has seven Roman Catholic members of parliament, all members of Sinn F\u00e9in (of a total of 18 from the whole of Northern Ireland) in the British House of Commons at Westminster; and the other three counties have one Protestant T.D. of the ten it has elected to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, the Lower House of the Oireachtas, the parliament of the Republic of Ireland. At present (August 2007) County Donegal sends six T.D.'s to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The county is divided into two constituencies: Donegal North-East and Donegal South-West, each with three T.D.'s. County Cavan and County Monaghan form the one constituency called Cavan-Monaghan, which sends five T.D.'s to the D\u00e1il (one of whom is a Protestant).\nThe historic Flag of Ulster served as the basis for the Ulster Banner (often referred to as the Flag of Northern Ireland), which was the flag of the Government of Northern Ireland until the proroguing of the Stormont parliament in 1973.\nSport.\nThe border has divided association football teams since 1921. The Irish Football Association (the I.F.A.) oversees the sport in N.I., while the Football Association of Ireland (the F.A.I.) oversees the sport in the Republic. As a result, separate international teams are fielded and separate championships take place (Irish Football League in Northern Ireland, League of Ireland in the rest of Ulster and Ireland). Anomalously, Derry City F.C. has played in the League of Ireland since 1985 due to crowd trouble at some of their Irish League matches prior to this. The other major Ulster team in the League of Ireland is Finn Harps of Ballybofey, County Donegal. When Derry City F.C. and Finn Harps play against each other, the game is usually referred to as a 'North-West Derby'. There have been cup competitions between I.F.A. and F.A.I. clubs, most recently the Setanta Sports Cup.\nIn Rugby union, the professional rugby team representing the province and the IRFU Ulster Branch, Ulster Rugby, compete in the United Rugby Championship along with teams from Wales, Scotland, Italy, South Africa and the other Irish Provinces (Leinster, Munster and Connacht). They also compete in Europe's main club rugby tournament, the European Rugby Champions Cup, which they won (as the Heineken Cup) back in 1999. Notable Ulster rugby players include Willy John McBride, Jack Kyle and Mike Gibson. The former is the most capped British and Irish Lion of all time, having completed four tours with the Lions in the sixties and seventies. At international level players from Ulster join with those from the other 3 provinces to form the island-wide Ireland team.\nIn Gaelic games (which include Gaelic football and hurling), Ulster counties play the Ulster Senior Football Championship and Ulster Senior Hurling Championship. In football, the main competitions in which they compete with the other Irish counties are the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and National Football League, while the Ulster club champions represent the province in the All-Ireland Senior Club Football Championship. Hurling teams play in the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship, National Hurling League and All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship. The whole province fields a team to play the other provinces in the Railway Cup in both football and hurling. Gaelic Football is by far the most popular of the GAA sports in Ulster but hurling is also played, especially in Antrim, Armagh, Derry, and Down.\nThe Ulster Hockey Union organises field hockey in the province and contributes substantially to the all-island hockey team.\nCricket is also played in Ulster, especially in Northern Ireland and East Donegal. Ulster enters two teams into the Interprovincial Series; the North Knights and the North West Warriors, who are the respective representative teams of the Northern Cricket Union (NCU) and the North West Cricket Union (NWCU).\nGolf is, however, by far the most high-profile sport and the sport that Ulster has succeeded at more than any other. Ulster has produced many great players over the years, from Fred Daly winning The Open Championship in 1947 at the Royal Liverpool Golf Club, Hoylake to most recently Rory McIlroy winning the US Open and Darren Clarke winning The Open Championship in 2011. Ulster also has another Major winner in Graeme McDowell, who also won the US Open in 2010. The Open Championship returned to Ulster, after 68 years, in 2019 at Royal Portrush Golf Club.\nIn horse racing, specifically National Hunt, Ulster has produced the most dominant jockey of all time, Tony McCoy.\nThe Circuit of Ireland Rally is an annual automobile rally held in Ulster since 1931.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32067", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32067", "title": "United States Internal Revenue Service", "text": ""}
{"id": "32068", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32068", "title": "US Army", "text": ""}
{"id": "32069", "revid": "48030719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32069", "title": "USS John C. Stennis", "text": "US Navy Nimitz-class aircraft carrier\nUSS \"John C. Stennis\" (CVN-74), named for Senator John C. Stennis of Mississippi, is the seventh of the -class of nuclear-powered supercarriers in the United States Navy.\nShe was commissioned on 9 December 1995. Her temporary home port is Norfolk, Virginia, for her scheduled refueling and complex overhaul (RCOH), which began in 2019. After her overhaul is completed sometime in the 2020s, she is scheduled to return to Bremerton, Washington.\nMission and capabilities.\nThe mission of \"John C. Stennis\" is to conduct sustained combat air operations. The embarked air wing consists of eight to nine squadrons. Attached aircraft are Navy and Marine Corps F/A-18 Hornet, EA-18G Growler, MH-60R, MH-60S, and E-2C Hawkeye.\nThe air wing can engage enemy aircraft, submarines, and land targets, or lay mines hundreds of miles from the ship. \"John C. Stennis\"'s aircraft are used to conduct strikes, support land battles, protect the battle group or other friendly shipping, and implement a sea or air blockade. The air wing provides a visible presence to demonstrate American power and resolve in a crisis. The ship normally operates as the centerpiece of a carrier battle group commanded by a flag officer embarked upon \"John C. Stennis\" and consisting of four to six other ships.\n\"John C. Stennis\"'s two nuclear reactors give her virtually unlimited range and endurance and a top speed in excess of 30\u00a0knots (56\u00a0km/h, 34.5\u00a0mph). The ship's four catapults and four arresting gear engines enable her to launch and recover aircraft rapidly and simultaneously. The ship carries approximately of fuel for her aircraft and escorts, and enough weapons and stores for extended operations without replenishment. \"John C. Stennis\" also has extensive repair capabilities, including a fully equipped Aircraft Intermediate Maintenance Department, a micro-miniature electronics repair shop, and numerous ship repair shops.\nFor defense, in addition to her air wing and accompanying vessels, \"John C. Stennis\" has Nato Seasparrow Surface Missile System, Rolling Airframe Missile (RAM), the CIWS Close-in Weapons System for cruise missile defense, and the AN/SLQ-32 Electronic Warfare System.\nHistory.\nThe nuclear-powered USS \"John C. Stennis\" (CVN 74) was contracted on 29 March 1988, and the keel was laid on 13 March 1991 at Newport News Shipbuilding, Newport News, Virginia.\nThe ship was christened on 11 November 1993, in honor of Senator John Cornelius Stennis (D-Mississippi) who served in the Senate from 1947 to 1989. The daughter of the ship's namesake, Mrs. Margaret Stennis-Womble, was the ship's sponsor. \"John C. Stennis\" was commissioned on 9 December 1995 at Naval Station Norfolk, Virginia, and she conducted flight deck certification in January 1996. The first arrested landing was by a VX-23 F-14B. The ship conducted numerous carrier qualifications and independent steaming exercises off the East Coast throughout the next two years. Included among these events was the first carrier landing of an F/A-18E/F Super Hornet on 18 January 1997.\n1998.\nOn 26 February 1998 with Carrier Air Wing Seven embarked, \"John C. Stennis\" left Norfolk for her maiden deployment, transiting the Suez Canal on 7 March and arriving in the Persian Gulf on 11 March 1998. The ship traveled in 274 hours, an average speed of to relieve in conducting Operation Southern Watch missions. \"John C. Stennis\" departed the Persian Gulf on 19 July 1998 for her new home port of Naval Air Station North Island in San Diego, California, arriving on 26 August 1998. In October 1998, she entered a six-month maintenance and upgrade period at North Island, returning to sea in April 1999. During the maintenance period, a jet blast deflector collapsed, severely injuring two sailors.\n1999.\nIn May 1999, the ship ran aground in a shallow area adjacent to the turning basin near North Island. Silt clogged the intake pipes to the steam condensing systems for the nuclear reactor plants, causing the carrier's two nuclear reactors to be shut down (one reactor by crew, the other automatically) for a period of 45 minutes. She was towed back to her pier for maintenance and observation for the next two days. The cleanup cost was about $2\u00a0million.\n2000.\nOn 7 January 2000, \"John C. Stennis\" deployed to the Persian Gulf to relieve in Operation Southern Watch. During the deployment, the ship made port visits to South Korea, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Australia, Tasmania and Pearl Harbor, before returning to San Diego on 3 July 2000.\n2001.\nOn 21 May 2001, the ship served as \"the world's largest and most expensive outdoor theater\" for the world premiere of the Disney film \"Pearl Harbor\". More than 2,000 people attended the premiere on the ship, which had special grandstand seating and one of the world's largest movie screens assembled on the flight deck.\nFollowing the September 11 attacks, \"John C. Stennis\" conducted Noble Eagle missions off the U.S. West Coast. In 2000 and 2001, \"John C. Stennis\" was part of Carrier Group 7.\nOn 12 November 2001, two months earlier than scheduled, the ship left on her third deployment to the U.S. Fifth Fleet area of responsibility in support of Operation Enduring Freedom, returning to San Diego on 28 May 2002. From June 2002 to January 2003, \"JCS\" underwent a seven-month Planned Incremental Availability (PIA).\n2004.\nFrom 24 May to 1 November 2004, \"John C. Stennis\" conducted her fourth major overseas deployment, participating in Exercise Northern Edge 2004 in the Gulf of Alaska, Rim of the Pacific (RimPac) Exercise off Hawaii, exercises with \"Kitty Hawk\" off Japan and goodwill visits to Japan, Malaysia and Western Australia. Shortly after returning from deployment to San Diego, \"JCS\" changed her home port to Naval Station Bremerton, Washington, on 19 January 2005. Once at Bremerton, \"John C. Stennis\" underwent an 11-month docking planned incremental availability (DPIA), the first time she had been dry-docked since commissioning. Upgrades included a new mast. The new mast's structure is the first of its kind. A new type of steel alloy was used, making it stiffer and thicker than before. The new mast is also heavier and taller, allowing it to support new antennae the old mast would not have been able to support. Other upgrades included the installation of a new integrated bridge system in the pilothouse that will save manpower and provide state-of-the-art displays.\nFollowing the maintenance cycle and pre-deployment training exercises, the carrier returned to Bremerton, Washington, and the carrier was certified surge ready, meaning the ship maintained a high state of readiness in case of an unscheduled deployment.\n2007.\nOn 16 January 2007, the carrier and her group set sail for the Persian Gulf as part of an increase in US military presence. \"John C. Stennis\" arrived in the area on 19 February 2007, joining in the United States Fifth Fleet area of operations. This marked the first time since 2003 that there were two aircraft carrier battle groups in the region simultaneously.\nOn 23 May 2007, \"John C. Stennis\", along with eight other warships including the aircraft carrier and amphibious assault ship , passed through the Strait of Hormuz. US Navy officials said it was the largest such move since 2003.\nOn 31 August 2007 \"John C. Stennis\" returned to Bremerton.\n2009.\n\"John C. Stennis\" departed Bremerton for a 6-month deployment to the western Pacific on 13 January 2009. On 24 April, the ship arrived in Singapore. That same day, one of the ship's sailors was crushed and killed while working from a small harbor boat to secure a drain that discharges oily water from the aircraft catapults.\nOn 29 April, the ship's executive officer, Commander David L. Burnham, was relieved by Rear Admiral Mark A. Vance over unspecified personal conduct. Burnham was reassigned to a base in San Diego, pending an investigation.\nAfter participating in exercises with Japan Maritime Self Defense Force and the Republic of Korea, as well as joint exercise Northern Edge 2009, \"John C. Stennis\" returned from deployment in early July 2009. Carrier Air Wing 9 debarked on 6 July at NAS North Island, prior to the ship's arrival at her homeport of Bremerton on 10 July.\n2011.\nOn 30 March 2011, a VMFAT-101 F/A-18C Hornet suffered an uncontained catastrophic engine failure, exploded and caught fire just before launch from \"John C. Stennis\" about off the coast of San Diego during launch and recovery training operations. The aircraft was at full power, in tension on the catapult when the accident occurred. Eleven flight deck crewmen were injured while the pilot was unhurt. There was no major damage to the carrier but the aircraft was a total loss.\nOn 18 December 2011, the final command-and-control mission for U.S. forces over Iraq was flown by an E-2C Hawkeye (\"pictured\") from Carrier Airborne Early Warning Squadron 112 (VAW-112), catapulting off the carrier \"John C. Stennis\" at 7:32\u00a0am and returning at 11:04 a.m, both local time. This mission effectively ended U.S. naval support for Operation New Dawn.\n2012.\nOn 3 January 2012, Iranian General Ataollah Salehi warned \"John C. Stennis\" \"not to return to the Persian Gulf.\" The United States dismissed the warning.\nOn 7 January, \"John C. Stennis\" led the rescue of an Iranian-flagged fishing vessel, \"Al Mulahi,\" following her seizure by pirates. The pirates ambushed the ship and Iranian flag to search for other ships to hijack, while holding the original crew hostage. When some of the pirates attempted to board a Bahamian-flagged cargo ship, \"Sunshine\", she radioed for assistance. \"John C. Stennis\" dispatched a helicopter and cruiser to assist. A boarding party captured the pirates who attacked \"Sunshine\", fed them, then released them temporarily. A helicopter then secretly followed the pirates back to their mother ship, \"Al Mulahi\". Crew from the destroyer then boarded the fishing vessel (upon permission in Urdu from the captain), and arrested all of the pirates with no casualties.\nOn 2 March 2012, \"John C. Stennis\" returned home from her 7-month deployment to homeport Bremerton, Washington.\nOn 7 July 2012, crew members were informed that \"John C. Stennis\" would be returning to the Middle East in August, much sooner than expected.\nOn 27 August 2012, \"John C. Stennis\" departed to the Middle East originally for six months, but was extended to eight.\n2013.\nOn 1 April 2013, the ship arrived at Changi Naval Base in Singapore. Local ITE students were invited for a guided tour inside the aircraft carrier.\nFollowing that the ship sailed to Pearl Harbor, where she performed a week long tiger cruise to San Diego \nAt 12:45 on 3 May 2013, \"John C. Stennis\" arrived at her home port of Naval Base Kitsap in Bremerton, Washington, the completion of a ten-month, deployment to the western Pacific Ocean. During this deployment, squadron aircraft flew more than 1,300 sorties from the carrier's deck in the war in Afghanistan.\nOn 27 June, the ship entered Dry Dock at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard and Intermediate Maintenance Facility (PSNS &amp; IMF) to begin her scheduled 16 month Docking Planned Incremental Availability (DPIA). Work included preserving and painting the ship's hull, upgrading the propulsion plant, refurbishing the crew's berthing compartments, and a complete replacement of the ship's computer networks and work stations.\n2014.\n\"John C. Stennis\" completed her Docking Planned Incremental Availability (DPIA) on 5 November 2014. After a six-day sea trial, the ship certified on 10 November as a Naval Operational asset.\n2015.\nIn mid-January 2015, \"John C. Stennis\" departed her home port of Naval Base Kitsap in Bremerton, Washington, and arrived at Naval Magazine Indian Island to load munitions prior to departing for San Diego to receive aircraft and another 2,000 sailors. On 1 September, the carrier arrived back at Bremerton, Washington.\n2016.\nOn 15 January 2016, \"John C. Stennis\" left Naval Base Kitsap for a scheduled deployment to the Western Pacific. On 19 April she arrived to Singapore for a regularly scheduled port visit after completing an annual bilateral training exercise in the Philippines. On 26 April 2016, China denied \"John C. Stennis\", and her escort ships, permission to make a port visit to Hong Kong. On 10 August, the carrier arrived in San Diego, California for offload and disembarkation of CVW-9. On 14 August, \"John C. Stennis\" arrived back to homeport, Naval Base Kitsap, finishing a Western Pacific deployment and RIMPAC exercise.\n2017.\nFrom February to August 2017, \"John C. Stennis\" was in overhaul at the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard.\n2018.\nOn 2 August 2018, the Navy announced that \"John C. Stennis\" would change homeport to Norfolk, Virginia in advance of her refueling and complex overhaul (RCOH) at Newport News Shipbuilding. will move from San Diego to Naval Base Kitsap to go through a period of maintenance at Puget Sound and will replace \"Carl Vinson\" at San Diego.\nOn 12 December 2018, \"John C. Stennis\" launched her first combat sorties in support of Operation Freedom's Sentinel in Afghanistan. On 29 December 2018, \"John C. Stennis\" launched her first combat sorties in support of Operation Inherent Resolve in Iraq and Syria.\n2019.\nOn 16 May 2019, \"John C. Stennis\" arrived in her new home port of Norfolk, Virginia in preparation for her refueling and complex overhaul (RCOH) in 2020. RCOH is expected to be completed sometime in the mid 2020s.\nOn 16 Dec 2019, \"John C. Stennis\" hosted a plank owners reunion onboard in Norfolk, VA.\n2021-Present.\nOn 7 May 2021, \"John C. Stennis\" went into Newport News for her midlife Refuel and Complex Overhaul (RCOH). The overhaul is expected to be completed by 2026.\nWith more than 25 million man hours going into upgrading the Stennis, the upcoming outfitting and testing phase will allow shipbuilders to complete the overhaul and installation of the ship\u2019s major components and test its electronics, combat, and propulsion systems. This period will also focus on improving the ship\u2019s living areas and the general quality of life for the sailors, including crew living spaces, galleys, and mess decks.\nShip's seal.\n\"John C. Stennis\"'s seal was produced from the combined efforts of several crew members with historical help from Stennis Center for Public Service, John C. Stennis Space Center and United States Senate Historian. The seal implies peace through strength, just as Senator John C. Stennis was referred to as an \"unwavering advocate of peace through strength\" by President Ronald Reagan, when the ship's name was announced in June 1988.\nThe circular shape signifies the \"Nimitz\"-class aircraft carrier's unique capability to circle the world without refueling while providing a forward presence from the sea. The predominant colors are red, white, blue and gold, the same as those of the United States and the Navy. The outer border, taken from one version of a U.S. Senate crest, represents the strength through unity of the ship's crew. The four gold bands and eight ties denote John C. Stennis' four decades (41 years) in the Senate and the eight presidents he served with, from President Truman to President Reagan. The seven stars in the blue border represent his seven terms in the Senate and characterize \"John C. Stennis\" as the seventh \"Nimitz\"-class aircraft carrier. The red and white stripes inside the blue border represent the American flag and the American people \"John C. Stennis\" serves. They also honor the courage and sacrifice of the United States' armed forces.\nThe eagle and shield is a representation of the gilt eagle and shield overlooking the Old Senate Chamber. The shield represents the United States of America. The twenty stars represent the US's twentieth state, Mississippi, the home of John C. Stennis. The three arrows in the eagle's talons symbolize the ship's and air wing's ability to project power. The burst of light emanating from the shield, representative of the emergence of a new nation in the United States Senate Seal, portrays the birth of over 25 major Naval Aviation programs under Senator Stennis' leadership, including all aircraft carriers from to , and aircraft from the F-4 Phantom to the F/A-18 Hornet. The eagle is representative of John C. Stennis' stature in the Senate, where he was respected and admired as a \"soaring eagle\" by some of his colleagues.\nThe ship herself is pictured in the seal. On the edges of the flight deck are the words \"Honor, Courage, Commitment\" which are the United States Navy's Core Values.\nThe seal, after selection by the ship's crew, was submitted to Mrs. Margaret Stennis Womble, the ship's sponsor and daughter of Senator Stennis, and to Mrs. John Hampton Stennis, the matron of honor and wife of Senator Stennis' son, for their approval. In February 1995 they approved the design.\nShip's name controversy.\nThe ship's name was originally approved by then-president Ronald Reagan in 1988. As of 2021, the ship's name was the subject of renewed controversy due to Senator Stennis's outspoken opposition to civil rights and racial equality, and his extensive record of legislative support for racial segregation. The controversy is part of a larger reassessment of military bases, ships and other U.S. military assets named after Confederate generals and other persons associated with slavery and racial segregation.\nIn fiction.\nJohn C. Stennis was used and featured in and World War Z.\nThe ship carried a dead kaiju in Pacific Rim.\nIt was briefly featured in the Intro to NCIS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32070", "revid": "6712453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32070", "title": "Republican Party (United States)", "text": "American political party\nThe Republican Party, also known as the Grand Old Party (GOP), is a conservative and right-wing political party in the United States. It emerged as the main rival of the Democratic Party in the 1850s, and the two parties have dominated American politics since then.\nThe Republican Party was founded in 1854 by anti-slavery activists opposing the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act and the expansion of slavery into U.S. territories. It rapidly gained support in the North, drawing in former Whigs and Free Soilers. Abraham Lincoln's election in 1860 led to the secession of Southern states and the outbreak of the American Civil War. Under Lincoln and a Republican-controlled Congress, the party led efforts to preserve the Union, defeat the Confederacy, and abolish slavery. During the Reconstruction era, Republicans sought to extend civil rights protections to freedmen, but by the late 1870s the party shifted its focus toward business interests and industrial expansion. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, it dominated national politics, promoting protective tariffs, infrastructure development, and \"laissez-faire\" economic policies, while navigating internal divisions between progressive and conservative factions. The party's support declined during the Great Depression, as the New Deal coalition reshaped American politics. Republicans returned to national power with the 1952 election of Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose moderate conservatism reflected a pragmatic acceptance of many New Deal-era programs.\nFollowing the civil rights era, the Republican Party's use of the Southern strategy appealed to many white voters disaffected by Democratic support for civil rights. The 1980 election of Ronald Reagan marked a major realignment, consolidating a coalition of free market advocates, social conservatives, and foreign policy hawks. Since 2009, internal divisions have grown, leading to a shift toward right-wing populism, which ultimately became its dominant faction. This culminated in the 2016 election of Donald Trump, whose leadership style and political agenda\u2014often referred to as Trumpism\u2014reshaped the party's identity. By the 2020s, the party has increasingly shifted towards illiberalism. In the 21st century, the Republican Party's strongest demographics are rural voters, White Southerners, evangelical Christians, men, senior citizens, and voters without college degrees.\nOn economic issues, the party has maintained a pro-capital attitude since its inception. It currently supports Trump's mercantilist policies, including tariffs on imports on all countries at the highest rates in the world while opposing globalization and free trade. It also supports low income taxes and deregulation while opposing labor unions, a public health insurance option and single-payer healthcare. On social issues, it advocates for restricting abortion and supports some tough-on-crime policies such as capital punishment but is divided on the prohibition of recreational drug use. It promotes gun ownership, easing gun restrictions, and opposes transgender rights. Views on immigration within the party vary; it generally supports limited legal immigration but is strongly in favor of legal crackdowns on illegal immigration and the deportation of those without permanent legal status, such as undocumented immigrants and those with temporary protected status. In foreign policy, the party mostly supports U.S. aid to Israel but is divided on aid to Ukraine and supports improving relations with Russia, with Trump's ascent empowering an isolationist \"America First\" foreign policy agenda.\nHistory.\nAbolitionist and progressive eras.\nIn 1854, the Republican Party emerged to combat the expansion of slavery into western territories after the passing of the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act. The early Republican Party consisted of northern Protestants, factory workers, professionals, businessmen, prosperous farmers, and after the Civil War also of black former slaves. The party had very little support from white Southerners at the time, who predominantly backed the Democratic Party in the Solid South, and from Irish and German Catholics, who made up a major Democratic voting block. While both parties adopted pro-business policies in the 19th century, the early GOP was distinguished by its support for the national banking system, the gold standard, railroads, and high tariffs. The party opposed the expansion of slavery before 1861 and led the fight to destroy the Confederate States of America (1861\u20131865). While the Republican Party had almost no presence in the Southern United States at its inception, it was very successful in the Northern United States, where by 1858 it had enlisted former Whigs and former Free Soil Democrats to form majorities in nearly every Northern state.\nWith the election of its first president, Abraham Lincoln, in 1860, the party's success in guiding the Union to victory in the Civil War, and the party's role in the abolition of slavery, the Republican Party largely dominated the national political scene until 1932. In 1912, former Republican president Theodore Roosevelt formed the Progressive Party after being rejected by the GOP and ran unsuccessfully as a third-party presidential candidate calling for social reforms. The GOP lost its congressional majorities during the Great Depression (1929\u20131940); under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Democrats formed a winning New Deal coalition that was dominant from 1932 through 1964.\nShift rightward.\nAfter the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Southern strategy, the party's core base shifted with the Southern states becoming more reliably Republican in presidential politics and the Northeastern states becoming more reliably Democratic. White voters increasingly identified with the Republican Party after the 1960s. Following the Supreme Court's 1973 decision in \"Roe v. Wade\", the Republican Party opposed abortion in its party platform and grew its support among evangelicals. The Republican Party won five of the six presidential elections from 1968 to 1988. Two-term President Ronald Reagan, who held office from 1981 to 1989, was a transformative party leader. His conservative policies called for reduced social government spending and regulation, increased military spending, lower taxes, and a strong anti-Soviet foreign policy. Reagan's influence upon the party persisted into the 21st century.\nSince the 1990s, the party's support has chiefly come from the South, the Great Plains, the Mountain States, and rural areas in the North.\nTrump era.\nIn the 2016 presidential election, Republican nominee Donald Trump defeated Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. The result was unexpected; polls leading up to the election showed Clinton leading the race. Trump's victory was fueled by narrow victories in three states\u2014Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin\u2014that had been part of the Democratic blue wall for decades. It was attributed to strong support amongst working-class white voters, who felt dismissed and disrespected by the political establishment. Trump became popular with them by abandoning Republican establishment orthodoxy in favor of a broader nationalist message. His election accelerated the Republican Party's shift towards right-wing populism and resulted in decreasing influence among its conservative factions.\nAfter the 2016 elections, Republicans maintained their majority in the Senate, the House, and governorships, and wielded newly acquired executive power with Trump's election. The Republican Party controlled 69 of 99 state legislative chambers in 2017, the most it had held in history. The Party also held 33 governorships, the most it had held since 1922. The party had total control of government in 25 states, the most since 1952. The opposing Democratic Party held full control of only five states in 2017. In the 2018 elections, Republicans lost control of the House, but strengthened their hold on the Senate.\nOver the course of his presidency, Trump appointed three justices to the Supreme Court: Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. He was impeached by the House of Representatives in 2019 on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress but was acquitted by the Senate in 2020. Trump lost the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden but refused to concede the race, claiming widespread electoral fraud and attempting to overturn the results. On January 6, 2021, the United States Capitol was attacked by Trump supporters following a rally at which Trump spoke. After the attack, the House impeached Trump for a second time on the charge of incitement of insurrection, making him the only federal officeholder to be impeached twice. The Senate acquitted him in February 2021, after he had already left office. Following the 2020 election, election denial became increasingly mainstream in the party, with the majority of Republican candidates in 2022 being election deniers. The party also made efforts to restrict voting based on false claims of fraud. By 2020, the Republican Party had greatly shifted towards illiberalism following the election of Trump, and research conducted by the V-Dem Institute concluded that the party was more similar to Europe's most right-wing parties such as Law and Justice in Poland or Fidesz in Hungary.\nThe party went into the 2022 elections confident and with analysts predicting a red wave, but it underperformed expectations, with voters in swing states and competitive districts joining Democrats in rejecting candidates who had been endorsed by Trump or who had denied the results of the 2020 election. The party won control of the House with a narrow majority, but lost the Senate and several state legislative majorities and governorships. The results led to a number of Republicans and conservative thought leaders questioning whether Trump should continue as the party's main figurehead and leader.\nDespite those disappointments, Trump easily won the nomination to be the party's candidate again in 2024, marking the third straight election of him being the GOP nominee. Trump \u2013 who survived an ear injury in an assassination attempt during the campaign \u2013 achieved victory against Vice President Kamala Harris, who replaced President Biden on the Democratic ticket after his withdrawal in July. He won both the electoral college and popular vote, becoming the first Republican to do so since George W. Bush in 2004, and improving his vote share among working class voters, particularly among young men, those without college degrees, and Hispanic voters. The Republicans also held a slim majority in the House and retook control of the Senate, securing the party's first trifecta since 2017. The Republican government was party to the 2025 federal shutdown, the longest in the nation's history.\nCurrent status.\nAs of 2025, the GOP holds the presidency, and majorities in both the U.S. House of Representatives and U.S. Senate, giving them a federal government trifecta. It also holds 27 state governorships, 28 state legislatures, and 23 state government trifectas. Six of the nine current U.S. Supreme Court justices were appointed by Republican presidents.\nThere have been 19 Republicans who have served as president, the most from any one political party, the most recent being current president Donald Trump, who became the 47th president on January 20, 2025. Trump also served as the 45th president from 2017 to 2021.\nName and symbols.\nThe Republican Party's founding members chose its name as homage to the values of republicanism promoted by the Democratic-Republican Party, which its founder, Thomas Jefferson, called the \"Republican Party\". The idea for the name came from an editorial by the party's leading publicist, Horace Greeley, who called for \"some simple name like 'Republican' [that] would more fitly designate those who had united to restore the Union to its true mission of champion and promulgator of Liberty rather than propagandist of slavery\". The name reflects the 1776 republican values of civic virtue and opposition to aristocracy and corruption. \"Republican\" has a variety of meanings around the world, and the Republican Party has evolved such that the meanings no longer always align.\nThe term \"Grand Old Party\" is a traditional nickname for the Republican Party, and the abbreviation \"GOP\" is a commonly used designation. The term originated in 1875 in the \"Congressional Record\", referring to the party associated with the successful military defense of the Union as \"this gallant old party\". The following year in an article in the \"Cincinnati Commercial\", the term was modified to \"grand old party\". The first use of the abbreviation is dated 1884.\nThe traditional mascot of the party is the elephant. A political cartoon by Thomas Nast, published in \"Harper's Weekly\" on November 7, 1874, is considered the first important use of the symbol. The cartoon was published during the debate over possibly run for third term from President Ulysses S. Grant. It draws imagery and text from the Aesop fable \"The Ass in the Lion's Skin\", combined with rumors of animals escaping from the Central Park Zoo.\nAn alternate symbol of the Republican Party in states such as Indiana, New York and Ohio is the bald eagle as opposed to the Democratic rooster or the Democratic five-pointed star. In Kentucky, the log cabin is a symbol of the Republican Party.\nTraditionally the party had no consistent color identity. After the 2000 presidential election, the color red became associated with Republicans. During and after the election, the major broadcast networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: states won by Republican nominee George W. Bush were colored red and states won by Democratic nominee Al Gore were colored blue. Due to the weeks-long dispute over the election results, these color associations became firmly ingrained, persisting in subsequent years. Although the assignment of colors to political parties is unofficial and informal, the media has come to represent the respective political parties using these colors. The party and its candidates have also come to embrace the color red.\nFactions.\nCivil War and Reconstruction era.\nThe Radical Republicans were a major factor of the party from its inception in 1854 until the end of the Reconstruction Era in 1877. They strongly opposed slavery, were hard-line abolitionists, and later advocated equal rights for the freedmen and women. They were heavily influenced by religious ideals and evangelical Christianity. Radical Republicans pressed for abolition as a major war aim and they opposed the moderate Reconstruction plans of Abraham Lincoln as both too lenient on the Confederates and not going far enough to help former slaves. After the war's end and Lincoln's assassination, the Radicals clashed with Andrew Johnson over Reconstruction policy. Radicals led efforts to establish civil rights for former slaves and fully implement emancipation, pushing the Fourteenth Amendment for statutory protections through Congress. They opposed allowing ex-Confederate officers to retake political power in the Southern U.S., and emphasized liberty, equality, and the Fifteenth Amendment which provided voting rights for the freedmen. Many later became Stalwarts, who supported machine politics.\nModerate Republicans were known for their loyal support of President Abraham Lincoln's war policies and expressed antipathy towards the more militant stances advocated by the Radical Republicans. In contrast to Radicals, Moderate Republicans were less enthusiastic on the issue of Black suffrage even while embracing civil equality and the expansive federal authority observed throughout the American Civil War. They were also skeptical of the lenient, conciliatory Reconstruction policies of President Andrew Johnson. Members of the Moderate Republicans comprised in part of previous Radical Republicans who became disenchanted with the alleged corruption of the latter faction. They generally opposed efforts by Radical Republicans to rebuild the Southern U.S. under an economically mobile, free-market system.\n20th century.\nThe 20th century saw the Republican party split into an Old Right and a moderate-liberal faction in the Northeast that eventually became known as Rockefeller Republicans. Opposition to Roosevelt's New Deal saw the formation of the conservative coalition. The 1950s saw fusionism of traditionalist and social conservatism and right-libertarianism, along with the rise of the First New Right to be followed in 1964 with a more populist Second New Right.\nThe rise of the Reagan coalition in the 1980s began what has been called the Reagan era. Reagan's rise displaced the liberal-moderate faction of the GOP and established Reagan-style conservatism as the prevailing ideological faction of the Party for the next thirty years, until the rise of the right-wing populist faction. Reagan conservatives generally supported policies that favored limited government, individualism, traditionalism, republicanism, and limited federal governmental power in relation to the states.\n21st century.\nRepublicans began the 21st century with the election of George W. Bush in the 2000 United States presidential election and saw the peak of a neoconservative faction that held significant influence over the initial American response to the September 11 attacks through the war on terror. The election of Barack Obama saw the formation of the Tea Party movement in 2009 that coincided with a global rise in right-wing populist movements from the 2010s to 2020s. The global rise in right-wing populism has been attributed to factors including economic insecurity due to financialization, a decline in organized religion, backlash to globalization, and migrant crises.\nRight-wing populism became an increasingly dominant ideological faction within the GOP throughout the 2010s and helped lead to the election of Donald Trump in 2016. Starting in the 1970s and accelerating in the 2000s, American right-wing interest groups invested heavily in external mobilization vehicles that led to the organizational weakening of the GOP establishment. The outsize role of conservative media, in particular Fox News, led to it being followed and trusted more by the Republican base over traditional party elites. The depletion of organizational capacity partly led to Trump's victory in the Republican primaries against the wishes of a very weak party establishment and traditional power brokers. Trump's election exacerbated internal schisms within the GOP, and saw the GOP move from a center coalition of moderates and conservatives to a solidly right-wing party hostile to liberal views and any deviations from the party line.\nThe Party has since faced intense factionalism. These factions are particularly apparent in the U.S. House of Representatives, where three Republican House leaders (Eric Cantor, John Boehner, and Kevin McCarthy) have been ousted since 2009. All three of the top Republican elected officials during Trump's first term (Vice President, Speaker of the House, and Senate Republican leader) were ousted or stepped down by Trump's second term.\nThe party's establishment conservative faction has lost all of its influence. Many conservatives critical of the Trumpist faction have also lost influence within the party, with no former Republican presidential or vice presidential nominees attending the 2024 Republican National Convention.\nThe victory of Trump in the 2024 presidential election saw the party increasingly shift towards Trumpism, and party criticism of Trump was described as being muted to non-existent. \"The New York Times\" described it as a \"hostile takeover\", and a victory of right-wing populism over the old conservative establishment. Polling found that 53% of Republican voters saw loyalty to Trump as central to their political identity and what it means to be a Republican. During Trump's second presidency, Republican members of Congress were described by political commentators and news media as largely submissive to Trump, letting him dictate policies without pushback. \nRight-wing populists.\nRight-wing populism is the dominant political faction of the GOP. Sometimes referred to as the MAGA or \"America First\" movement, Republican populists have been described as consisting of a range of right-wing ideologies including but not limited to right-wing populism, national conservatism, neo-nationalism,&lt;ref name=\"Zhou_12/8/2022\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; mercantilism, and Trumpism. Trump has been described as one of many nationalist leaders, including Vladimir Putin of Russia, Xi Jinping of China, Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, Narendra Modi of India, Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, Viktor Orb\u00e1n of Hungary and Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel.\nThe Republican Party's right-wing populist movements emerged in concurrence with a global increase in populist movements in the 2010s and 2020s, coupled with entrenchment and increased partisanship within the party since 2010. This included the rise of the Tea Party movement, which has also been described as far-right. This faction gained further dominance in the GOP during Joe Biden's presidency (2021\u20132025), including in the aftermath of the 2021\u20132023 inflation surge and Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nBusinessman Elon Musk, the wealthiest individual in the world, is a notable proponent of right-wing populism. Since acquiring Twitter in 2022, Musk has shared far-right misinformation and numerous conspiracy theories, and his views are described as right-wing to far-right. However, Musk has also been described as in conflict with the populist wing of the party on some issues, particularly legal immigration, government spending, free trade, judicial reforms and relations with China.\nAccording to political scientists Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins, the Republican Party's gains among white voters without college degrees and corresponding losses among white voters with college degrees contributed to the rise of right-wing populism. Until 2016, white voters with college degrees were a Republican-leaning group, but have since become a Democratic-leaning group. In the 2020 presidential election, Joe Biden became the first Democratic president to win a majority of white voters with college degrees (51\u201348%) since 1964, while Trump won white voters without college degrees 67\u201332%.\nRight-wing populism has broad appeal across income and wealth, and is extremely polarized with respect to educational attainment among White voters. According to a 2017 study, agreement with Trump on social issues, rather than economic pressure, increased support for Trump among White voters without college degrees. White voters without college degrees who were economically struggling were more likely to vote for Democrats and support the Democratic party's economic agenda. Right-wing populism has appeal to Hispanic and Asian voters, but has little appeal to African American voters.\nAccording to historian Gary Gerstle, Trumpism gained support in opposition to neoliberalism, including opposition to free trade, immigration, globalization, and internationalism. Trump won the 2016 and 2024 presidential elections by winning states in the Rust Belt that had suffered from population decline and deindustrialization. Compared to other Republicans, the populist faction is more likely to oppose legal immigration, free trade, neoconservatism, and environmental protection laws. It has been described as featuring anti-intellectualism and overtly racial appeals.\nIn international relations, populists support U.S. aid to Israel but not to Ukraine. They are generally supportive of improving relations with Russia, and favor an isolationist \"America First\" foreign policy agenda. This faction has been described as closer to that of Vladimir Putin's Russia and Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Turkey than Western Europe and the Anglosphere in terms of positions on international cooperation, support for an autocratic leadership style, and trust in institutions. This faction takes nationalist and irredentist views towards other countries in North America, advocating for U.S. territorial expansion to include Canada, Greenland and the Panama Canal, the renaming of the Gulf of Mexico, and potential military action on Mexican soil.\nThe party's far-right faction includes members of the Freedom Caucus. They generally reject compromise within the party and with the Democrats, and are willing to oust fellow Republican office holders they deem to be too moderate. According to sociologist Joe Feagin, political polarization by racially extremist Republicans as well as their increased attention from conservative media has perpetuated the near extinction of moderate Republicans and created legislative paralysis at numerous government levels in the last few decades.\nJulia Azari, an associate professor of political science at Marquette University, noted that not all populist Republicans are public supporters of Donald Trump, and that some Republicans such as Virginia Governor Glenn Youngkin endorse Trump policies while distancing themselves from Trump as a person. The continued dominance of Trump within the GOP has limited the success of this strategy. In 2024, Trump led a takeover of the Republican National Committee.\nA \"FiveThirtyEight\" analysis found that of the 293 Republican members of Congress on January 20, 2017, just 121 (41%) were left on January 20, 2025. There were many reasons for the turnover, including retirements and deaths, losing general and primary elections, seeking other office, etc., but the extent of the change is still stark. There were 273 Republican members of Congress on January 20, 2025. Trump also changed his vice president and both houses of Congress had changed their top leadership.\nConservatives.\nRonald Reagan's presidential election in 1980 established Reagan-style American conservatism as the dominant ideological faction of the Republican Party until the election of Donald Trump in 2016. Trump's 2016 election split both the GOP and larger conservative movement into Trumpist and anti-Trump factions, with the Trumpist faction winning. According to Nate Silver, in all three of Trump's runs for president, income had no significant correlation with support for the Republican Party, as voters across all incomes were closely divided between the two parties.\nDemographically, the party has lost majority support from white voters with college degrees, while continuing to gain among voters without college degrees. Higher educational attainment is strongly correlated with higher income, as well as decreased support for Trump and social conservatism. In the 2024 presidential election, Democrat Kamala Harris won a majority of voters with annual incomes over $100,000 (51\u201347%) and $200,000 (52\u201346%). Harris was also very competitive among White voters making over $100,000 (49\u201350%) and $200,000 a year (48\u201351%).\nA core economic belief of Reagan-style American conservatism that has been opposed by the right-wing populist faction is support for neoliberalism, including support for multilateralism and free trade while opposing tariffs. The right-wing populist faction has gained preeminence by appealing to White voters without college degrees who oppose globalization and free trade and instead support enacting tariffs, particularly in the Rust Belt states that were crucial to Donald Trump winning the presidency twice. Donald Trump and his base have supported enacting mercantilist economic policies intended to bring back the economic model that dominated the world from roughly the 16th to 19th centuries.\nConventional conservatism has been in decline across the Western world, not just the United States. In the European Union's multi-party system, right-wing populist parties and European conservative parties both received support from about a quarter of voters in the early 2020s, the highest share for right-wing populist parties since the end of World War II.\nTrump's first vice president Mike Pence has since distanced himself from Trump and did not endorse him in the 2024 presidential election. Trump did not run with Pence again, instead choosing JD Vance. Mitch McConnell, who previously served as Senate Republican leader for 18 years (2007\u20132025), stepped down as leader in 2025 and will retire in 2026 due to declining health and age, as well as disagreements with Trump. McConnell was described as the last powerful member of the Republican establishment, with his retirement marking its end.\nThe Roberts Court (2005\u2013present), three of whose members were appointed by Trump as of 2024, has been described as the most conservative Supreme Court since the Vinson Court (1946\u20131953). It represents the last of the Republican establishment, with Chief Justice John Roberts the only Republican leader before Trump to have maintained office during Trump's second term.\nThe party still maintains long-time ideologically conservative positions on many issues. Traditional modern conservatives combine support for free-market economic policies with social conservatism and a hawkish approach to foreign policy. Other parts of the conservative movement are composed of fiscal conservatives and deficit hawks.\nIn foreign policy, neoconservatives are a small faction of the GOP that support an interventionist foreign policy and increased military spending. They previously held significant influence in the early 2000s in planning the initial response to the 9/11 attacks through the war on terror. Since the election of Trump in 2016, neoconservatism has declined and non-interventionism and isolationism has grown among elected federal Republican officeholders.\nLong-term shifts in conservative thinking following the elections of Trump have been described as a \"new fusionism\" of traditional conservative ideology and right-wing populist themes. These have resulted in shifts towards greater support for national conservatism, protectionism, cultural conservatism, a more realist foreign policy, a conspiracist sub-culture, a repudiation of neoconservatism, reduced efforts to roll back entitlement programs, and a disdain for traditional checks and balances. There are significant divisions within the party on the issues of abortion and LGBT rights.\nConservative caucuses include the Republican Study Committee and Freedom Caucus.\nChristian right.\nSince the rise of the Christian right in the 1970s, the Republican Party has drawn significant support from evangelicals, Mormons, and traditionalist Catholics, partly due to opposition to abortion after \"Roe v. Wade.\" The Christian right faction is characterized by strong support of socially conservative and Christian nationalist policies. Christian conservatives seek to use the teachings of Christianity to influence law and public policy. Compared to other Republicans, the socially conservative Christian right faction of the party is more likely to oppose LGBT rights, marijuana legalization, and support significantly restricting the legality of abortion.\nThe Christian right is strongest in the Bible Belt, which covers most of the Southern United States. Mike Pence, Donald Trump's vice president from 2017 to 2021, was a member of the Christian right. In October 2023, a member of the Christian right faction, Louisiana representative Mike Johnson, was elected the 56th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives.\nLibertarians.\nThe Republican Party has a libertarian faction. This faction of the party is most popular in the Midwestern and Western United States. Libertarianism emerged from fusionism in the 1950s and 60s. Barry Goldwater had a substantial impact on the conservative-libertarian movement of the 1960s. Compared to other Republicans, they are more likely to favor the legalization of marijuana, LGBT rights such as same-sex marriage, gun rights, oppose mass surveillance, and support reforms to current laws surrounding civil asset forfeiture. Right-wing libertarians are strongly divided on the subject of abortion. Prominent libertarian conservatives within the Republican Party include Rand Paul, Thomas Massie, and Mike Lee.\nDuring the 2024 United States elections, the Republican Party adopted pro-cryptocurrency policies, which were originally advocated by the libertarian wing of the party. As the Republican presidential nominee, Donald Trump addressed the 2024 Libertarian National Convention, pledging support for cryptocurrency, opposing central bank digital currency and expressing support for the commutation of Ross Ulbricht. Trump's 2024 campaign featured greater influence from technolibertarian elements, particularly Elon Musk, who was subsequently nominated to lead the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE).\nIn June 2025, the libertarian wing strongly opposed Trump's One Big Beautiful Bill Act for contributing to the national debt, with Paul, Massie and Musk all publicly criticizing the legislation. In response, White House Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy Stephen Miller, a figure associated with the populist wing of the party, criticized the libertarian faction, stating, \"Certain libertarians in Congress, who are not MAGA, have their own agenda...and it's not yours.\" Miller has been described by \"The Hill\" as advocating for a break with the libertarians within the party, based on his view that they do not sufficiently emphasize strict immigration restrictions or favor massive increases of government spending.\nModerates.\nModerates in the Republican Party are an ideologically centrist group that predominantly come from the Northeastern United States, and are typically located in swing states or blue states. Moderate Republican voters are typically highly educated, affluent, fiscally conservative, socially moderate or liberal and often \"Never Trump\". While they sometimes share the economic views of other Republicans (i.e. lower taxes, deregulation, and welfare reform), moderate Republicans differ in that some are for affirmative action, LGBT rights and same-sex marriage, legal access to and even public funding for abortion, gun control laws, more environmental regulation and action on climate change, fewer restrictions on immigration and a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. In the 21st century, some former Republican moderates have switched to the Democratic Party, and the faction is in decline.\nNotable moderate Republicans include Senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine, Nevada governor Joe Lombardo, Vermont governor Phil Scott, New Hampshire governor Kelly Ayotte, and former Maryland governor Larry Hogan.\nPolitical positions.\nEmbrace of Trumpism and far-right ideology.\nThe election of Trump in 2016 saw the Republican Party shift to embrace and bring formerly far-right, fringe, and extreme ideas and organizations into the mainstream. His election shifted traditional Republican beliefs and ideology into a new leadership style and political agenda referred to as Trumpism. \nTrump explicitly and routinely disparages racial, religious, and ethnic minorities, and scholars consistently find that racial animus regarding blacks, immigrants, and Muslims are the best predictors of support for Trump. By 2025, \"The New York Times\" reported that congressional Republicans had increasingly used overtly bigoted language and offensive tropes against the racial and religious identity of their political opponents with little to no pushback from GOP leadership. \nThe second presidency of Trump saw him nominate several White House officials with ties to antisemitic extremists. His administration promoted social media content promoting remigration and containing antisemitic slurs, and was criticized as promoting white nationalism and Nazism. The Southern Poverty Law Center found that some \"images and language appear to come directly from antisemitic and neo-Nazi publications and a white Christian nationalist website\". \nIn late 2025, \"Politico\" revealed leaked group chats among high-ranking leaders of the \"Young Republicans\" that included language praising Adolf Hitler and promoting Nazism, encouraging the rape and killing of political opponents, extensive use of antisemitic and racial slurs, and favorable opinions on slavery. The messages drew bipartisan condemnation, and another incident involving the display of an American flag with a swastika in Republican Congressman David Taylor's office a day later spurred significant political commentary about the future of the GOP and condemnation about the prominence of Nazi ideology within the Republican Party. The same month, \"Politico\" posted more leaked messages from Republican Office of Special Council nominee Paul Ingrassia where he stated he had \"a Nazi streak\", that he wanted white men in positions of leadership, used ethnic slurs for Black people and Italians, and proposed making Kwanzaa and all celebrations of Black culture illegal.\nEconomic policies.\nEnacting high tariffs on foreign imports is a core component of Donald Trump's fiscal agenda. Tariffs are taxes on foreign imports, mainly paid by domestic businesses, given that consumers generally do not import foreign goods directly. By raising tariffs to their highest levels since the Gilded Age, Trump enacted one of the largest tax increases by any Republican president. The Constitution's Import-Export Clause requires that only the federal government be allowed to collect tariff revenue from imports.\nTraditionally, Republicans believe that free markets and individual achievement are the primary factors behind economic prosperity. Reduction in income taxes for those with higher incomes is a core component of Republicans' fiscal agenda. As of 2025, Trump and the Republican Party largely abandoned traditional Republican orthodoxy about protecting and promoting the free market, instead favoring state capitalism by taking direct government equity stakes in major US corporations, an approach that has been characterized by critics in favor of free market economics as socialist.\nTaxes and trade.\nAs of 2025[ [update]] the Republican Party supports near-universal tariffs, but that has not always been the case. For example, during the last half of the 20th century, Republicans were strong proponents of free trade. However 68% of republicans and republicans-leaning independents approve of the increasing tariffs while the democrats overwhelmingly disapprove of it at 89%. The current Republican president, Donald Trump, has been a staunch proponent of enacting tariffs as a means of generating tax revenue and has been described as a mercantilist. In 2025, Trump raised American tariff rates to the highest in the world, at the highest level since the Smoot\u2013Hawley Tariff Act of 1930. Donald Trump opposes globalization, and his economic policies have been described as attempting to unravel the multilateral global economic order, including the power of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Trump has expressed his admiration for Republican president William McKinley's tariff policies. McKinley was the author of the Tariff Act of 1890, and both Trump and McKinley nicknamed themselves as a \"Tariff Man\". According to an April 2025 Economist/YouGov poll, \"Republican voters overwhelmingly support Trump's tariffs, while Democratic voters generally do not.\"\nAt its inception, the Republican Party supported protective tariffs. Abraham Lincoln enacted tariffs during the Civil War. The great battle over the high Payne\u2013Aldrich Tariff Act in 1910 caused a split in the party. The Reciprocal Tariff Act of 1934 marked a sharp departure from the era of protectionism in the United States. American duties on foreign products declined from an average of 46% in 1934 to 12% by 1962, which included the presidency of Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower. After World War II, the U.S. promoted the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established in 1947, to minimize tariffs and other restrictions, and to liberalize trade among all capitalist countries.\nDuring the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, Republicans abandoned protectionist policies and came out against quotas and in favor of the GATT and the World Trade Organization policy of minimal economic barriers to global trade. Free trade with Canada came about as a result of the Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement of 1987, which led in 1994 to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) based on Reagan's plan to enlarge the scope of the market for American firms to include Canada and Mexico. President Bill Clinton, with strong Republican support in 1993, pushed NAFTA through Congress over the vehement objection of labor unions.\nThe 2016 presidential election marked a return to supporting protectionism, beginning with Donald Trump's first presidency. In 2017, only 36% of Republicans agreed that free trade agreements are good for the United States, compared to 67% of Democrats. When asked if free trade has helped respondents specifically, the approval numbers for Democrats drop to 54%, however approval ratings among Republicans remain relatively unchanged at 34%.\nIncome tax cuts have been at the core of Republican economic policy since 1980. At the national level and state level, Republicans tend to pursue policies of tax cuts and deregulation. Modern Republicans advocate the theory of supply-side economics, which holds that lower tax rates increase economic growth. Many Republicans oppose higher tax rates for higher earners, which they believe are unfairly targeted at those who create jobs and wealth. They believe private spending is more efficient than government spending. Republican lawmakers have also sought to limit funding for tax enforcement and tax collection.\nThe modern Republican Party's economic policy positions tend to align with business interests and the affluent.\nRepublicans have traditionally advocated in favor of fiscal conservatism. By the 2020s, Republicans have largely abandoned fiscal conservatism as an ideological cornerstone.\nLabor unions and the minimum wage.\nThe Republican Party is generally opposed to labor unions. Republicans believe corporations should be able to establish their own employment practices, including benefits and wages, with the free market deciding the price of work. Since the 1920s, Republicans have generally been opposed by labor union organizations and members. At the national level, Republicans supported the Taft\u2013Hartley Act of 1947, which gives workers the right not to participate in unions. Modern Republicans at the state level generally support various right-to-work laws. Most Republicans also oppose increases in the minimum wage.\nEnvironmental policies.\nHistorically, progressive leaders in the Republican Party supported environmental protection. Republican President Theodore Roosevelt was a prominent conservationist whose policies eventually led to the creation of the National Park Service. While Republican President Richard Nixon was not an environmentalist, he signed legislation to create the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 and had a comprehensive environmental program. However, this position has changed since the 1980s and the administration of President Ronald Reagan, who labeled environmental regulations a burden on the economy. Since then, Republicans have increasingly taken positions against environmental regulation, with many Republicans rejecting the scientific consensus on climate change. Republican voters are divided over the human causes of climate change and global warming. Since 2008, many members of the Republican Party have been criticized for being anti-environmentalist and promoting climate change denial in opposition to the general scientific consensus, making them unique even among other worldwide conservative parties.\nIn 2006, then-California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger broke from Republican orthodoxy to sign several bills imposing caps on carbon emissions in California. Then-President George W. Bush opposed mandatory caps at a national level. Bush's decision not to regulate carbon dioxide as a pollutant was challenged in the Supreme Court by 12 states, with the court ruling against the Bush administration in 2007. Bush also publicly opposed ratification of the Kyoto Protocols which sought to limit greenhouse gas emissions and thereby combat climate change; his position was heavily criticized by climate scientists.\nThe Republican Party rejects cap-and-trade policy to limit carbon emissions. In the 2000s, Senator John McCain proposed bills (such as the McCain-Lieberman Climate Stewardship Act) that would have regulated carbon emissions, but his position on climate change was unusual among high-ranking party members. Some Republican candidates have supported the development of alternative fuels to achieve energy independence for the United States. Some Republicans support increased oil drilling in protected areas such as the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a position that has drawn criticism from activists.\nMany Republicans during the presidency of Barack Obama opposed his administration's new environmental regulations, such as those on carbon emissions from coal. In particular, many Republicans supported building the Keystone Pipeline; this position was supported by businesses, but opposed by indigenous peoples' groups and environmental activists.\nAccording to the Center for American Progress, a non-profit liberal advocacy group, more than 55% of congressional Republicans were climate change deniers in 2014. PolitiFact in May 2014 found \"relatively few Republican members of Congress\u00a0... accept the prevailing scientific conclusion that global warming is both real and man-made.\" The group found eight members who acknowledged it, although the group acknowledged there could be more and that not all members of Congress have taken a stance on the issue.\nFrom 2008 to 2017, the Republican Party went from \"debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist\", according to \"The New York Times\". In January 2015, the Republican-led U.S. Senate voted 98\u20131 to pass a resolution acknowledging that \"climate change is real and is not a hoax\"; however, an amendment stating that \"human activity significantly contributes to climate change\" was supported by only five Republican senators.\nHealth care.\nThe party opposes a single-payer health care system, describing it as socialized medicine. It also opposes the Affordable Care Act and expansions of Medicaid. Historically, there have been diverse and overlapping views within both the Republican Party and the Democratic Party on the role of government in health care, but the two parties became highly polarized on the topic during 2008\u20132009 and onwards.\nBoth Republicans and Democrats made various proposals to establish federally funded aged health insurance prior to the bipartisan effort to establish Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. No Republican member of Congress voted for the Affordable Care Act in 2009, and after it passed, the party made frequent attempts to repeal it. At the state level, the party has tended to adopt a position against Medicaid expansion.\nRepublicans typically believe individuals should take responsibility for their own circumstances and that the private sector is more effective in helping the poor through charity than the government is through welfare programs, and argue that social assistance programs cause government dependency. As of November 2022, all 11 states that had not expanded Medicaid had Republican-controlled state legislatures.\nBy 2020, Republican officials had increasingly adopted anti-vaccine activism and policy.\nForeign policy.\nThe Republican Party has a persistent history of skepticism and opposition to multilateralism in American foreign policy. Neoconservatism, which supports unilateralism and emphasizes the use of force and hawkishness in American foreign policy, has had some influence in all Republican presidential administrations since Ronald Reagan's. Some, including paleoconservatives, call for non-interventionism and an isolationist \"America First\" foreign policy agenda. This faction gained strength starting in 2016 with the rise of Donald Trump, demanding that the United States reset its previous interventionist foreign policy and encourage allies and partners to take greater responsibility for their own defense.\nIsrael.\nDuring the 1940s, many Republicans, particularly Senator Robert A. Taft, advocated for recognition of Israel, leading to support for Israel being integrated into the 1948 Republican Party platform. Nevertheless, some Republicans at the time opposed the cause of an independent Jewish state due to the influence of conservatives of the Old Right. The rise of neoconservatism saw the Republican Party become further pro-Israel by the 1990s and 2000s, although notable anti-Israel sentiment persisted through paleoconservative figures such as Pat Buchanan. As president, Donald Trump generally supported Israel during most of his term, but became increasingly critical of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu towards the end of it. According to \"i24NEWS\", the 2020s have seen declining support for Israel among nationalist Republicans, led by individuals such as Tucker Carlson. Nevertheless, the 2024 Republican Party platform reaffirmed the party would \"stand with Israel\" and called for the deportation of \"pro-Hamas radicals\", while expressing a desire for peace in the Middle East. Although the Republican Party has often positioned itself as an opponent of antisemitism and denounced Democrats as insufficiently supportive of Israel, many members of the Christian right support Israel primarily due to theological beliefs about the centrality of Israel to the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and the conversion or damnation of Jews and other non-Christians.\nTaiwan.\nIn the party's 2016 platform, its stance on Taiwan is: \"We oppose any unilateral steps by either side to alter the status quo in the Taiwan Straits on the principle that all issues regarding the island's future must be resolved peacefully, through dialogue, and be agreeable to the people of Taiwan.\" In addition, if \"China were to violate those principles, the United States, in accord with the Taiwan Relations Act, will help Taiwan defend itself\".\nMention of Taiwan was omitted from the party's 2024 platform.\nWar on terror.\nSince the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, neoconservatives in the party have supported the war on terror, including the War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War. The George W. Bush administration took the position that the Geneva Conventions do not apply to unlawful combatants, while other prominent Republicans, such as Ted Cruz, strongly oppose the use of enhanced interrogation techniques, which they view as torture. In the 2020s, Trumpist Republicans such as Matt Gaetz supported reducing U.S. military presence abroad and ending intervention in countries such as Somalia.\nEurope, Russia and Ukraine.\nThe 2016 Republican platform eliminated references to giving weapons to Ukraine in its fight with Russia and rebel forces; the removal of this language reportedly resulted from intervention from staffers to presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump. However, the Trump administration approved a new sale of anti-tank weapons to Ukraine in 2017. Republicans generally question European NATO members' alleged insufficient investment in defense funding, and some are dissatisfied with U.S. aid to Ukraine. Some Republican members of the U.S. Congress support foreign aid to Israel but not to Ukraine, and have been described by U.S. media as pro-Russian.\nAmid the Russian invasion of Ukraine, several prominent Republicans criticized some colleagues and conservative media outlets for echoing Russian propaganda. Liz Cheney, formerly the third-ranking House Republican, said \"a Putin wing of the Republican Party\" had emerged. Former vice president Mike Pence said, \"There is no room in the Republican Party for apologists for Putin.\" House Foreign Affairs Committee chairman Michael McCaul asserted that Russian propaganda had \"infected a good chunk of my party's base.\" House Intelligence Committee chairman Mike Turner confirmed McCaul's assessment, asserting that some propaganda coming directly from Russia could be heard on the House floor. Republican senator Thom Tillis characterized the influential conservative commentator Tucker Carlson, who frequently expresses pro-Russia sentiments, as Russia's \"useful idiot\".\nIn April 2024, a majority of Republican members of the U.S. House of Representatives voted against a military aid package to Ukraine. Both Trump and Senator JD Vance, the 2024 Republican presidential nominee and vice presidential nominee respectively, have been vocal critics of military aid to Ukraine and advocates of a peace deal between Russia and Ukraine. The 2024 Republican Party platform did not mention Russia or Ukraine, but stated the party's objectives to \"prevent World War III\" and \"restore peace to Europe\".\nIn February 2025, during the Trump\u2013Zelenskyy meeting, Trump and Vance hostilely berated Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy.\nForeign relations and aid.\nIn a 2014 poll, 59% of Republicans favored doing less abroad and focusing on the country's own problems instead.\nRepublicans have frequently advocated for restricting foreign aid as a means of asserting the national security and immigration interests of the United States.\nA survey by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs shows that \"Trump Republicans seem to prefer a US role that is more independent, less cooperative, and more inclined to use military force to deal with the threats they see as the most pressing\".\nSocial issues.\nThe Republican Party is generally associated with social conservative policies, although it does have dissenting centrist and libertarian factions. The social conservatives support laws that uphold their traditional values, such as opposition to same-sex marriage, abortion, and marijuana. The Republican Party's positions on social and cultural issues are in part a reflection of the influential role that the Christian right has had in the party since the 1970s. Most conservative Republicans also oppose gun control, affirmative action, and illegal immigration. \nAbortion and embryonic stem cell research.\nThe Republican position on abortion has changed significantly over time. During the 1960s and early 1970s, opposition to abortion was concentrated among members of the political left and the Democratic Party; most liberal Catholics\u2014which tended to vote for the Democratic Party\u2014opposed expanding abortion access while most conservative evangelical Protestants supported it.\nDuring this period, Republicans generally favored legalized abortion more than Democrats, although significant heterogeneity could be found within both parties. Leading Republican political figures, including Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, took pro-choice positions until the early 1980s. However, starting at this point, both George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan described themselves as pro-life during their presidencies.\nIn the 21st century, both George W. Bush and Donald Trump described themselves as \"pro-life\" during their terms. However, Trump stated that he supported the legality and ethics of abortion before his candidacy in 2015.\nSummarizing the rapid shift in the Republican and Democratic positions on abortion, Sue Halpern writes:\n...in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many Republicans were behind efforts to liberalize and even decriminalize abortion; theirs was the party of reproductive choice, while Democrats, with their large Catholic constituency, were the opposition. Republican governor Ronald Reagan signed the California Therapeutic Abortion Act, one of the most liberal abortion laws in the country, in 1967, legalizing abortion for women whose mental or physical health would be impaired by pregnancy, or whose pregnancies were the result of rape or incest. The same year, the Republican strongholds of North Carolina and Colorado made it easier for women to obtain abortions. New York, under Governor Nelson Rockefeller, a Republican, eliminated all restrictions on women seeking to terminate pregnancies up to twenty-four weeks gestation... Richard Nixon, Barry Goldwater, Gerald Ford, and George H.W. Bush were all pro-choice, and they were not party outliers. In 1972, a Gallup poll found that 68 percent of Republicans believed abortion to be a private matter between a woman and her doctor. The government, they said, should not be involved... \nSince the 1980s, opposition to abortion has become strongest in the party among traditionalist Catholics and conservative Protestant evangelicals. Initially, evangelicals were relatively indifferent to the cause of abortion and overwhelmingly viewed it as a concern that was sectarian and Catholic. Historian Randall Balmer notes that Billy Graham's \"Christianity Today\" published in 1968 a statement by theologian Bruce Waltke that: \"God does not regard the fetus as a soul, no matter how far gestation has progressed.\" Typical of the time, \"Christianity Today\" \"refused to characterize abortion as sinful\" and cited \"individual health, family welfare, and social responsibility\" as \"justifications for ending a pregnancy.\" Similar beliefs were held among conservative figures in the Southern Baptist Convention, including W. A. Criswell, who is partially credited with starting the \"conservative resurgence\" within the organization, who stated: \"I have always felt that it was only after a child was born and had a life separate from its mother that it became an individual person and it has always, therefore, seemed to me that what is best for the mother and for the future should be allowed.\" Balmer argues that evangelical American Christianity being inherently tied to opposition to abortion is a relatively new occurrence. After the late 1970s, he writes, opinion against abortion among evangelicals rapidly shifted in favor of its prohibition.\nToday, opinion polls show that Republican voters are heavily divided on the legality of abortion, although vast majority of the party's national and state candidates are anti-abortion and oppose elective abortion on religious or moral grounds. While many advocate exceptions in the case of incest, rape or the mother's life being at risk, in 2012 the party approved a platform advocating banning abortions without exception. There were not highly polarized differences between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party prior to the \"Roe v. Wade\" 1973 Supreme Court ruling (which made prohibitions on abortion rights unconstitutional), but after the Supreme Court ruling, opposition to abortion became an increasingly key national platform for the Republican Party. As a result, Evangelicals gravitated towards the Republican Party. Most Republicans oppose government funding for abortion providers, notably Planned Parenthood. This includes support for the Hyde Amendment.\nUntil its dissolution in 2018, Republican Majority for Choice, an abortion rights PAC, advocated for amending the GOP platform to include pro-abortion rights members.\nThe Republican Party has pursued policies at the national and state-level to restrict embryonic stem cell research beyond the original lines because it involves the destruction of human embryos.\nAfter the overturning of \"Roe v. Wade\" in 2022, a majority of Republican-controlled states passed near-total bans on abortion, rendering it largely illegal throughout much of the United States.\nAffirmative action.\nRepublicans generally oppose affirmative action, often describing it as a \"quota system\" and believing that it is not meritocratic and is counter-productive socially, with critics arguing that it promotes \"reverse discrimination\". According to a 2023 ABC poll, a majority of Americans (52%) and 75% of Republicans supported the Supreme Court's decision in Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard prohibiting race as a factor in college admissions, compared to only 26% of Democrats.\nThe 2012 Republican national platform stated, \"We support efforts to help low-income individuals get a fair chance based on their potential and individual merit; but we reject preferences, quotas, and set-asides, as the best or sole methods through which fairness can be achieved, whether in government, education or corporate boardrooms...Merit, ability, aptitude, and results should be the factors that determine advancement in our society.\"\nGun ownership.\nRepublicans generally support gun ownership rights and oppose laws regulating guns with 23% of republicans favoring stricter gun laws compared to 86% of democrats. According to a 2023 Pew Research Center poll, 45% of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents personally own firearms, compared to 32% for the general public and 20% of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents.\nThe National Rifle Association of America, a special interest group in support of gun ownership, has consistently aligned itself with the Republican Party. Following gun control measures under the Clinton administration, such as the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, the Republicans allied with the NRA during the Republican Revolution in 1994. Since then, the NRA has consistently backed Republican candidates and contributed financial support.\nIn contrast, George H. W. Bush, formerly a lifelong NRA member, was highly critical of the organization following their response to the Oklahoma City bombing authored by CEO Wayne LaPierre, and publicly resigned in protest.\nCriminal justice.\nThe Republican Party has generally promoted strict anti-crime policies, such as mandatory minimum sentences and the death penalty. In the 2010s, however, prominent Republicans demonstrated some interest in criminal justice reform designed to combat mass incarceration, with President Trump signing the First Step Act, which expanded good behavior credits for perpetrators of most nonviolent crimes and required the U.S. Attorney General to develop a system to assess the recidivism risk of all federal prisoners. By 2024, however, the Republican Party and its leaders had largely left behind its prior support for reform of the justice system.\nRepublican elected officials have historically supported the war on drugs. They generally oppose legalization or decriminalization of drugs such as marijuana.\nOpposition to the legalization of marijuana has softened significantly over time among Republican voters and politicians. A 2021 \"Quinnipiac\" poll found that 62% of Republicans supported the legalization of recreational marijuana use and that net support for the position was +30 points. Some Republican-controlled states have legalized medical and recreational marijuana in recent years. In September 2024, then-candidate Donald Trump endorsed the legalization of recreational marijuana.\nImmigration.\nThe Republican Party has taken widely varying views on immigration throughout its history, but have generally and traditionally taken an anti-immigration and nativist stance compared to the opposition. In the period between 1850 and 1870, the Republican Party was more opposed to immigration than the Democrats. The GOP's opposition was, in part, caused by its reliance on the support of anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant parties such as the Know-Nothings. In the decades following the Civil War, especially in the 1880s, the Republican Party lessened its stance on immigration, as it represented the manufacturers in the northeast (who wanted additional labor); although during this period, the Democratic Party still came to be seen as the party of both American and foreign labor, and many religious Republicans used anti-Irish and pro-Christian sentiments. Starting in the early 1930s, the parties focused on Mexican emigration, as the Democrats proposed a softer stance on Mexican immigration during the Great Depression and New Deal, rather than Republicans under Herbert Hoover.\nIn 2006, the Republican-led Senate passed comprehensive immigration reform that would eventually have allowed millions of illegal immigrants to become citizens. Despite the support of Republican President George W. Bush, the House of Representatives (also led by Republicans) did not advance the bill. After Republican Mitt Romney was defeated in the 2012 presidential election, particularly due to a lack of support among Latinos, several Republicans advocated a friendlier approach to immigrants that would allow for more migrant workers and a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. The Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 passed the Senate 68\u201332, but was not brought to a vote in the House and died in the 113th Congress. In a 2013 poll, 60% of Republicans supported the pathway to citizenship concept.\nIn 2016, Donald Trump proposed to build a wall along the southern border of the United States. Trump immigration policies during his administration included a travel ban from multiple Muslim-majority countries, a Remain in Mexico policy for asylum-seekers, a controversial family separation policy, and attempting to end DACA. During the tenure of Democratic President Joe Biden, the Republican Party has continued to take a hardline stance against illegal immigration. The Party largely opposes immigration reform, although there are widely differing views on immigration within the Party. The Party's proposed 2024 platform was opposed to immigration, and called for the mass deportation of all illegal immigrants in the United States, which during Trump's second presidency was extended to immigrants without permanent legal status. A 2024 Pew Research Center poll found that 88% of Donald Trump's supporters favored mass deportation of all illegal immigrants, compared to 27% of Kamala Harris supporters.\nLGBT issues.\nSimilar to the Democratic Party, the Republican position on LGBT rights has changed significantly over time, with continuously increasing support among both parties on the issue. The Log Cabin Republicans is a group within the Republican Party that represents LGBT conservatives and allies and advocates for LGBT rights.\nFrom the early-2000s to the mid-2010s, Republicans opposed same-sex marriage, while being divided on the issue of civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex couples. During the 2004 election, George W. Bush campaigned prominently on a constitutional amendment to prohibit same-sex marriage; many believe it helped Bush win re-election. In both 2004 and 2006, President Bush, Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, and House Majority Leader John Boehner promoted the Federal Marriage Amendment, a proposed constitutional amendment which would legally restrict the definition of marriage to heterosexual couples. In both attempts, the amendment failed to secure enough votes to invoke cloture and thus ultimately was never passed. As more states legalized same-sex marriage in the 2010s, Republicans increasingly supported allowing each state to decide its own marriage policy. As of 2014, most state GOP platforms expressed opposition to same-sex marriage. The 2016 GOP Platform defined marriage as \"natural marriage, the union of one man and one woman,\" and condemned the Supreme Court's ruling legalizing same-sex marriages. The 2020 platform, which reused the 2016 platform, retained the statements against same-sex marriage.\nFollowing his election as president in 2016, Donald Trump stated that he had no objection to same-sex marriage or to the Supreme Court decision in \"Obergefell v. Hodges\", but had previously promised to consider appointing a Supreme Court justice to roll back the constitutional right. In office, Trump was the first sitting Republican president to recognize LGBT Pride Month. Conversely, the Trump administration banned transgender individuals from service in the United States military and rolled back other protections for transgender people which had been enacted during the previous Democratic presidency. However, other Republicans, such as Vivek Ramaswamy, do not support such a ban.\nThe Republican Party platform previously opposed the inclusion of gay people in the military and opposed adding sexual orientation to the list of protected classes since 1992. The Republican Party opposed the inclusion of sexual preference in anti-discrimination statutes from 1992 to 2004. The 2008 and 2012 Republican Party platform supported anti-discrimination statutes based on sex, race, age, religion, creed, disability, or national origin, but both platforms were silent on sexual orientation and gender identity. The 2016 platform was opposed to sex discrimination statutes that included the phrase \"sexual orientation\". The same 2016 platform rejected \"Obergefell v. Hodges\", and was also used for the party's 2020 platform. In the early 2020s, numerous Republican-led states proposed or passed laws that have been described as anti-trans by critics, as well as laws limiting or banning public performances of drag shows, and teaching schoolchildren about LGBT topics.\nOn November 6, 2021, RNC Chair Ronna McDaniel announced the creation of the \"RNC Pride Coalition\", in partnership with the Log Cabin Republicans, to promote outreach to LGBTQ voters. However, after the announcement, McDaniel apologized for not having communicated the announcement in advance and emphasized that the new outreach program did not alter the 2016 GOP Platform.\nAs of 2023, a majority of Republican voters support same-sex marriage. According to \"FiveThirtyEight\", as of 2022, Republican voters are consistently more open to same-sex marriage than their representatives. The party platform approved at the 2024 Republican National Convention no longer states that marriage should be between \"one man and one woman\", though it did oppose the inclusion of transgender women in women's sports and teaching about LGBT topics in schools. According to a 2023 \"YouGov\" poll, Republicans are slightly more likely to oppose intersex medical alterations than Democrats.\nIn November 2024, Trump nominated Scott Bessent for United States Secretary of the Treasury. He is the second openly gay man to serve in the Cabinet of the United States (after Pete Buttigieg) and the fourth openly gay man to serve in a cabinet-level office (after Demetrios Marantis, Richard Grenell and Buttigieg). As the secretary of the treasury is fifth in the United States presidential line of succession, he is the highest-ranking openly LGBT person in American history.\nVoting rights.\nVirtually all restrictions on voting have in recent years been implemented by Republicans. Republicans, mainly at the state level, argue that the restrictions (such as the purging of voter rolls, limiting voting locations, and limiting early and mail-in voting) are vital to prevent voter fraud, saying that voter fraud is an underestimated issue in elections. Polling has found majority support for early voting, automatic voter registration and voter ID laws among the general population.\nIn defending their restrictions to voting rights, Republicans have made false and exaggerated claims about the extent of voter fraud in the United States; all existing research indicates that it is extremely rare, and civil and voting rights organizations often accuse Republicans of enacting restrictions to influence elections in the party's favor. Many laws or regulations restricting voting enacted by Republicans have been successfully challenged in court, with court rulings striking down such regulations and accusing Republicans of establishing them with partisan purpose.\nAfter the Supreme Court decision in \"Shelby County v. Holder\" rolled back aspects of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Republicans introduced cuts to early voting, purges of voter rolls and imposition of strict voter ID laws. The 2016 Republican platform advocated proof of citizenship as a prerequisite for registering to vote and photo ID as a prerequisite when voting.\nAfter Donald Trump and his Republican allies made false claims of fraud during the 2020 presidential election, Republicans launched a nationwide effort to impose tighter election laws at the state level. Such bills are centered around limiting mail-in voting, strengthening voter ID laws, shortening early voting, eliminating automatic and same-day voter registration, curbing the use of ballot drop boxes, and allowing for increased purging of voter rolls. Republicans in at least eight states have also introduced bills that would give lawmakers greater power over election administration, after they were unsuccessful in their attempts to overturn election results in swing states won by Biden.\nSupporters of the bills argue they would improve election security and reverse temporary changes enacted during the COVID-19 pandemic; they point to false claims of significant election fraud, as well as the substantial public distrust of the integrity of the 2020 election those claims have fostered, as justification. Political analysts say that the efforts amount to voter suppression, are intended to advantage Republicans by reducing the number of people who vote, and would disproportionately affect minority voters.\nComposition and demographics.\nAccording to a 2025 Gallup poll, 46% of Americans identify or lean towards Republicans, and 45% identify or lean towards Democrats. Republicans have held an edge since 2022, while the Democratic Party had previously held an overall edge in party identification from 1992 to 2021, since Gallup began polling on the issue in 1991. In 2016, \"The New York Times\" stated that the party was strongest in the South, most of the Midwestern and Mountain States, and Alaska.\nThe Republican party's core voting demographics are White voters without college degrees and White Southerners. Racial polarization is extremely high in the Southern United States, with White Southerners almost entirely voting for the Republican Party and Black Southerners almost entirely voting for the Democratic Party.\nAs of 2024, the Republican Party has support from a majority of White voters, and increasingly among Hispanics and Asians.\nA majority of working-class, rural, men, individuals without college degrees, and lower income voters vote for the party. Traditionalist religious voters, including Evangelicals Latter-Day Saints, Muslims, and Catholic voters lean towards the Republicans. The party has made significant gains among the white working class, Asians, and Hispanics.\nRepublicans have lost support among upper middle class and college-educated whites. In 2024, Trump only narrowly won White voters making $100,000 to $199,999 (50\u201349%), over $200,000 (51\u201348%), and White men with college degrees (50-48%), all on par with Trump winning the popular vote 50\u201348%.\nIncome.\nUntil 2016, higher income was strongly correlated to voting for the Republican Party among the general electorate. However, in all three of Trump's elections in 2016, 2020, and 2024, the previous correlation between higher incomes and voting for the Republican Party was largely eliminated among the electorate as a whole. For White voters, instead higher educational attainment was strongly correlated with higher support for the Democratic Party. According to a 2024 Pew Research Center poll, homeowners are slightly more likely to be Republicans (51-45%), while renters are much more likely to be Democrats (64-32%).\nIn the 2024 presidential election, Trump did better among lower-income voters than high-income voters, the first time ever for the Republican nominee in modern American political history. Trump lost voters making annual incomes over $100,000 (47\u201351%) and $200,000 (46\u201352%) to Democrat Kamala Harris, with voters making over $200,000 a year being Trump's weakest income demographic. Trump won voters making less than $100,000 (51\u201347%) and $50,000 (50\u201348%), though Trump did lose voters making less than $30,000 (46\u201350%).\nTrump won some of the lowest-income counties, mainly majority-White counties in Appalachia. Most of the lowest-income counties are majority-Black counties in the Southern Black Belt, which Trump lost.\nMen without college degrees, particularly blue-collar men, are Donald Trump's strongest demographic. Per exit polls, Trump won White men without college degrees (69-29%) and just over half of Hispanic men in the 2024 presidential election.\nRegion.\nSome of the oldest Republican strongholds in the country are in the Southern United States, particularly majority-White Unionist counties in Appalachia. The Republican Party gradually gained power in the Southern United States since 1964. Although Richard Nixon carried 49 states in 1972, including every Southern state, the Republican Party remained quite weak at the local and state levels across the entire South for decades. Republicans first won a majority of U.S. House seats in the South in the 1994 \"Republican Revolution\", and only began to dominate the South after the 2010 elections.\nSince the 2010s, White Southerners are the Republican Party's strongest racial demographic, in some Deep South states voting nearly as Republican as African Americans vote Democratic. This is partially attributable to religiosity, with White evangelical Christians in the Bible Belt, which covers most of the South, being the Republican Party's strongest religious demographic. In particular, in 2024 Trump won every state with a significant presence in the Bible Belt except Virginia, because Northern Virginia is part of the heavily Democratic Washington metropolitan area.\nWhite Southerners with college degrees remain strongly Republican. In 2024, Trump won White Southerners 67-32%, including White Southerners with college degrees 57-41%. Trump won White evangelicals 82-17%, including White evangelicals with college degrees 75-23%.\nAge.\nThe Republican Party does best with middle age and older voters, particularly voters over the age of 50. In the 2024 presidential election, Trump lost voters aged 18\u201329 (43\u201354%) and 30\u201339 (45\u201351%), tied with voters aged 40\u201349 (49-49%), did best among voters aged 50\u201364 (54-44%), and narrowly won voters 65 and older (50-49%). This also holds when controlling for race.\nGender.\nSince 1980, a \"gender gap\" has seen stronger support for the Republican Party among men than among women. Unmarried and divorced women were far more likely to vote for Democrat John Kerry than for Republican George W. Bush in the 2004 presidential election. Exit polls from the 2012 elections revealed a continued weakness among unmarried women for the GOP, a large and growing portion of the electorate. Although women supported Obama over Mitt Romney by a margin of 55\u201344% in 2012, Romney prevailed amongst married women, 53\u201346%. Obama won unmarried women 67\u201331%.\nHowever, according to a December 2019 study, \"White women are the only group of female voters who support Republican Party candidates for president. They have done so by a majority in all but 2 of the last 18 elections\".\nEducation.\nIn all three of Donald Trump's elections in 2016, 2020, and 2024, for White voters lower educational attainment was strongly correlated with higher support for Trump. When controlling for educational attainment among White voters, there still remain large variations by state and region. In particular, college-educated White Southerners remain strongly Republican.\nThe Republican Party has steadily increased the percentage of votes it receives from white voters without college degrees since the 1970s, while the educational attainment of the United States has steadily increased. White voters without college degrees are more likely to live in rural areas.\nVoters with college degrees as a whole were a Republican-voting group until the 1990s. Despite losing in a landslide, Republican nominee Barry Goldwater nearly won a majority of voters with college degrees 48\u201352% in 1964. Republican president Gerald Ford won voters with college degrees 55-43% in 1976, while narrowly losing to Jimmy Carter. Since the 1990s, a majority of voters with graduate degrees have consistently voted for the Democratic Party. For example, George W. Bush won voters with just a bachelor's degree 52-46% while losing voters with a graduate degree 44\u201355%, while winning re-election in 2004.\nUntil 2016, white voters with college degrees were a Republican-leaning group. Despite Obama's decisive 2008 victory, Republican nominee John McCain won a majority of white voters with college degrees 51-47% and white voters without college degrees 58-40%. In 2012, Republican nominee Mitt Romney won white voters with college degrees 56-42%, though Obama won voters with college degrees as a whole 50-48% while winning re-election. Since the 2010s, white voters with college degrees have been increasingly voting for the Democratic Party. Following the 2016 presidential election, exit polls indicated that \"Donald Trump attracted a large share of the vote from Whites without a college degree, receiving 72 percent of the White non-college male vote and 62 percent of the White non-college female vote.\" Overall, 52% of voters with college degrees voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, while 52% of voters without college degrees voted for Trump.\nIn the 2020 United States presidential election, Donald Trump won white voters without college degrees 67-32%, while losing white voters with a college degree 48\u201351%. In the 2024 United States presidential election, Trump maintained his margins among white voters without college degrees 66-32% and lost white voters with a college degree 45\u201352%. In 2024, Trump won 56% of voters without a college degree, compared to 42% of voters with a college degree.\nEthnicity.\nRepublicans have consistently won the White vote in every presidential election after the 1964 presidential election. There exist large variations among White voters by region and state. In particular, Republicans lose White voters in the Northeast, parts of the Upper Midwest and West Coast. Republicans are strongest with White Southerners, particularly White evangelical Christians in the Bible Belt, which covers most of the Southern United States. White Southerners with college degrees remain strongly Republican. In some Deep South states, Whites vote nearly as Republican as African Americans vote Democratic. In the 2024 presidential election, Trump won White Southerners 67-32%.\nRepublicans have been winning under 15% of the African American vote in national elections since 1980. Until the New Deal of the 1930s, Black people supported the Republican Party by large margins. Black delegates were a sizable share of southern delegates to the national Republican convention from Reconstruction until the start of the 20th century when their share began to decline. Black people shifted in large margins to the Democratic Party in the 1930s, when Black politicians such as Arthur Mitchell and William Dawson supported the New Deal because it would better serve the interest of Black Americans. Black voters would become one of the core components of the New Deal coalition. In the South, after the Voting Rights Act to prohibit racial discrimination in elections was passed by a bipartisan coalition in 1965, Black people were able to vote again and ever since have formed a significant portion (20\u201350%) of the Democratic vote in that region.\nIn the 2010 elections, two African American Republicans, Tim Scott and Allen West, were elected to the House of Representatives. As of January 2023, there are four African-American Republicans in the House of Representatives and one African American Republican in the United States Senate. In recent decades, Republicans have been moderately successful in gaining support from Hispanic and Asian American voters. George W. Bush, who campaigned energetically for Hispanic votes, received 35% of their vote in 2000 and 44% in 2004. The party's strong anti-communist stance has made it popular among some minority groups from current and former Communist states, in particular Cuban Americans, Korean Americans, Chinese Americans and Vietnamese Americans. The 2007 election of Bobby Jindal as Governor of Louisiana was hailed as pathbreaking. Jindal became the first elected minority governor in Louisiana and the first state governor of Indian descent.\nRepublicans have gained support among racial and ethnic minorities, particularly among those who are working class, Hispanic or Latino, or Asian American since the 2010s. According to John Avlon, in 2013, the Republican party was more ethnically diverse at the statewide elected official level than the Democratic Party was; GOP statewide elected officials included Latino Nevada Governor Brian Sandoval and African-American U.S. senator Tim Scott of South Carolina.\nIn the 2008 presidential election, Republican presidential candidate John McCain won 55% of White votes, 35% of Asian votes, 31% of Hispanic votes and 4% of African American votes. In 2012, 88% of Romney voters were White while 56% of Obama voters were White. In the 2024 presidential election, Trump won 57% of White voters, 46% of Hispanic voters, 39% of Asian voters, and 13% of African American voters.\nDonald Trump won the popular vote in the 2024 United States presidential election as White voters without college degrees still strongly backed him, in addition to the gains made with Asian and Latino voters in comparison to the 2020 United States presidential election. As a whole, 84% of Trump voters were White.\nReligious communities.\nReligion has always played a major role for both parties, but in the course of a century, the parties' religious compositions have changed. Religion was a major dividing line between the parties before 1960, with Catholics, Jews, and southern Protestants heavily Democratic and northeastern Protestants heavily Republican. Most of the old differences faded away after the realignment of the 1970s and 1980s that undercut the New Deal coalition. Since 1980, a large majority of evangelicals has voted Republican; 70\u201380% voted for Bush in 2000 and 2004 and 70% for Republican House candidates in 2006.\nMembers of the Mormon faith had a mixed relationship with Donald Trump during his tenure, despite 67% of them voting for him in 2016 and 56% of them supporting his presidency in 2018, disapproving of his personal behavior such as that shown during the \"Access Hollywood\" controversy. In the 2020 United States presidential election in Utah, Trump won the state by about 21.5%, by a margin more than 20% lower compared to Mitt Romney (who is Mormon) in 2012 and George W. Bush in 2004. Their opinion on Trump had not affected their party affiliation, however, as 76% of Mormons in 2018 expressed preference for generic Republican congressional candidates. Similarly, while Trump again won majority-Mormon Utah in 2024, the state had one of the smallest swings to the right and Trump's 22% margin was well below that of prior Republican presidential nominees.\nJews continue to vote 70\u201380% Democratic; however, a slim majority of Orthodox Jews voted for the Republican Party in 2016, following years of growing Orthodox Jewish support for the party due to its social conservatism and increasingly pro-Israel foreign policy stance. Over 70% of Orthodox Jews identify as Republican or Republican leaning as of 2021. An exit poll conducted by the Associated Press for 2020 found 35% of Muslims voted for Donald Trump. The mainline Protestants have dropped to about 55% Republican (in contrast to 75% before 1968). Democrats have close links with the African American churches, especially the National Baptists, while their historic dominance among Catholic voters has eroded to 54\u201346 in the 2010 midterms.\nAlthough once strongly Democratic, American Catholic voters have been politically divided in the 21st century with 52% of Catholic voters voting for Trump in 2016 and 52% voting for Biden in 2020. While Catholic Republican leaders try to stay in line with the teachings of the Catholic Church on subjects such as abortion, contraception, euthanasia, and embryonic stem cell research, they tend to differ on the death penalty and same-sex marriage.\nRepublican presidents.\nAs of 2025, there have been 19 Republican presidents. This is 3 more than the Democratic Party, which has had 16.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32071", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32071", "title": "USS Liberty incident", "text": "1967 Israeli attack on United States Navy ship\nThe USS \"Liberty\" incident was an attack on a United States Navy technical research ship (a spy ship), , by Israeli Air Force jet fighter aircraft and Israeli Navy motor torpedo boats, on 8 June 1967, during the Six-Day War. The combined air and sea attack killed 34 crew members (naval officers, seamen, two marines, and one civilian NSA employee), wounded 171 crew members, and severely damaged the ship. At the time, the ship was in international waters north of the Sinai Peninsula, about northwest from the Egyptian city of Arish.\nIsrael apologized for the attack, saying that USS \"Liberty\" had been attacked in error after being mistaken for an Egyptian ship. Both the Israeli and United States governments conducted inquiries and issued reports that concluded the attack was a mistake due to Israeli confusion about the ship's identity. Others, including survivors of the attack, have rejected these conclusions and maintain that the attack was deliberate. Thomas Hinman Moorer, the 7th chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, accused President Lyndon B. Johnson of having covered up that the attack was a deliberate act.\nIn May 1968, the Israeli government paid US$ (equivalent to US$ in 2024) to the U.S. government in compensation for the families of the 34 men killed in the attack. In March 1969, Israel paid a further $ ($ in 2024) to the men who had been wounded. In December 1980, it agreed to pay $ ($ in 2024) as the final settlement for material damage to the ship plus 13 years of interest.\nUSS \"Liberty\".\n was originally the light civilian cargo vessel \"Simmons Victory\", a mass-produced, standard-design Victory ship, the follow-on series to the famous Liberty ships that supplied the Allies with cargo during World War II. It was acquired by the United States Navy and converted to an auxiliary technical research ship (AGTR), a cover name for National Security Agency (NSA) \"spy ships\" carrying out signals intelligence missions. It carried out five operations in waters off the west coast of Africa leading up to 1967.\nAttack on the \"Liberty\".\nEvents leading to the attack.\nDuring the Six-Day War between Israel and several Arab nations, the United States maintained a neutral country status. Several days before the war began, USS \"Liberty\" was ordered to proceed to the eastern Mediterranean area to perform a signals intelligence collection mission in international waters near the north coast of Sinai, Egypt. After the war erupted, due to concerns about its safety as it approached its patrol area, several messages were sent to \"Liberty\" to increase its allowable closest point of approach (CPA) to Egypt's and Israel's coasts from , respectively, to , and then later to for both countries, thereby reducing proximity. However, due to ineffective message handling and routing, these messages were not received until after the attack.\nAccording to Israeli sources, at the start of the war on 5 June, General Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli Air Force (IAF) chief of staff informed Commander Ernest Carl Castle, the American naval attach\u00e9 in Tel Aviv, that Israel would defend its coast with every means at its disposal, including sinking unidentified ships. He asked the U.S. to keep its ships away from Israel's shore or at least inform Israel of their exact positions.\nAmerican sources said that no inquiry about ships in the area was made until after the attack on \"Liberty\". In a message sent from U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk to U.S. Ambassador Walworth Barbour in Tel Aviv, Israel, Rusk asked for \"urgent confirmation\" of Israel's statement. Barbour responded: \"No request for info on U.S. ships operating off Sinai was made until after \"Liberty\" incident.\" Further, Barbour stated: \"Had Israelis made such an inquiry it would have been forwarded immediately to the chief of naval operations and other high naval commands and repeated to dept [Department of State].\"\nWith the outbreak of war, Captain William L. McGonagle of \"Liberty\" immediately asked Vice Admiral William I. Martin at the United States Sixth Fleet headquarters to send a destroyer to accompany \"Liberty\" and serve as its armed escort and as an auxiliary communications center. The following day, Admiral Martin replied: \"\"Liberty\" is a clearly marked United States ship in international waters, not a participant in the conflict and not a reasonable subject for attack by any nation. Request denied.\" He promised, however, that in the unlikely event of an inadvertent attack, jet fighters from the Sixth Fleet would be overhead in ten minutes.\nMeanwhile, at the United Nations on 6 June, U.S. Ambassador Arthur Goldberg told the United Nations Security Council that vessels of the Sixth Fleet were several hundred miles from the conflict, in response to Egyptian complaints that the United States was supporting Israel in the conflict. When this statement was made, it was in fact true; \"Liberty\", now assigned to the Sixth Fleet, was in the central Mediterranean Sea, passing between Libya and Crete. It would ultimately steam to about north of the Sinai Peninsula.\nOn the night of 7 June Washington time, early morning on 8 June, 01:10 Zulu or 03:10 local time, the Pentagon issued an order to Sixth Fleet headquarters to tell \"Liberty\" to come no closer than to Israel, Syria, or the Sinai coast (Oren, p.\u00a0263). According to the Naval Court of Inquiry and the National Security Agency official history, the order to withdraw was not sent on the radio frequency that \"Liberty\" monitored for her orders until 15:25 Zulu, several hours after the attack, due to a long series of administrative and message routing problems. The Navy said a large volume of unrelated high-precedence traffic, including intelligence intercepts related to the conflict, were being handled at the time; and that this combined with a shortage of qualified radiomen contributed to the delayed transmission of the withdrawal message.\nVisual contact.\nOfficial testimony combined with \"Liberty\"'s deck log establish that throughout the morning of the attack, 8 June, the ship was overflown, at various times and locations, by IAF aircraft. The primary aircraft type was the Nord Noratlas; there were also two unidentified delta-wing jets at about 09:00 Sinai time (GMT+2). \"Liberty\" crewmembers say that one of the Noratlas aircraft flew so close to \"Liberty\" that noise from its propellers rattled the ship's deck plating, and that the pilots and crewmembers waved to each other. It was later reported, based on information from IDF sources, that the over-flights were coincidental, and that the aircraft were hunting for Egyptian submarines that had been spotted near the coast.\nAt about 05:45 Sinai time, a ship-sighting report was received at Israeli Central Coastal Command (CCC) in respect of \"Liberty\", identified by an aerial naval observer as \"apparently a destroyer, sailing west of Gaza\". The vessel's location was marked on a CCC control table, using a red marker, indicating an unidentified vessel. At about 06:00, the aerial naval observer, Major Uri Meretz, reported that the ship appeared to be a U.S. Navy supply ship; at about 09:00 the red marker was replaced with a green marker to indicate a neutral vessel. About the same time, an Israeli jet fighter pilot reported that a ship north of Arish had fired at his aircraft after he tried to identify the vessel. Israeli naval command dispatched two destroyers to investigate, but they were returned to their previous positions at 09:40 after doubts emerged during the pilot's debriefing. After the naval observer's Noratlas landed and he was debriefed, the ship he saw was further identified as USS \"Liberty\", based on its \"GTR-5\" hull markings. USS \"Liberty\"'s marker was removed from CCC's Control Table at 11:00, due to its positional information being considered out of date.\nAt 11:24, the Israeli chief of naval operations received a report that Arish was being shelled from the sea. An inquiry into the source of the report was ordered to determine its validity. The report came from an air support officer in Arish. Additionally, at 11:27 the Israeli Supreme Command head of operations received a report stating that a ship had been shelling Arish, but the shells had fallen short. (The investigative journalist James Bamford points out that \"Liberty\" had only four .50 caliber machine guns mounted on her decks and thus could not have shelled the coast.) The Head of Operations ordered that the report be verified, and that it be determined whether or not Israeli Navy vessels were off the coast of Arish. At 11:45, another report arrived at Supreme Command saying two ships were approaching the Arish coast.\nThe shelling and ship reports were passed from Supreme Command to Fleet Operations control center. The chief of naval operations took them seriously, and at 12:05 torpedo boat Division 914 was ordered to patrol in the direction of Arish. Division 914, codenamed \"Pagoda\", was under the command of Commander Moshe Oren. It consisted of three torpedo boats numbered: T-203, T-204 and T-206. At 12:15, Division 914 received orders to patrol a position north of Arish. As Commander Oren headed toward Arish, he was informed by Naval Operations of the reported shelling of Arish and told that IAF aircraft would be dispatched to the area after the target had been detected. Chief of Staff Yitzhak Rabin was concerned that the supposed Egyptian shelling was the prelude to an amphibious landing that could outflank Israeli forces. Rabin reiterated the standing order to sink any unidentified ships in the area, but advised caution, as Soviet vessels were reportedly operating nearby. At 13:41, the torpedo boats detected an unknown vessel 20 miles northwest of Arish and off the coast of Bardawil. The ship's speed was estimated on their radars. The combat information center officer on T-204, Ensign Aharon Yifrah, reported to Oren that the target had been detected at a range of , that her speed had been tracked for a few minutes, after which he had determined that the target was moving westward at a speed of . These data were forwarded to the Fleet Operations control center.\nThe speed of the target was significant because it indicated that the target was a combat vessel. Moreover, Israeli forces had standing orders to fire on any unknown vessels sailing in the area at over , a speed which, at the time, could be attained only by warships. The chief of naval operations asked the torpedo boats to double-check their calculations. Yifrah twice recalculated and confirmed his assessment. A few minutes later, Commander Oren reported that the target, now from his position, was moving at a speed of on a different heading. Bamford, however, points out that \"Liberty\"'s top speed was far below 28 knots. His sources say that at the time of the attack \"Liberty\" was following her signal-intercept mission course along the northern Sinai coast, at about speed.\nThe data on the ship's speed, together with its direction, gave the impression that it was an Egyptian destroyer fleeing toward port after shelling Arish. The torpedo boats gave chase, but did not expect to overtake their target before it reached Egypt. Commander Oren requested that the Israeli Air Force dispatch aircraft to intercept. At 13:48, the chief of naval operations requested dispatch of fighter aircraft to the ship's location.\nThe IAF dispatched a flight of two Mirage III fighter jets codenamed Kursa flight which arrived at \"Liberty\" at about 14:00. The formation leader, Captain Iftach Spector, attempted to identify the ship. He radioed to one of the torpedo boats his observation that the ship looked like a military ship with one smokestack and one mast. He also communicated, in effect, that the ship appeared to him like a destroyer or another type of small ship. In a post-attack statement, the pilots said they saw no distinguishable markings or flag on the ship.\nAt this point, a recorded exchange took place between a command headquarters weapons systems officer, one of the air controllers, and the chief air controller questioning a possible American presence. Immediately after the exchange, at 13:57, the chief air controller, Lieutenant-Colonel Shmuel Kislev, cleared the Mirages to attack.\nAir and sea attacks.\nAfter being cleared to attack, the Mirages dove on the ship and attacked with 30-mm cannons and rockets. The attack came a few minutes after the crew completed a chemical attack drill, with Captain McGonagle on the command bridge. The crew was in \"stand-down mode\", with their helmets and life jackets removed. Battle readiness \"modified condition three\" was set, which meant that the ship's four .50 caliber machine guns were manned and ammunition was ready for loading and firing. Eight crewmen either were killed immediately or received fatal injuries and died later, and 75 were wounded. Among the wounded was McGonagle, who was hit in the right thigh and arm. During the attack, antennas were severed, gas drums caught fire, and the ship's flag was knocked down. McGonagle sent an urgent request for help to the Sixth Fleet, \"Under attack by unidentified jet aircraft, require immediate assistance\".\nThe Mirages left after expending their ammunition, and were replaced by a flight of two Dassault Super Myst\u00e8res codenamed Royal flight. The Mysteres were armed with napalm bombs, and were flown by Captain Yossi Zuk and his wingman, Yaakov Hamermish. The Mysteres released their payloads over the ship and strafed it with their cannons. Much of the ship's superstructure caught fire. The Mysteres were readying to attack again when the Israeli Navy, alerted by the absence of return fire, warned Kislev that the target could be Israeli. Kislev told the pilots not to attack if there was any doubt about identification, and the Israeli Navy quickly contacted all of its vessels in the area. The Israeli Navy found that none of its vessels were under fire, and the aircraft were cleared to attack. However, Kislev was still disturbed by a lack of return fire and requested one last attempt to identify the ship. Captain Zuk made an attempt at identification while strafing the ship. He reported seeing no flag, but saw the ship's GTR-5 marking. Kislev immediately ordered the attack stopped. Kislev guessed that the ship was American.\nThe fact that the ship had Latin alphabet markings led Chief of Staff Rabin to fear that the ship was Soviet. Though Egyptian warships were known to disguise their identities with Western markings, they usually displayed Arabic letters and numbers only. Rabin ordered the torpedo boats to remain at a safe distance from the ship, and sent in two A\u00e9rospatiale SA 321 Super Frelon helicopters to search for survivors. These radio communications were recorded by Israel. The order was also recorded in the torpedo boat's log, although Commander Oren claimed not to have received it. The order to cease fire was given at 14:20, twenty-four minutes before the torpedo boats arrived at the \"Liberty\"'s position.\nDuring the interval, crewmen aboard \"Liberty\" hoisted a large American flag. During the early part of the air attack and before the torpedo boats were sighted, \"Liberty\" sent a distress message that was received by Sixth Fleet aircraft carrier . Aircraft carrier dispatched eight aircraft. The carrier had been in the middle of strategic exercises. Vice-Admiral William I. Martin recalled the aircraft minutes later.\nMcGonagle testified at the naval court of inquiry that during &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; McGonagle testified that he \"believed that the time of initial sighting of the torpedo boats ... was about 14:20\", and that the \"boats appeared to be in a wedge type formation with the center boat the lead point of the wedge. Estimated speed of the boats was about \", and that it \"appeared that they were approaching the ship in a torpedo launch attitude\".\nWhen the torpedo boats arrived, Commander Oren could see that the ship could not be the destroyer that had supposedly shelled Arish or any ship capable of speed. According to Michael Limor, an Israeli naval reservist serving on one of the torpedo boats, they attempted to contact the ship by heliograph and radio, but received no response. At , T-204 paused and signalled \"AA\", which means \"identify yourself\". Due to damaged equipment, McGonagle could only reply using a handheld Aldis lamp. Oren recalled receiving a similar response from the \"Ibrahim el Awal\", an Egyptian destroyer captured by Israel during the Suez Crisis, and was convinced that he was facing an enemy ship. He consulted an Israeli identification guide to Arab fleets and concluded the ship was the Egyptian supply ship \"El Quseir\", based on observing its deckline, midship bridge and smokestack. The captain of boat T-203 reached the same conclusion independently. The boats moved into battle formation, but did not attack.\nAs the torpedo boats rapidly approached, McGonagle ordered a sailor to proceed to machine gun Mount 51 and open fire. However, he then noticed that the boats appeared to be flying an Israeli flag, and \"realized that there was a possibility of the aircraft having been Israeli and the attack had been conducted in error\". McGonagle ordered the man at gun mount 51 to hold fire, but a short burst was fired at the torpedo boats before the man understood the order.\nMcGonagle observed that machine gun Mount 53 began firing at the center torpedo boat at about the same time gun mount 51 fired, and that its fire was \"extremely effective and blanketed the area and the center torpedo boat\". Machine gun mount 53 was located on the starboard amidships side, behind the pilot house. McGonagle could not see or \"get to mount 53 from the starboard wing of the bridge\". So, he \"sent Mr. Lucas around the port side of the bridge, around to the skylights, to see if he could tell [Seaman] Quintero, whom [he] believed to be the gunner on Machine gun 53, to hold fire\". Lucas \"reported back in a few minutes in effect that he saw no one at mount 53\". Lucas, who had left the command bridge during the air attack and returned to assist McGonagle, believed that the sound of gunfire was likely from ammunition cooking off, due to a nearby fire. Previously, Lucas had granted a request from Quintero to fire at the torpedo boats, before heat from a nearby fire chased him from gun mount 53. McGonagle later testified, at the Court of Inquiry, that this was likely the \"extremely effective\" firing event he had observed.\nAfter coming under fire, the torpedo boats returned fire with their cannons, killing \"Liberty\"'s helmsman. The torpedo boats then launched five torpedoes at the \"Liberty\". At 12:35Z (14:35 local time) one torpedo hit \"Liberty\" on the starboard side forward of the superstructure, creating a wide hole in what had been a cargo hold converted to the ship's research spaces and killing 25 servicemen, almost all of them from the intelligence section, and wounding dozens. It has been said the torpedo hit a major hull frame that absorbed much of the energy; crew members reported that if the torpedo had missed the frame the \"Liberty\" would have split in two. The other four torpedoes missed the ship.\nThe torpedo boats then closed in and strafed the ship's hull with their cannons and machine guns. According to some crewmen, the torpedo boats fired at damage control parties and sailors preparing life rafts for launch. (See disputed details below.) A life raft which floated from the ship was picked up by T-203 and found to bear U.S. Navy markings. T-204 then circled \"Liberty\", and Oren spotted the designation GTR-5, but saw no flag. It took until 15:30 to establish the ship's identity. Shortly before the \"Liberty\"'s identity was confirmed, the \"Saratoga\" launched eight aircraft armed with conventional weapons towards \"Liberty\". After the ship's identity was confirmed, the General Staff was notified and an apology was sent to naval attach\u00e9 Castle. The aircraft approaching \"Liberty\" were recalled to the \"Saratoga\".\nAftermath of the attack.\nAccording to transcripts of intercepted radio communications, published by the U.S. National Security Agency, at about 14:30, near the beginning of the torpedo boat attack, two IAF helicopters were dispatched to \"Liberty\"'s location. The helicopters arrived at about 15:10, about 35 minutes after the torpedo hit the ship. After arriving, one of the helicopter pilots was asked by his ground-based controller to verify that the ship was flying an American flag. The helicopters conducted a brief search for crew members of the ship who might have fallen overboard during the air attack. No one was found. The helicopters left the ship at about 15:20.\nAt about 16:00, two hours after the attack began, Israel informed the U.S. embassy in Tel Aviv that its military forces had mistakenly attacked a U.S. Navy ship. When the ship was \"confirmed to be American\" the torpedo boats returned at about 16:40 to offer help; it was refused by the \"Liberty\". Later, Israel provided a helicopter to fly U.S. naval attach\u00e9 Commander Castle to the ship. (pp.\u00a032, 34)\nIn Washington, President Lyndon B. Johnson had received word from the Joint Chiefs of Staff that \"Liberty\" had been torpedoed by an unknown vessel at 09:50 eastern time. Johnson assumed that the Soviets were involved, and hotlined Moscow with news of the attack and the dispatch of jets from \"Saratoga\". He chose not to make any public statements and delegated this task to Phil G. Goulding, who was an assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs at the time. Soon afterward, the Israelis said that they had mistakenly attacked the ship. The Johnson administration conveyed \"strong dismay\" to Israeli ambassador Avraham Harman. Meanwhile, apologies were soon sent by Israeli prime minister Levi Eshkol, Foreign Minister Abba Eban, and charg\u00e9 d'affaires Ephraim Evron. Within 48 hours, Israel offered to compensate the victims and their families.\nThough \"Liberty\" was severely damaged, with a 39\u00a0ft wide by 24\u00a0ft high (12 m \u00d7 7.3 m) hole and a twisted keel, her crew kept her afloat, and she was able to leave the area under her own power. \"Liberty\" was first met by Soviet Kildin class guided missile destroyer (DDG 626/4), which offered help. Subsequently, it was met by the destroyers and , and the cruiser . Medical personnel were transferred to \"Liberty\", and she was escorted to Malta, where she was given interim repairs. After these were completed in July 1967, \"Liberty\" returned to the U.S. She was decommissioned in June 1968 and struck from the Naval Vessel Register. \"Liberty\" was transferred to the United States Maritime Administration (MARAD) in December 1970 and sold for scrap in 1973.\nFrom the start, the response to Israeli statements of mistaken identity ranged between frank disbelief to unquestioning acceptance within the administration in Washington. A communication to the Israeli ambassador on 10 June, by Secretary Rusk stated, among other things:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the time of the attack, the USS \"Liberty\" was flying the American flag and its identification was clearly indicated in large white letters and numerals on its hull. ... Experience demonstrates that both the flag and the identification number of the vessel were readily visible from the air ... Accordingly, there is every reason to believe that the USS \"Liberty\" was identified, or at least her nationality determined, by Israeli aircraft approximately one hour before the attack. ... The subsequent attack by the torpedo boats, substantially after the vessel was or should have been identified by Israeli military forces, manifests the same reckless disregard for human life.\nGeorge Lenczowski notes: \"It was significant that, in contrast to his secretary of state, President Johnson fully accepted the Israeli version of the tragic incident.\" He notes that Johnson himself included only one small paragraph about the \"Liberty\" in his autobiography, in which he accepted the Israeli explanation, minimized the affair and distorted the number of dead and wounded, by lowering them from 34 to 10 and 171 to 100, respectively. Lenczowski further states: \"It seems Johnson was more interested in avoiding a possible confrontation with the Soviet Union, ... than in restraining Israel.\"\nMcGonagle received the Medal of Honor, the highest U.S. medal, for his actions. The Medal of Honor is generally presented by the president of the United States in the White House, but this time it was awarded at the Washington Navy Yard by the Secretary of the Navy in an unpublicized ceremony. Other \"Liberty\" sailors received decorations for their actions during and after the attack, but most of the award citations omitted mention of Israel as the perpetrator. In 2009, however, a Silver Star was awarded to crewmember Terry Halbardier, who braved machine-gun and cannon fire to repair a damaged antenna that restored the ship's communication; in his award citation Israel was named as the attacker.\nU.S. government investigations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Court produced evidence that the Israeli armed forces had ample opportunity to identify \"LIBERTY\" correctly. The Court had insufficient information before it to make a judgment on the reasons for the decision by Israeli aircraft and motor torpedo boats to attack\u00a0... It was not the responsibility of the Court to rule on the culpability of the attackers, and no evidence was heard from the attacking nation.\u2014\u200a\nAmerican inquiries, memoranda, records of testimony, and various reports involving or mentioning the \"Liberty\" attack include, but are not limited to, the following:\nThe U.S. Naval Court of Inquiry record contains testimony by \"Liberty\" crew members, exhibits of attack damage photographs, and various reports. The court concluded that the testimony record revealed \"a shallow investigation, plagued by myriad disagreements between the captain and his crew\". According to the Navy Court of Inquiry's record of proceedings, four days were spent hearing testimony: two days for fourteen survivors of the attack and several U.S. Navy expert witnesses, and two partial days for two expert U.S. Navy witnesses. No testimony was heard from Israeli personnel involved.\nThe official U.S. records of the Liberty incident were designated top-secret and closed to the general public. The U.S. government and Israel jointly stated: \"That the Israeli attack upon the USS \"Liberty\" had been the result of error, and nothing more.\" Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations after the \"Liberty\" incident, said that he \"cannot accept the claim by the Israelis that this was a case of mistaken identity\".\nThe CIA Memoranda consists of two documents: one dated June 13, 1967, and the other dated June 21, 1967. The June 13 memorandum is an \"account of circumstances of the attack ... compiled from all available sources\". The June 21 memorandum is a point-by-point analysis of the Israeli inquiry findings of fact. It concludes: \"The attack was not made in malice toward the U.S. and was by mistake, but the failure of the IDF Headquarters and the attacking aircraft to identify the \"Liberty\" and the subsequent attack by torpedo boats were both incongruous and indicative of gross negligence.\"\nThe Clark Clifford report concluded: \"The unprovoked attack on the \"Liberty\" constitutes a flagrant act of gross negligence for which the Israeli Government should be held completely responsible, and the Israeli military personnel involved should be punished.\"\nThe Senate Foreign Relations Committee testimony contains, as an aside during hearings concerning a foreign aid authorization bill, questions and statements from several senators and responses from then Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, about the \"Liberty\" attack. For the most part, the senators were dismayed about the attack, as expressed by Senator Bourke B. Hickenlooper: \"From what I have read I can't tolerate for one minute that this [attack] was an accident.\" There was concern about obtaining more information on the attack, as expressed by committee chairman J. William Fulbright: \"We asked for [the attack investigation report] about two weeks ago and have not received it yet from Secretary Rusk. ... By the time we get to it we will be on some other subject.\" Secretary McNamara promised fast delivery of the investigation report, \"...\u00a0you will have it in four hours\", and concluded his remarks by saying: \"I simply want to emphasize that the investigative report does not show any evidence of a conscious intent to attack a U.S. vessel.\"\nThe House Armed Services Committee investigation report, \"Review of Department of Defense Worldwide Communications\" was not an investigation focused on the \"Liberty\" attack, although it contains a section describing the flow of communications connected with the \"Liberty\" incident.\nThe National Security Agency (NSA) history report on the event included declassified documents which stated: \"Every official interview of numerous \"Liberty\" crewmen gave consistent evidence that indeed the \"Liberty\" was flying an American flag\u2014and, further, the weather conditions were ideal to ensure its easy observance and identification.\"\nThe USS \"Liberty\" Veterans Association, composed of veterans from the ship, states that U.S. congressional investigations and other U.S. investigations were not actually investigations into the attack, but rather reports using evidence only from the U.S. Navy Court of Inquiry, or investigations unrelated to culpability that involved issues such as communications. In their view, the U.S. Navy Court of Inquiry is the only actual investigation on the incident to date. They say it was hastily conducted, in only ten days, even though the court's president, Rear Admiral Isaac Kidd, said that it would take six months to conduct properly. The inquiry's terms of reference were limited to whether any shortcomings on the part of the \"Liberty\"'s crew had contributed to the injuries and deaths that resulted from the attack.\nMichael Oren (a former Israeli ambassador to the United States) contends that \"the United States National Archives contain no evidence to suggest that information obtained by the \"Liberty\" augmented Washington's already detailed picture of events on the Golan front and of Israel's intentions there.\"\nIsraeli government investigations.\nAccording to an Israel Foreign Ministry letter to the Israeli Embassy in Washington: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the grave situation that has been created, the only way to soften the result is for us to be able to announce to the U.S. government already today that we intend to prosecute people for this disaster. We have to publicize that in Israel already tonight. ... it is crucial that our announcement about prosecuting those who are to blame be publicized before \u2013 I repeat, before \u2013 the publication of the American report here.\nTwo subsequent Israeli inquiry reports and a historical report concluded the attack was conducted because \"Liberty\" was confused with an Egyptian vessel and because of failures in communications between Israel and the U.S. The three Israeli reports were:\nIn the historical report, it was acknowledged that IDF naval headquarters knew at least three hours before the attack that the ship was \"an electromagnetic audio-surveillance ship of the U.S. Navy\" but concluded that this information had simply \"gotten lost, never passed along to the ground controllers who directed the air attack nor to the crews of the three Israeli torpedo boats\".\nThe Israeli government said that three crucial errors were made: the refreshing of the status board (removing the ship's classification as American, so that the later shift did not see it identified), the erroneous identification of the ship as an Egyptian vessel, and the lack of notification from the returning aircraft informing Israeli headquarters of markings on the front of the hull (markings that would not be found on an Egyptian ship). As a common root of these problems, Israel blamed the combination of alarm and fatigue experienced by the Israeli forces at that point of the war when pilots were severely overworked.\nAfter conducting his own fact-finding inquiry and reviewing evidence, Judge Yerushalmi's decision was: \"I have not discovered any deviation from the standard of reasonable conduct which would justify committal of anyone for trial.\" In other words, he found no negligence by any IDF member associated with the attack.\nOngoing controversy and unresolved questions.\nSome intelligence and military officials dispute Israel's explanation. In 1991, Dean Rusk, U.S. Secretary of State at the time of the incident, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was never satisfied with the Israeli explanation. Their sustained attack to disable and sink \"Liberty\" precluded an assault by accident or some trigger-happy local commander. Through diplomatic channels we refused to accept their explanations. I didn't believe them then, and I don't believe them to this day. The attack was outrageous.\nRetired naval Lieutenant Commander James Ennes, a junior officer (and off-going Officer of the Deck) on \"Liberty\"'s bridge at the time of the attack, authored a book titled \"Assault on the Liberty\" describing the incident and saying, among other things, that the attack was deliberate. Ennes and Joe Meadors, also a survivor of the attack, run a website about the incident. Meadors states that the classification of the attack as deliberate is the official policy of the USS \"Liberty\" Veterans Association, to which survivors and other former crew members belong. Other survivors run several additional websites. Citing Ennes's book, Lenczowski notes: \"Liberty\"'s personnel received firm orders not to say anything to anybody about the attack, and the naval inquiry was conducted in such a way as to earn it the name of \"coverup\".\nIn 2002, Captain Ward Boston, JAGC, U.S. Navy, senior counsel for the Court of Inquiry, said that the Court of Inquiry's findings were intended to cover up what was a deliberate attack by Israel on a ship that the Israelis knew to be American. In 2004, in response to the publication of A. Jay Cristol's book \"The Liberty Incident\", which Boston said was an \"insidious attempt to whitewash the facts\", Boston prepared and signed an affidavit in which he said that Admiral Kidd had told him that the government ordered Kidd to falsely report that the attack was a mistake, and that Boston and Kidd both believed the attack was deliberate. Cristol wrote about Boston's professional qualifications and integrity, on page 149 of his book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Boston brought two special assets in addition to his skill as a Navy lawyer. He had been a naval aviator in World War II and therefore had insight beyond that of one qualified only in the law. Also, Kidd knew him as a man of integrity. On an earlier matter Boston had been willing to bump heads with Kidd when Boston felt it was more important to do the right thing than to curry favor with the senior who would write his fitness report.\u2014\u200a\nCristol said he believes that Boston is not telling the truth about Kidd's views and any pressure from the U.S. government. Cristol, who also served as an officer of the U.S. Navy's Judge Advocate General, suggests that Boston was responsible in part for the original conclusions of the Court of Inquiry and, that by later declaring that they were false, Boston has admitted to \"lying under oath\". Cristol also notes that Boston's statements about pressure on Kidd were hearsay, and that Kidd was not alive to confirm or deny them and that Boston did not maintain, prior to his affidavit and comments related to it, that Kidd spoke of such instructions to Boston or to others. Cristol also provides a handwritten 1991 letter from Admiral Kidd that, according to Cristol, \"suggest that Ward Boston has either a faulty memory or a vivid imagination\". According to James Ennes, however, Admiral Kidd urged Ennes and his group to keep pressing for an open congressional probe.\nThe following arguments, found in official reports or other sources, were published to support the hypothesis that the attack was due to mistaken identity:\nSeveral books and the BBC documentary \"USS Liberty: Dead in the Water\" argued that \"Liberty\" was attacked in order to prevent the U.S. from knowing about the forthcoming attack in the Golan Heights, which would violate a cease-fire to which Israel's government had agreed. However, Syria did not accept the cease fire until 9 June, after the attack on \"Liberty\". Russian author Joseph Daichman, in his book \"History of the Mossad\", states Israel was justified in attacking the \"Liberty\". Israel knew that American radio signals were intercepted by the Soviet Union and that the Soviets would certainly inform Egypt of the fact that, by moving troops to the Golan Heights, Israel had left the Egyptian border undefended.\nLenczowski notes that while the Israeli decision to \"attack and destroy\" the ship \"may appear puzzling\", the explanation seems to be found in \"Liberty\"'s nature and its task to monitor communications from both sides in the war zone. He writes that timely knowledge of their decision to invade Syria and preparatory moves toward it \"might have frustrated Israeli designs for the conquest of Syria's Golan Heights\" and, in the sense of Ennes's accusations, provides \"a plausible thesis that Israel deliberately decided to incapacitate the signals-collecting American ship and leave no one alive to tell the story of the attack\".\nThe U.S. ambassador to Israel, Barbour, had reported on the day of the \"Liberty\" attack that he \"would not be surprised\" by an Israeli attack on Syria, and the IDF Intelligence chief told a White House aide then in Israel that \"there still remained the Syria problem and perhaps it would be necessary to give Syria a blow\".\nThe 1981 book \"Weapons\" by Russell Warren Howe says that \"Liberty\" was accompanied by the Polaris ballistic missile-armed \"Lafayette\"-class submarine , which filmed the entire episode through its periscope but was unable to provide assistance.\nJames Bamford, a former ABC News producer, says in his 2001 book \"Body of Secrets\", that Israel deliberately attacked \"Liberty\" to prevent the discovery of what he described as war crimes, including the killing of Egyptian prisoners of war by the IDF that he alleges was taking place around the same time in the nearby town of El-Arish. However, according to CAMERA, his claim that 400 Egyptians were executed has been cast into doubt since reporters present in the town claimed that there had been a large battle and this was the main cause of casualties. Bamford also stated that eyewitness Gabi Bron had claimed he saw 150 people executed by Israeli troops at El-Arish. However, Gabi Bron claimed to have only seen 5 people executed by Israeli troops.\nThe press release for the BBC documentary film \"Dead in the Water\" states that new recorded and other evidence suggests the attack was a \"daring ploy by Israel to fake an Egyptian attack\" to give America a reason to enter the war against Egypt. It claimed that President Lyndon B. Johnson launched allegedly nuclear-armed aircraft targeted against Cairo from a U.S. aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean. The aircraft were recalled only just in time, when it was clear the \"Liberty\" had not been sunk and that Israel had carried out the attack. An information source for the aircraft being nuclear-armed, James Ennes later stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is clear that I was mistaken about the aircraft involved, as F4s do not carry nuclear weapons. Others tell me that the aircraft that were launched carried Bullpup missiles, which might easily be mistaken for nuclear bombs. And we learned much later that the USS \"America\" was involved in a nuclear weapons loading drill at the very time the ship learned of the attack on the Liberty and that this drill is one factor that delayed \"America\"'s response to our call for help. It is also possible that those were the weapons seen by our sources.\nAlso confusing this issue is an oral history report from the American Embassy in Cairo, now in the LBJ Library, which notes that the Embassy received an urgent message from Washington warning that Cairo was about to be bombed by U.S. forces, presumably in mistaken retaliation for the USS \"Liberty\" attack. That strange message was never explained or cancelled.\nThe video also reports hearsay of a covert alliance of U.S. and Israeli intelligence agencies.\nAdmiral Thomas H. Moorer, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a critic of the official U.S. government version of events, chaired a non-governmental investigation into the attack on the \"Liberty\" in 2003. The committee, which included former U.S. ambassador to Saudi Arabia James E. Akins, found Israel to be culpable and suggested several theories for Israel's possible motives, including the desire to blame Egypt and so bring the U.S. into the Six-Day War.\nAccording to John Loftus and Mark Aarons in their book, \"The Secret War Against the Jews\", \"Liberty\" was attacked because the Israelis knew that the ship's mission was to monitor radio signals from Israeli troops and pass troop movement information to the Egyptians.\nThe USS \"Liberty\" incident is frequently referenced in antisemitic conspiracy theories, which Cristol said are spread to damage Israel\u2013United States relations. He said that conspiracy theorists \"don't care what the facts are; they just want to present the idea that Israel did a dirty deed against the US\". A Southern Poverty Law Center extremism monitor, Heidi Beirich, described the incident as a \"rallying cry\" for antisemites, and the scholar Spencer Sunshine called it a \"perennial favorite\" target of neo-Nazis. Iranian government-affiliated social media accounts have reportedly promoted \"Liberty\" conspiracy theories to incite hatred of Israel and Jews. In 2018, the celebrities Brett Favre and Andy Dick issued apologies after a neo-Nazi group, the Goyim Defense League, tricked them into recording Cameo videos containing coded antisemitic messages referencing the \"Liberty\". Representative Paul Gosar (R-AZ) referred to the incident as a false flag operation by Israel and the United States Intelligence Community in a 2024 newsletter, which drew criticism from the Anti-Defamation League.\nNSA tapes and subsequent developments.\nThe NSA reported that there had been no radio intercepts of the attack made by the \"Liberty\" herself, nor had there been any radio intercepts made by the U.S. submarine . Within an hour of learning that the \"Liberty\" had been torpedoed, the director of the NSA, LTG Marshall S. Carter, sent a message to all intercept sites requesting a search of communications that might be connected to the attack or any reaction to it. The only such communication reported was intercepted by a U.S. Navy EC-121 aircraft that flew near the attacks from 14:30 to 15:27, Sinai time (12:30 to 13:27 Z); it had collected voice conversations between two Israeli helicopter pilots and the control tower at Hatzor Airfield following the attack on the \"Liberty\".\nOn 2 July 2003, the NSA released copies of these recordings and their translations and summaries. These revelations were elicited as part of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit by Florida bankruptcy judge and retired naval aviator Jay Cristol. Two linguists who were aboard the EC-121 when the recordings were made said separately that at least two additional tapes were made that had been withheld. English language translations of the released tapes indicate that the Israelis spoke of hitting an Egyptian supply ship even after the end of attack. The rescue helicopters relayed urgent requests that the rescuers ask the first survivor pulled out of the water what his nationality is; there was discussion as to whether the survivors would speak Arabic.\nA summary of the NSA-translated tapes indicates that at 12:34Z Hatzor air control began directing two Israeli Air Force helicopters to an Egyptian warship, to rescue its crew: \"This ship has now been identified as Egyptian.\" The helicopters arrived near the ship at about 13:03Z: \"I see a big vessel, near it are three small vessels ...\" At 13:08Z, Hatzor air control indicated concern about the nationality of the ship's crew: \"The first matter to clarify is to find out what their nationality is.\" At 13:10Z, one of the helicopter pilots asked the nearby torpedo boats' Division Commander about the meaning of the ship's hull number: \"GTR5 is written on it. Does this mean something?\" The response was: \"Negative, it doesn't mean anything.\" At 13:12Z, one of the helicopter pilots was asked by air control: \"Did you clearly identify an American flag?\" No answer appears in the transcript, but the air controller then says: \"We request that you make another pass and check once more if this is really an American flag.\" Again, no response appears in the transcript. At about 13:14Z, the helicopters were directed to return home.\nOn 10 October 2003, \"The Jerusalem Post\" ran an interview with Yiftah Spector, one of the pilots who participated in the attack. Spector said the ship was assumed to be Egyptian, stating that: \"there was positively no flag\". The interview also contains the transcripts of the Israeli communications about the \"Liberty\". However, the journalist who transcribed the tapes for that article, Arieh O'Sullivan, later confirmed that \"the Israeli Air Force tapes he listened to contained blank spaces\". The \"Liberty\"'s survivors contradict Spector. According to subsequently declassified NSA documents: \"Every official interview of numerous \"Liberty\" crewmen gave consistent evidence that the \"Liberty\" was flying an American flag\u2014and, further, the weather conditions were ideal to ensure its easy observance and identification.\"\nOn 8 June 2005, the USS \"Liberty\" Veterans Association filed a \"Report of War Crimes Committed Against the U.S. Military, June 8, 1967\" with the Department of Defense (DoD). They say Department of Defense Directive 2311.01E requires the Department of Defense to conduct a thorough investigation of the allegations contained in their report. DoD has responded that a new investigation would not be conducted since a Navy Court of Inquiry had already investigated the facts and circumstances surrounding the attack.\nAs of 2006, the NSA had yet to declassify \"boxes and boxes\" of \"Liberty\" documents. Numerous requests under both declassification directives and the Freedom of Information Act are pending with various agencies including the NSA, Central Intelligence Agency, and Defense Intelligence Agency. \"On 8 June 2007, the National Security Agency released hundreds of additional declassified documents on the Israeli attack on the USS \"Liberty\", a communications interception vessel, on 8 June 1967.\"\nOn 2 October 2007, \"The Chicago Tribune\" published a special report into the attack, containing numerous previously unreported quotes from former military personnel with first-hand knowledge of the incident. Many of these quotes directly contradict the NSA's position that it never intercepted the communications of the attacking Israeli pilots, saying that not only did transcripts of those communications exist, but also that it showed the Israelis knew they were attacking an American naval vessel.\nTwo diplomatic cables written by Avraham Harman, Israel's ambassador in Washington, to Abba Eban, Israel's minister of foreign affairs, have been declassified by Israel and obtained from the Israel State Archive. The first cable, sent five days after the attack, informs Eban that a U.S. informant told Harman there was \"clear proof that from a certain stage the pilot discovered the identity of the ship and continued the attack anyway\". The second cable, sent three days later, added that the White House is \"very angry\" because \"the Americans probably have findings showing that our pilots indeed knew that the ship was American\". Documents of the Israeli General Staff meetings, declassified in October 2008, show no discussion of a planned attack on an American ship.\nOn 30 October 2014, Al Jazeera broadcast a documentary film containing recent first-hand accounts by several survivors of the incident. The documentary argues that Israel knew the ship was American, and planned to blame its sinking on Egypt in order to draw the United States into the war on the Israeli side.\nDetails in dispute.\nVarious details regarding the attack are the subject of controversy:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32073", "revid": "17531320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32073", "title": "USB", "text": "Standard for computer data connections\nUniversal Serial Bus (USB) is an industry standard, developed by USB Implementers Forum (USB-IF), for digital data transmission and power delivery between many types of electronics. It specifies the architecture, in particular the physical interfaces, and communication protocols to and from \"hosts\", such as personal computers, to and from peripheral \"devices\", e.g. displays, keyboards, and mass storage devices, and to and from intermediate \"hubs\", which multiply the number of a host's ports.\nIntroduced in 1996, USB was originally designed to standardize the connection of peripherals to computers, replacing various interfaces such as serial ports, parallel ports, game ports, and Apple Desktop Bus (ADB) ports. Early versions of USB became commonplace on a wide range of devices, such as keyboards, mice, cameras, printers, scanners, flash drives, smartphones, game consoles, and power banks. USB has since evolved into a standard to replace virtually all common ports on computers, mobile devices, peripherals, power supplies, and manifold other small electronics.\nIn the latest standard, the USB-C connector replaces many types of connectors for power (up to 240\u00a0W), displays (e.g. DisplayPort, HDMI), and many other uses, as well as all previous USB connectors.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] USB consists of four generations of specifications: USB 1.\"x\", USB 2.0, USB 3.\"x\", and USB4. The USB4 specification enhances the data transfer and power delivery functionality with \"a connection-oriented tunneling architecture designed to combine multiple protocols onto a single physical interface so that the total speed and performance of the USB4 Fabric can be dynamically shared.\" In particular, USB4 supports the tunneling of the Thunderbolt 3 protocols, namely PCI Express (PCIe, load/store interface) and DisplayPort (display interface). USB4 also adds host-to-host interfaces.\nEach specification sub-version supports different signaling rates from 1.5 and 12\u00a0Mbit/s half-duplex in USB\u00a01.0/1.1 to 80\u00a0Gbit/s full-duplex in USB4\u00a02.0. USB also provides power to peripheral devices; the latest versions of the standard extend the power delivery limits for battery charging and devices requiring up to 240 watts as defined in USB Power Delivery (USB-PD) Rev. V3.1. Over the years, USB(-PD) has been adopted as the standard power supply and charging format for many mobile devices, such as mobile phones, reducing the need for proprietary chargers.\nOverview.\nUSB was designed to standardize the connection of peripherals to personal computers, both to exchange data and to supply electric power. It has largely replaced interfaces such as serial ports and parallel ports and has become commonplace on various devices. Peripherals connected via USB include computer keyboards and mice, video cameras, printers, portable media players, mobile (portable) digital telephones, disk drives, and network adapters.\nUSB connectors have been increasingly replacing other types of charging cables for portable devices.\nUSB connector interfaces are classified into three types: the many various \"legacy\" Type-A (upstream) and Type-B (downstream) connectors found on \"hosts\", \"hubs\", and \"peripheral devices\", and the modern Type-C (USB-C) connector, which replaces the many legacy connectors as the only applicable connector for USB4.\nThe Type-A and Type-B connectors came in Standard, Mini, and Micro sizes. The standard format was the largest and was mainly used for desktop and larger peripheral equipment. The Mini-USB connectors (Mini-A, Mini-B, Mini-AB) were introduced for mobile devices. Still, they were quickly replaced by the thinner Micro-USB connectors (Micro-A, Micro-B, Micro-AB). The Type-C connector, also known as USB-C, is not exclusive to USB, is the only current standard for USB, is required for USB4, and is required by other standards, including modern DisplayPort and Thunderbolt. It is reversible and can support various functionalities and protocols, including USB; some are mandatory, and many are optional, depending on the type of hardware: host, peripheral device, or hub.\nUSB specifications provide backward compatibility, usually resulting in decreased signaling rates, maximal power offered, and other capabilities. The USB 1.1 specification replaces USB 1.0. The USB 2.0 specification is backward-compatible with USB 1.0/1.1. The USB 3.2 specification replaces USB 3.1 (and USB 3.0) while including the USB 2.0 specification. USB4 \"functionally replaces\" USB 3.2 while retaining the USB 2.0 bus operating in parallel.\nThe USB\u00a03.0 specification defined a new architecture and protocol named \"SuperSpeed\" (aka \"SuperSpeed USB\", marketed as \"SS\"), which included a new lane for a new signal coding scheme (8b/10b symbols, 5\u00a0Gbit/s; later also known as \"Gen 1\") providing full-duplex data transfers that physically required five additional wires and pins, while preserving the USB\u00a02.0 architecture and protocols and therefore keeping the original four pins/wires for the USB\u00a02.0 backward-compatibility resulting in 9 wires (with 9 or 10 pins at connector interfaces; ID-pin is not wired) in total.\nThe USB\u00a03.1 specification introduced an \"Enhanced SuperSpeed System\" \u2013 while preserving the \"SuperSpeed\" architecture and protocol (\"SuperSpeed USB\") \u2013 with an additional \"SuperSpeedPlus\" architecture and protocol (aka \"SuperSpeedPlus USB\") adding a new coding schema (128b/132b symbols, 10\u00a0Gbit/s; also known as \"Gen 2\"); for some time marketed as \"SuperSpeed+\" (\"SS+\").\nThe USB\u00a03.2 specification added a second lane to the \"Enhanced SuperSpeed System\" besides other enhancements so that the \"SuperSpeedPlus USB\" system part implements the \"Gen 1\u00d72\", \"Gen 2\u00d71,\" and \"Gen 2\u00d72\" operation modes. However, the \"SuperSpeed USB\" part of the system still implements the one-lane \"Gen 1\u00d71\" operation mode. Therefore, two-lane operations, namely \"USB\u00a03.2 Gen\u00a01\u00d72 \"(10\u00a0Gbit/s) and \"Gen\u00a02\u00d72 \"(20\u00a0Gbit/s), are only possible with Full-Featured USB-C. As of 2023, they are somewhat rarely implemented; Intel, however, started to include them in its 11th-generation SoC processor models, but Apple never provided them. On the other hand, \"USB\u00a03.2 Gen\u00a01(\u00d71)\" (5\u00a0Gbit/s) and \"Gen\u00a02(\u00d71)\" (10\u00a0Gbit/s) have been quite common for some years.\nConnector type quick reference.\nEach USB connection is made using two connectors: a \"receptacle\" and a \"plug\". Pictures show only receptacles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nObjectives.\nThe Universal Serial Bus was developed to simplify and improve the interface between personal computers and peripheral devices, such as cell phones, computer accessories, and monitors, when compared with previously existing standard or \"ad hoc\" proprietary interfaces.\nFrom the computer user's perspective, the USB interface improves ease of use in several ways:\nThe USB standard also provides multiple benefits for hardware manufacturers and software developers, specifically in the relative ease of implementation:\nLimitations.\nAs with all standards, USB possesses multiple limitations to its design:\nFor a product developer, using USB requires the implementation of a complex protocol and implies an \"intelligent\" controller in the peripheral device. Developers of USB devices intended for public sale generally must obtain a USB ID, which requires that they pay a fee to the USB Implementers Forum (USB-IF). Developers of products that use the USB specification must sign an agreement with the USB-IF. Use of the USB logos on the product requires annual fees and membership in the organization.\nHistory.\nA group of seven companies began the development of USB in 1995: Compaq, DEC, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, NEC, and Nortel. The goal was to make it fundamentally easier to connect external devices to PCs by replacing the multitude of connectors at the back of PCs, addressing the usability issues of existing interfaces, and simplifying software configuration of all devices connected to USB, as well as permitting greater data transfer rates for external devices and plug and play features. Concepts of the 1979 Atari SIO serial bus, of the 8-bit Atari computers, and the 1980 IEEE-488 derived Commodore bus, and Hewlett Packard's HP-IL bus pioneered this approach. A consortium led by Apple, and containing Sony, Panasonic (Matsushita), LG, Toshiba, Hitachi, Cannon, Philips Electronics, Compaq, Thomson and Texas Instruments, would develop the concept further, from 1986, as the IEEE 1394 firewire standard and patent pool. Joseph C. Decuir, originally of Atari, then Commodore, and a designer of the Atari SIO common bus, would work on the USB project, for Microsoft, obtaining one of the related US patents. Ajay Bhatt and his team worked on the standard at Intel; the first integrated circuits supporting USB were produced by Intel in 1995.\nUSB 1.\"x\".\nReleased in January 1996, USB\u00a01.0 specified signaling rates of 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s (\"Low Bandwidth\" or \"Low Speed\") and 12\u00a0Mbit/s (\"Full Speed\"). It did not allow for extension cables, due to timing and power limitations. Few USB devices made it to the market until USB\u00a01.1 was released in August 1998. USB\u00a01.1 was the earliest revision that was widely adopted and led to what Microsoft designated the \"Legacy-free PC\".\nNeither USB 1.0 nor 1.1 specified a design for any connector smaller than the standard type A or type B. Though many designs for a miniaturized type B connector appeared on many peripherals, conformity to the USB\u00a01.\"x\" standard was hampered by treating peripherals that had miniature connectors as though they had a tethered connection (that is: no plug or receptacle at the peripheral end). There was no known miniature type A connector until USB\u00a02.0 (revision 1.01) introduced one.\nUSB 2.0.\nUSB\u00a02.0 was released in April 2000, adding a higher maximum signaling rate of 480\u00a0Mbit/s (maximum theoretical data throughput 53\u00a0MByte/s) named \"High Speed\" or \"High Bandwidth\", in addition to the USB\u00a01.\"x\" \"Full Speed\" signaling rate of 12\u00a0Mbit/s (maximum theoretical data throughput 1.2\u00a0MByte/s).\nModifications to the USB specification have been made via engineering change notices (ECNs). The most important of these ECNs are included into the USB\u00a02.0 specification package available from USB.org:\nUSB 3.\"x\".\nThe USB\u00a03.0 specification was released on 12 November 2008, with its management transferring from USB\u00a03.0 Promoter Group to the USB Implementers Forum (USB-IF) and announced on 17 November 2008 at the SuperSpeed USB Developers Conference.\nUSB\u00a03.0 adds a new architecture and protocol named \"SuperSpeed\", with associated backward-compatible plugs, receptacles, and cables. SuperSpeed plugs and receptacles are identified with a distinct logo and blue inserts in standard format receptacles.\nThe SuperSpeed architecture provides for an operation mode at a rate of 5.0\u00a0Gbit/s, in addition to the three existing operation modes. Its efficiency is dependent on a number of factors including physical symbol encoding and link-level overhead. At a 5\u00a0Gbit/s signaling rate with 8b/10b encoding, each byte needs 10 bits to transmit, so the raw throughput is 500\u00a0MB/s. When flow control, packet framing and protocol overhead are considered, it is realistic for about two-thirds of the raw throughput, or 330\u00a0MB/s to transmit to an application.4\u201319 SuperSpeed's architecture is full-duplex; all earlier implementations, USB 1.0-2.0, are half-duplex, arbitrated by the host.\nLow-power and high-power devices remain operational with this standard, but devices implementing SuperSpeed can provide an increased current of between 150\u00a0mA and 900\u00a0mA, by discrete steps of 150\u00a0mA.9\u20139\nUSB 3.0 also introduced the USB Attached SCSI Protocol (UASP), which provides generally faster transfer speeds than the BOT (Bulk-Only-Transfer) protocol.\nUSB\u00a03.1, released in July 2013. Firstly, it preserves USB\u00a03.0's \"SuperSpeed\" architecture and protocol and its operation mode is newly named \"USB\u00a03.1 Gen 1\" (the previously called \"USB 3.0\")\n Secondly, it introduces a distinctively new \"SuperSpeedPlus\" architecture and protocol with a second operation mode named as \"USB\u00a03.1 Gen 2\" (sometimes marketed as \"SuperSpeed+ USB\", contrary to USB-IF recommendation). This doubles the maximum signaling rate to 10\u00a0Gbit/s (later marketed as \"SuperSpeed USB 10Gbps\", then simply \"USB\u00a010Gbps\"), while reducing line encoding overhead to just 3% by changing the encoding scheme to 128b/132b.\nUSB\u00a03.2, released in September 2017, preserves existing USB\u00a03.1 \"SuperSpeed\" and \"SuperSpeedPlus\" architectures and protocols and their respective operation modes, but introduces two additional \"SuperSpeedPlus\" operation modes (\"USB\u00a03.2 Gen\u00a01\u00d72\" and \"USB\u00a03.2 Gen\u00a02\u00d72\") with signaling rates of 10 and 20\u00a0Gbit/s (raw data rates of 1212 and 2424\u00a0MB/s), respectively. The increased bandwidth is a result of two-lane operation over the additional wires included in all Full-Featured USB\u2011C Fabrics (all involved devices, hubs, cables and host).\nNaming scheme.\nStarting with the USB 3.2 specification, USB-IF introduced a new naming scheme. To help companies with the branding of the different operation modes, USB-IF recommended branding the 5, 10, and 20\u00a0Gbit/s capabilities as \"SuperSpeed USB 5Gbps\", \"SuperSpeed USB 10Gbps\", and \"SuperSpeed USB 20Gbps\", respectively.\nIn 2023, they were replaced again, removing \"SuperSpeed\", with \"USB 5Gbps\", \"USB 10Gbps\", and \"USB 20Gbps\". With new \"Packaging\" and \"Port\" logos.\nUSB4.\nThe USB4 specification (Version 1.0) was released on 29 August 2019. It is based on the Thunderbolt 3 protocol, defines 20 and 40 Gbit/s modes over USB-C, and allows tunneling of USB 3.2, USB 2.0, PCIe and DisplayPort protocols; Thunderbolt 3 compatibility is optional for USB4 hosts/devices.USB4 Version 2.0 (announced 1 September 2022) adds a new physical layer and higher data rates: up to 80 Gbit/s bidirectional, and an asymmetric mode supporting 120/40 Gbit/s (host\u2192device / device\u2192host) for video-heavy use cases. It achieves this using PAM3 signaling and, in many cases, existing passive \u201c40 Gbit/s\u201d USB-C cables; a new 80 Gbit/s active cable category is also defined. Version 2.0 updates tunneling to align with DisplayPort 2.1 and PCIe 4.0, and maintains backward compatibility with USB4 1.0, USB 3.2/2.0, and Thunderbolt 3.\nSince 2023, the USB-IF recommends consumer-facing product names that reflect link speed (e.g., USB 40Gbps, USB 80Gbps), replacing \u201cUSB4 v1/v2\u201d in marketing and certification listings.\nSeptember 2022 naming scheme.\nBecause of the previous confusing naming schemes, USB-IF decided to change it once again. As of 2 September 2022, marketing names follow the syntax \"USB\u00a0\"x\"Gbps\", where \"x\" is the speed of transfer in Gbit/s. Overview of the updated names and logos can be seen in the adjacent table.\nThe operation modes USB\u00a03.2\u00a0Gen\u00a02\u00d72 and USB4\u00a0Gen\u00a02\u00d72 \u2013 or: USB\u00a03.2\u00a0Gen\u00a02\u00d71 and USB4\u00a0Gen\u00a02\u00d71 \u2013 are not interchangeable or compatible; all participating controllers must operate with the same mode.\nSystem design.\nA USB system consists of a host with one or more downstream facing ports (DFP), and multiple peripherals, forming a tiered-star topology. Additional USB hubs may be included, allowing up to five tiers. A USB host may have multiple controllers, each with one or more ports. Up to 127 devices may be connected to a single host controller.8\u201329 USB devices are linked in series through hubs. The hub built into the host controller is called the \"root hub\".\nA USB device may consist of several logical sub-devices that are referred to as \"device functions\". A \"composite device\" may provide several functions, for example, a webcam (video device function) with a built-in microphone (audio device function). An alternative to this is a \"compound device,\" in which the host assigns each logical device a distinct address and all logical devices connect to a built-in hub that connects to the physical USB cable.\nUSB device communication is based on \"pipes\" (logical channels). A pipe connects the host controller to a logical entity within a device, called an \"endpoint\". Because pipes correspond to endpoints, the terms are sometimes used interchangeably. Each USB device can have up to 32 endpoints (16 \"in\" and 16 \"out\"), though it is rare to have so many. Endpoints are defined and numbered by the device during initialization (the period after physical connection called \"enumeration\") and so are relatively permanent, whereas pipes may be opened and closed.\nThere are two types of pipe: stream and message.\nWhen a host starts a data transfer, it sends a TOKEN packet containing an endpoint specified with a tuple of \"(device_address, endpoint_number)\". If the transfer is from the host to the endpoint, the host sends an OUT packet (a specialization of a TOKEN packet) with the desired device address and endpoint number. If the data transfer is from the device to the host, the host sends an IN packet instead. If the destination endpoint is a uni-directional endpoint whose manufacturer's designated direction does not match the TOKEN packet (e.g. the manufacturer's designated direction is IN while the TOKEN packet is an OUT packet), the TOKEN packet is ignored. Otherwise, it is accepted and the data transaction can start. A bi-directional endpoint, on the other hand, accepts both IN and OUT packets.\nEndpoints are grouped into \"interfaces\" and each interface is associated with a single device function. An exception to this is endpoint zero, which is used for device configuration and is not associated with any interface. A single device function composed of independently controlled interfaces is called a \"composite device\". A composite device only has a single device address because the host only assigns a device address to a function.\nWhen a USB device is first connected to a USB host, the USB device enumeration process is started. The enumeration starts by sending a reset signal to the USB device. The signaling rate of the USB device is determined during the reset signaling. After reset, the USB device's information is read by the host and the device is assigned a unique 7-bit address. If the device is supported by the host, the device drivers needed for communicating with the device are loaded and the device is set to a configured state. If the USB host is restarted, the enumeration process is repeated for all connected devices.\nThe host controller directs traffic flow to devices, so no USB device can transfer any data on the bus without an explicit request from the host controller. In USB\u00a02.0, the host controller polls the bus for traffic, usually in a round-robin fashion. The throughput of each USB port is determined by the slower speed of either the USB port or the USB device connected to the port.\nHigh-speed USB\u00a02.0 hubs contain devices called transaction translators that convert between high-speed USB\u00a02.0 buses and full and low speed buses. There may be one translator per hub or per port.\nBecause there are two separate controllers in each USB\u00a03.0 host, USB\u00a03.0 devices transmit and receive at USB\u00a03.0 signaling rates regardless of USB\u00a02.0 or earlier devices connected to that host. Operating signaling rates for earlier devices are set in the legacy manner.\nDevice classes.\nThe functionality of a USB device is defined by a class code sent to a USB host. This allows the host to load software modules for the device and to support new devices from different manufacturers.\nDevice classes include:\nUSB mass storage / USB drive.\nThe USB mass storage device class (MSC or UMS) standardizes connections to storage devices. At first intended for magnetic and optical drives, it has been extended to support flash drives and SD card readers. The ability to boot a write-locked SD card with a USB adapter is particularly advantageous for maintaining the integrity and non-corruptible, pristine state of the booting medium.\nThough most personal computers since early 2005 can boot from USB mass storage devices, USB is not intended as a primary bus for a computer's internal storage. However, USB has the advantage of allowing hot-swapping, making it useful for mobile peripherals, including drives of various kinds.\nSeveral manufacturers offer external portable USB hard disk drives, or empty enclosures for disk drives. These offer performance comparable to internal drives, limited by the number and types of attached USB devices, and by the upper limit of the USB interface. Other competing standards for external drive connectivity include eSATA, ExpressCard, FireWire (IEEE 1394), and most recently Thunderbolt.\nAnother use for USB mass storage devices is the portable execution of software applications (such as web browsers and VoIP clients) with no need to install them on the host computer.\nMedia Transfer Protocol.\nMedia Transfer Protocol (MTP) was designed by Microsoft to give higher-level access to a device's filesystem than USB mass storage, at the level of files rather than disk blocks. It also has optional DRM features. MTP was designed for use with portable media players, but it has since been adopted as the primary storage access protocol of the Android operating system from the version 4.1 Jelly Bean as well as Windows Phone 8 (Windows Phone 7 devices had used the Zune protocol\u2014an evolution of MTP). The primary reason for this is that MTP does not require exclusive access to the storage device the way UMS does, alleviating potential problems should an Android program request the storage while it is attached to a computer. The main drawback is that MTP is not as well supported outside of Windows operating systems.\nHuman interface devices.\nA USB mouse or keyboard can usually be used with older computers that have PS/2 ports with the aid of a small USB-to-PS/2 adapter. For mice and keyboards with dual-protocol support, a passive adapter that contains no logic circuitry may be used: the USB hardware in the keyboard or mouse is designed to detect whether it is connected to a USB or PS/2 port, and communicate using the appropriate protocol. Active converters that connect USB keyboards and mice (usually one of each) to PS/2 ports also exist.\nDevice Firmware Upgrade mechanism.\n\"Device Firmware Upgrade\" (DFU) is a generic mechanism for upgrading the firmware of USB devices with improved versions provided by their manufacturers, offering (for example) a way to deploy firmware bug fixes. During the firmware upgrade operation, USB devices change their operating mode effectively becoming a PROM programmer. Any class of USB device can implement this capability by following the official DFU specifications. Doing so allows use of DFU-compatible host tools to update the device.\nDFU is sometimes used as a flash memory programming protocol in microcontrollers with built-in USB bootloader functionality.\nAudio streaming.\nThe USB Device Working Group has laid out specifications for audio streaming, and specific standards have been developed and implemented for audio class uses, such as microphones, speakers, headsets, telephones, musical instruments, etc. The working group has published four versions of audio device specifications: USB Audio\u00a01.0, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0, referred to as \"UAC\" or \"ADC\".\nUAC 3.0 primarily introduces improvements for portable devices, such as reduced power usage by bursting the data and staying in low power mode more often, and power domains for different components of the device, allowing them to be shut down when not in use.\nUAC 2.0 introduced support for High Speed USB (in addition to Full Speed), allowing greater bandwidth for multi-channel interfaces, higher sample rates, lower inherent latency, and 8\u00d7 improvement in timing resolution in synchronous and adaptive modes. UAC2 also introduced the concept of clock domains, which provides information to the host about which input and output terminals derive their clocks from the same source, as well as improved support for audio encodings like DSD, audio effects, channel clustering, user controls, and device descriptions.\nUAC 1.0 devices are still common, however, due to their cross-platform driverless compatibility, and also partly due to Microsoft's failure to implement UAC 2.0 for over a decade after its publication, having finally added support to Windows 10 through the Creators Update on 20 March 2017. UAC 2.0 is also supported by macOS, iOS, and Linux, however Android only implements a subset of the UAC 1.0 specification.\nUSB provides three isochronous (fixed-bandwidth) synchronization types, all of which are used by audio devices:\nWhile the USB spec originally described asynchronous mode being used in \"low cost speakers\" and adaptive mode in \"high-end digital speakers\", the opposite perception exists in the hi-fi world, where asynchronous mode is advertised as a feature, and adaptive/synchronous modes have a bad reputation. In reality, all types can be high-quality or low-quality, depending on the quality of their engineering and the application. Asynchronous has the benefit of being untied from the computer's clock, but the disadvantage of requiring sample rate conversion when combining multiple sources.\nConnectors.\nThe connectors the USB committee specifies support a number of USB's underlying goals, and reflect lessons learned from the many connectors the computer industry has used. The female connector mounted on the host or device is called the \"receptacle\", and the male connector attached to the cable is called the \"plug\". The official USB specification documents also periodically define the term \"male\" to represent the plug, and \"female\" to represent the receptacle.\nThe design is intended to make it difficult to insert a USB plug into its receptacle incorrectly. The USB specification requires that the cable plug and receptacle be marked so the user can recognize the proper orientation. The USB-C plug however is reversible. USB cables and small USB devices are held in place by the gripping force from the receptacle, with no screws, clips, or thumb-turns as some connectors use.\nThe distinction of \"A\" and \"B\" connectors was to enforce the directionality inherent in USB: The single \"host\" has Type\u2011A receptacles and each \"peripheral device\" has a single Type\u2011B receptacle. A \"hub\" provides multiple \"downstream\"-facing Type\u2011A receptacles and connects to the host through its single Type\u2011B receptacle (or a captive cable with a Type\u2011A plug). A hub may connect to the host either directly or through one or more additional hubs. Prior to Type\u2011C, USB On-The-Go allowed a device such as a smartphone to take either the \"host\" or the \"peripheral device\" role, with a single Type\u2011AB receptacle (Micro\u2011AB, superseded in 2014, or Mini-AB, deprecated 2007) that accepted both Type\u2011A and Type\u2011B plugs.\nUSB connector types multiplied as the specification progressed. The original USB specification detailed Standard\u2011A and Standard\u2011B plugs and receptacles. These were originally referred to as simply \"Type\u2011A\" and \"Type\u2011B\"; they were renamed \"Standard\" out of necessity to distinguish from Mini and later Micro connectors. The data contacts in the Standard plugs are recessed compared to the power and ground contacts so that devices are safely electrically connected before the more delicate data communications circuitry is connected, preventing damage. Some devices operate in different modes depending on whether the data connection is made. Simple power sources do not include data connections, instead shorting the data contacts together, but allow any capable USB device to charge or operate through a standard USB cable. Charging cables provide power connections but not data, though the standard requires at least a USB 2.0 data connection capability. In a non-standard charge-only cable, the data wires are shorted at the device end; otherwise, the device may reject the charger as unsuitable.\nCabling.\nThe USB\u00a01.1 standard specifies that a standard cable can have a maximum length of with devices operating at full speed (12\u00a0Mbit/s), and a maximum length of with devices operating at low speed (1.5\u00a0Mbit/s).\nUSB\u00a02.0 provides for a maximum cable length of for devices running at high speed (480\u00a0Mbit/s).\nThe USB\u00a03.0 standard does not directly specify a maximum cable length, requiring only that all cables meet an electrical specification: for copper cabling with AWG\u00a026 wires the maximum practical length is .\nUSB bridge \"cables\".\nTwo computers (\"hosts\") can easily be connected through a USB\u2011C cable, but before Type\u2011C hosts could not be connected to each other with common USB cables. USB bridge \"cables\", or data transfer cables, can be found within the market, offering direct PC to PC connections. A bridge \"cable\" is actually an electronic device that appears as a USB \"peripheral device\" to each of the connected \"hosts\", allowing peer-to-peer communication between the computers. Such USB bridge cables are used to transfer files between two computers via their USB ports.\nPopularized by Microsoft as Windows Easy Transfer, the Microsoft utility used a special USB bridge cable to transfer personal files and settings from a computer running an earlier version of Windows to a computer running a newer version. In the context of the use of \"Windows Easy Transfer\" software, the bridge cable can sometimes be referenced as \"Easy Transfer cable\".\nMany USB bridge / data transfer cables are still USB 2.0, but there are also a number of USB 3.0 transfer cables. Despite USB 3.0 being ten times as fast as USB 2.0, USB 3.0 transfer cables are only two to three times as fast given their design.\nThe USB 3.0 specification introduced an A-to-A cross-over cable without power for connecting two PCs. These are not meant for data transfer but are aimed at diagnostic uses.\nDual-role USB connections.\nUSB bridge cables have become less important with USB dual-role-device capabilities introduced with the USB 3.1 specification. Under the most recent specifications, USB supports most scenarios connecting systems directly with a Type-C cable. For the capability to work, however, connected systems must support role-switching. Dual-role capability requires there be \"two\" controllers within the system, as well as a \"role controller\". While this can be expected in a mobile platform such as a tablet or a phone, desktop PCs and laptops often do not support dual roles.\nPower.\nUpstream USB connectors supply power at a nominal 5\u00a0V DC via the V_BUS pin to downstream USB devices.\nLow-power and high-power devices.\nThis section describes the power distribution model of USB that existed before Power-Delivery (USB-PD). On devices that do not use PD, USB provides up to 4.5\u00a0W through Type-A and Type-B connectors, and up to 15\u00a0W through USB-C. All pre-PD USB power is provided at 5\u00a0V.\nFor a host providing power to devices, USB has a concept of the \"unit load\". Any device may draw power of one unit, and devices may request more power in these discrete steps. It is not required that the host provide requested power, and a device may not draw more power than negotiated.\n\"Low-power\" devices can draw no more than one unit. All devices must act as low-power devices when starting out as unconfigured. For USB devices up to USB\u00a02.0 a unit load is 100\u00a0mA (or 500\u00a0mW), while USB\u00a03.0 defines a unit load as 150\u00a0mA (750\u00a0mW). Full-featured USB-C can support low-power devices with a unit load of 250\u00a0mA (or 1250\u00a0mW).\n\"High-power\" devices, e.g. typical 2.5-inch hard disk drives, can draw more than one unit. USB up to 2.0 allows a host or hub to provide up to 2.5\u00a0W to each device, in five discrete steps of 100\u00a0mA, and SuperSpeed devices (USB 3.x) allows a host or a hub to provide up to 4.5\u00a0W in six steps of 150\u00a0mA.\nUSB-C allows for dual-lane operation of USB 3.x with larger unit load (250\u00a0mA; up to 7.5\u00a0W). USB-C also allows for Type-C Current as a replacement for USB BC, signaling power availability in a simple way, without needing any data connection.\nTo recognize Battery Charging mode, a dedicated charging port places a resistance not exceeding 200\u00a0\u03a9 across the D+ and D\u2212 terminals. Shorted or near-shorted data lanes with less than 200\u00a0\u03a9 of resistance across the D+ and D\u2212 terminals signify a dedicated charging port (DCP) with indefinite charging rates.\nIn addition to standard USB, there is a proprietary high-powered system known as PoweredUSB, developed in the 1990s, and mainly used in point-of-sale terminals such as cash registers.\nSignaling.\nUSB signals are transmitted using differential signaling on twisted-pair data wires with 90 \u03a9 \u00b1 15% characteristic impedance. USB 2.0 and earlier specifications define a single pair in half-duplex (HDx). USB 3.0 and later specifications define one dedicated pair for USB 2.0 compatibility and two or four pairs for data transfer: two data wire pairs realising full-duplex (FDx) for single lane (\"\u00d71\") variants require at least SuperSpeed (SS) connectors; four pairs realising full-duplex for two lane (\"\u00d72\") variants require USB-C connectors.\nUSB4 Gen 4 requires the use of all four pairs but allow for asymmetrical pairs configuration. In this case one data wire pair is used for the upstream data and the other three for the downstream data or vice-versa. USB4 Gen 4 use pulse amplitude modulation on 3 levels, providing a trit of information every baud transmitted, the transmission frequency of 12.8\u00a0GHz translate to a transmission rate of 25.6\u00a0GBd and the 11-bit\u2013to\u20137-trit translation provides a theoretical maximum transmission speed just over 40.2\u00a0Gbit/s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA USB connection is always between an \"A\" end, a downstream-facing port (DFP) of either a \"host\" or a \"hub\", and a \"B\" end, the upstream-facing port (UFP) of either a \"peripheral device\" or a \"hub\". Historically, this was made clear by the fact that hosts had only Type-A and peripheral devices had only Type-B ports, and every compatible cable had one Type-A plug and one Type-B plug. \nUSB-C (Type-C) is a single connector that replaces all legacy Type-A and Type-B connectors, so when both sides are equipment with USB Type-C ports, normally the device's type defines which is the DFP and which is the UFP. Some devices, e.g. modern smart phones, can act as both. Consequently, the connected devices negotiate which is the \"host\" and which is the \"peripheral device\".\nProtocol layer.\nDuring USB communication, data is transmitted as packets. Initially, all packets are sent from the host via the root hub, and possibly more hubs, to devices. Some of those packets direct a device to send some packets in reply.\nTransactions.\nThe basic transactions of USB are:\nRelated standards.\nMedia Agnostic USB.\nThe USB Implementers Forum introduced the Media Agnostic USB (MA-USB) v.1.0 wireless communication standard based on the USB protocol on 29 July 2015. Wireless USB is a cable-replacement technology, and uses ultra-wideband wireless technology for data rates of up to 480\u00a0Mbit/s.\nThe USB-IF used WiGig Serial Extension v1.2 specification as its initial foundation for the MA-USB specification and is compliant with SuperSpeed USB (3.0 and 3.1) and Hi-Speed USB (USB 2.0). Devices that use MA-USB will be branded as \"Powered by MA-USB\", provided the product qualifies its certification program.\nInterChip USB.\nInterChip USB is a chip-to-chip variant that eliminates the conventional transceivers found in normal USB. The HSIC physical layer uses about 50% less power and 75% less board area compared to USB\u00a02.0. It is an alternative standard to SPI and I2C.\nUSB-C.\nUSB-C (officially \"USB Type-C\") is a standard that defines a new connector, and several new connection features. Among them it supports \"Alternate Mode\", which allows transporting other protocols via the USB-C connector and cable. This is commonly used to support the DisplayPort or HDMI protocols, which allows connecting a display, such as a computer monitor or television set, via USB-C.\nAll other connectors are not capable of two-lane operations (Gen 1\u00d72 and Gen 2\u00d72) in USB 3.2, but can be used for one-lane operations (Gen\u00a01\u00d71 and Gen\u00a02\u00d71).\nDisplayLink.\nDisplayLink is a technology which allows multiple displays to be connected to a computer via USB. It was introduced around 2006, and before the advent of Alternate Mode over USB-C it was the only way to connect displays via USB. It is a proprietary technology, not standardized by the USB Implementers Forum and typically requires a separate device driver on the computer.\nComparisons with other connection methods.\nFireWire (IEEE 1394).\nAt first, USB was considered a complement to FireWire (IEEE 1394) technology, which was designed as a high-bandwidth serial bus that efficiently interconnects peripherals such as disk drives, audio interfaces, and video equipment. In the initial design, USB operated at a far lower data rate and used less sophisticated hardware. It was suitable for small peripherals such as keyboards and pointing devices.\nThe most significant technical differences between FireWire and USB include:\nThese and other differences reflect the differing design goals of the two buses: USB was designed for simplicity and low cost, while FireWire was designed for high performance, particularly in time-sensitive applications such as audio and video. Although similar in theoretical maximum signaling rate, FireWire\u00a0400 is faster than USB\u00a02.0 high-bandwidth in real-use, especially in high-bandwidth use such as external hard drives. The newer FireWire\u00a0800 standard is twice as fast as FireWire\u00a0400 and faster than USB\u00a02.0 high-bandwidth both theoretically and practically. However, FireWire's speed advantages rely on low-level techniques such as direct memory access (DMA), which in turn have created opportunities for security exploits such as the DMA attack.\nThe chipset and drivers used to implement USB and FireWire have a crucial impact on how much of the bandwidth prescribed by the specification is achieved in the real world, along with compatibility with peripherals.\nEthernet.\nThe \"IEEE 802.3af\", \"802.3at\", and \"802.3bt\" Power over Ethernet (PoE) standards specify more elaborate power negotiation schemes than powered USB. They operate at 48\u00a0V\u00a0DC and can supply more power (up to 12.95\u00a0W for \"802.3af\", 25.5\u00a0W for \"802.3at\", a.k.a. \"PoE+\", 71\u00a0W for \"802.3bt\", a.k.a. \"4PPoE\") over a cable up to 100\u00a0meters compared to USB\u00a02.0, which provides 2.5\u00a0W with a maximum cable length of 5\u00a0meters. This has made PoE popular for Voice over IP telephones, security cameras, wireless access points, and other networked devices within buildings. However, USB is cheaper than PoE provided that the distance is short and power demand is low.\nEthernet standards require electrical isolation between the networked device (computer, phone, etc.) and the network cable up to 1500\u00a0V\u00a0AC or 2250\u00a0V\u00a0DC for 60\u00a0seconds. USB has no such requirement as it was designed for peripherals closely associated with a host computer, and in fact it connects the peripheral and host grounds. This gives Ethernet a significant safety advantage over USB with peripherals such as cable and DSL modems connected to external wiring that can assume hazardous voltages under certain fault conditions.\nMIDI.\nThe \"USB Device Class Definition for MIDI Devices\" transmits Music Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) music data over USB. The MIDI capability is extended to allow up to sixteen simultaneous \"virtual MIDI cables\", each of which can carry the usual MIDI sixteen channels and clocks.\nUSB is competitive for low-cost and physically adjacent devices. However, Power over Ethernet and the MIDI plug standard have an advantage in high-end devices that may have long cables. USB can cause ground loop problems between equipment, because it connects ground references on both transceivers. By contrast, the MIDI plug standard and Ethernet have built-in isolation to or more.\neSATA/eSATAp.\nThe eSATA connector is a more robust SATA connector, intended for connection to external hard drives and SSDs. eSATA's transfer rate (up to 6\u00a0Gbit/s) is similar to that of USB\u00a03.0 (up to 5\u00a0Gbit/s) and USB\u00a03.1 (up to 10\u00a0Gbit/s). A device connected by eSATA appears as an ordinary SATA device, giving both full performance and full compatibility associated with internal drives.\neSATA does not supply power to external devices. This is an increasing disadvantage compared to USB. Even though USB\u00a03.0's 4.5\u00a0W is sometimes insufficient to power external hard drives, technology is advancing, and external drives gradually need less power, diminishing the eSATA advantage. eSATAp (power over eSATA, a.k.a. ESATA/USB) is a connector introduced in 2009 that supplies power to attached devices using a new, backward compatible, connector. On a notebook eSATAp usually supplies only 5\u00a0V to power a 2.5-inch HDD/SSD; on a desktop workstation it can additionally supply 12\u00a0V to power larger devices including 3.5-inch HDD/SSD and 5.25-inch optical drives.\neSATAp support can be added to a desktop machine in the form of a bracket connecting the motherboard SATA, power, and USB resources.\neSATA, like USB, supports hot plugging, although this might be limited by OS drivers and device firmware.\nThunderbolt.\nThunderbolt combines PCI Express and DisplayPort into a new serial data interface. Original Thunderbolt implementations have two channels, each with a transfer speed of 10\u00a0Gbit/s, resulting in an aggregate unidirectional bandwidth of 20\u00a0Gbit/s.\nThunderbolt 2 uses link aggregation to combine the two 10\u00a0Gbit/s channels into one bidirectional 20\u00a0Gbit/s channel.\nThunderbolt 3 and Thunderbolt 4 use USB-C. Thunderbolt\u00a03 has two physical 20\u00a0Gbit/s bi-directional channels, aggregated to appear as a single logical 40\u00a0Gbit/s bi-directional channel. Thunderbolt 3 controllers can incorporate a USB\u00a03.1 Gen\u00a02 controller to provide compatibility with USB devices. They are also capable of providing DisplayPort Alternate Mode as well as DisplayPort over USB4 Fabric, making the function of a Thunderbolt\u00a03 port a superset of that of a USB\u00a03.1 Gen\u00a02 port.\nDisplayPort Alternate Mode 2.0: USB4 (requiring USB-C) requires that hubs support DisplayPort 2.0 over a USB-C Alternate Mode. DisplayPort 2.0 can support 8K resolution at 60\u00a0Hz with HDR10 color. DisplayPort 2.0 can use up to 80\u00a0Gbit/s, which is double the amount available to USB data, because it sends all the data in one direction (to the monitor) and can thus use all eight data wires at once.\nAfter the specification was made royalty-free and custodianship of the Thunderbolt protocol was transferred from Intel to the USB Implementers Forum, Thunderbolt 3 has been effectively implemented in the USB4 specification \u2013 with compatibility with Thunderbolt 3 optional but encouraged for USB4 products.\nInteroperability.\nVarious protocol converters are available that convert USB data signals to and from other communications standards.\nSecurity threats.\nDue to the USB standard's plug-and-play nature, host computers are vulnerable to USB devices containing malicious software. It is possible to create a device that looks like a flash drive, but when plugged in, simulates a keyboard and types malicious commands. For example, on a computer running Microsoft Windows, the device can wait a set amount of time, then open PowerShell and download a malware script. The attack is called a BadUSB attack.\nAnother malicious device is a USB killer, which sends high voltage pulses across the data lines, destroying or damaging whatever it is plugged into.\nIn versions of Microsoft Windows before Windows XP, Windows would automatically run a script (if present) on certain devices via AutoRun, one of which are USB mass storage devices, which may contain malicious software.\nIt's possible to gain full system control by hacking USB controller.\nSee also.\nUSB.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDerived and related standards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32074", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32074", "title": "Universal serial bus", "text": ""}
{"id": "32077", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32077", "title": "1996 United States presidential election", "text": "Presidential elections were held in the United States on November 5, 1996. Incumbent Democratic president Bill Clinton and his running mate, incumbent vice president Al Gore, were elected to a second term. They defeated the Republican ticket of former Senate majority leader Bob Dole and former secretary of housing and urban development Jack Kemp and the Reform ticket of businessman Ross Perot and economist Pat Choate. \nClinton and Vice President Gore were re-nominated without incident by the Democratic Party. Numerous candidates entered the 1996 Republican primaries, with Dole considered the early frontrunner. Dole clinched the nomination after defeating challenges by publisher Steve Forbes and paleoconservative leader Pat Buchanan. Dole's running mate was Jack Kemp, a former New York congressman and football player who had served as the housing secretary under President George H. W. Bush. Ross Perot, who had won 18.9% of the popular vote as an independent candidate in 1992, ran as the candidate of the Reform Party. Perot received less media attention in 1996 and was excluded from the presidential debates.\nClinton's chances of winning were initially considered slim in the middle of his term, as his party had lost both the House of Representatives and the Senate in 1994 for the first time in decades. He was able to regain ground as the economy began to recover from the early 1990s recession with a relatively stable world stage. Clinton tied Dole to Newt Gingrich, the arch-conservative Republican speaker of the House, and expressed concern that Republicans would increase the deficit and slash spending on popular programs like Social Security and Medicare. Dole promised an across-the-board 15% reduction in federal income taxes and labeled Clinton as a \"spoiled\" Baby Boomer who \"never grew up\" and \"never sacrificed.\" Dole's age was a persistent issue in the election, and gaffes by Dole exacerbated the issue for his campaign.\nOn election day, Clinton defeated Dole by a wide margin, winning 379 electors to Dole's 159 and taking 49.2% of the national popular vote to Dole's 40.7%. As in 1992, Perot's strong candidacy held both major party candidates below 50% nationwide. Notably, Clinton's strength with many southern and rural whites makes him the last Democrat to carry the states of Kentucky, Louisiana, West Virginia, Arkansas, Missouri, and Tennessee in a presidential election. He was also the last Democrat to win Arizona until 2020. This is also the last election where either major party nominee would get under 50,000,000 votes.\nBackground.\nIn 1995, the Republican Party was riding high on the significant gains made in the 1994 midterm elections. In those races, the Republicans, led by whip Newt Gingrich, captured the majority of seats in the House for the first time in forty years and the majority of seats in the Senate for the first time in eight years. Gingrich became speaker of the House, while Bob Dole was elevated to Senate majority leader.\nThe Republicans of the 104th Congress pursued an ambitious agenda, highlighted by their Contract with America, but were often forced to compromise with Clinton, who wielded veto power. A budget impasse between Congress and the Clinton administration eventually resulted in a government shutdown. Clinton, meanwhile, was praised for signing the GOP's welfare reform, and other notable bills, but was forced to abandon his own health care plan.\nDemocratic Party nomination.\nDemocratic Candidates\nCandidates gallery.\nWith the advantage of incumbency, Bill Clinton's path to renomination by the Democratic Party was uneventful. At the 1996 Democratic National Convention, Clinton and incumbent Vice President Al Gore were renominated with token opposition. Formerly incarcerated fringe candidate Lyndon LaRouche won a few Arkansas delegates who were barred from the convention. Jimmy Griffin, former Mayor of Buffalo, New York, mounted a brief campaign but withdrew after a poor showing in the New Hampshire primary. Former Pennsylvania governor Bob Casey contemplated a challenge to Clinton, but health problems forced Casey to abandon a bid.\nClinton easily won primaries nationwide, with margins consistently higher than 80%.\nPopular primaries vote:\nConvention tally:\nRepublican Party nomination.\nRepublican candidates:\nCandidates gallery.\nA number of Republican candidates entered the field to challenge the incumbent Democratic president, Bill Clinton.\nThe fragmented field of candidates debated issues such as a flat tax and other tax cut proposals, and a return to supply-side economic policies popularized by Ronald Reagan. More attention was drawn to the race by the budget stalemate in 1995 between Congress and the president, which caused temporary shutdowns and slowdowns in many areas of federal government service.\nFormer Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin of Illinois, who served in the United States House of Representatives from Illinois's 16th District and was the 1990 Republican U.S. Senate nominee losing to incumbent Paul Simon conducted a bid for most of 1995, but withdrew before the Iowa caucuses as polls showed her languishing far behind. She participated in a number of primary presidential debates before withdrawing. Martin's predecessor in Congress, John Anderson had made first a Republican then independent presidential bid in 1980. Also, Simon who defeated Martin for the U.S. Senate had run for president as a Democrat in 1988.\nFormer U.S. Army General and future Secretary of State Colin Powell was widely courted as a potential Republican nominee. However, on November 8, 1995, Powell announced that he would not seek the nomination. Former and future Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld formed a presidential campaign exploratory committee, but declined to formally enter the race. Former Secretary of State James A. Baker III and former Secretary of Education William Bennett both flirted with bids, and both even set up exploratory committees for a number of months, but both finally declared within days of each other that they would not run.\nFormer Secretary of Defense and future Vice President of the United States Dick Cheney was touted by many as a possible candidate for the presidency, but he declared his intentions not to run in early 1995. Then-Texas governor and future president George W. Bush was also urged by some party leaders to seek the Republican Party nomination, but opted against doing so.\nPrimaries and convention.\nAhead of the 1996 primary contest, Republican Leader of the United States Senate and former vice-presidential candidate Bob Dole was seen as the most likely winner. However, Steve Forbes finished first in Delaware and Arizona while paleoconservative firebrand Pat Buchanan managed early victories in Alaska and Louisiana, in addition to a strong second place in the Iowa caucuses and a surprising victory in the small but key New Hampshire primary. Buchanan's New Hampshire win alarmed the Republican \"establishment\" sufficiently as to provoke prominent Republicans to quickly coalesce around Dole, and Dole won every primary starting with North and South Dakota. Dole resigned his Senate seat on June 11 and the Republican National Convention formally nominated Dole on August 15, 1996, for president.\nPopular primaries vote:\nConvention tally:\nFormer Representative and Housing Secretary Jack Kemp was nominated by acclamation for vice president, the following day. This was the only Republican ticket between 1980 and 2004 that did not include a member of the Bush family.\nReform Party nomination.\nCandidates gallery.\nThe United States Reform Party had great difficulty in finding a candidate willing to run in the general election. Lowell Weicker, Tim Penny, David Boren and Richard Lamm were among those who toyed with the notion of seeking its presidential nomination, though all but Lamm decided against it; Lamm had himself come close to withdrawing his name from consideration. Lamm designated Ed Zschau as his vice presidential candidate.\nUltimately, the Reform Party nominated its founder Ross Perot from Texas in its first election as an official political party. Although Perot easily won the nomination, his victory at the party's national convention led to a schism as supporters of Lamm accused him of rigging the vote to prevent them from casting their ballots. This faction walked out of the national convention and eventually formed their own group, the American Reform Party, and attempted to convince Lamm to run as an Independent in the general election; Lamm declined, pointing out a promise he made before running that he would respect the Party's final decision.\nEconomist Pat Choate was nominated for vice president.\nMinor parties and independents.\nParties in this section obtained ballot access in enough states to theoretically obtain the minimum number of electoral votes needed to win the election. Individuals included in this section completed one or more of the following actions: received, or formally announced their candidacy for, the presidential nomination of a third party; formally announced intention to run as an independent candidate and obtained enough ballot access to win the election; filed as a third party or non-affiliated candidate with the FEC (for other than exploratory purposes). Within each party, candidates are listed alphabetically by surname.\nLibertarian Party nomination.\nLibertarian candidates:\nThe Libertarian Party nominated free-market writer and investment analyst Harry Browne from Tennessee, and selected Jo Jorgensen from South Carolina as his running mate. Browne and Jorgensen drew 485,798 votes (0.5% of the popular vote).\nGreen Party nomination.\nThe Green Party of the United States drafted Ralph Nader of Connecticut as a candidate for president of the United States on the Green Party ticket. He was not formally nominated by the Green Party USA, which was, at the time, the largest national Green group; instead, he was nominated independently by various state Green parties (in some areas, he appeared on the ballot as an independent). Nader vowed to spend only $5,000 in his election campaign (to avoid having to file a financial statement with the FEC). Winona LaDuke, a Native American activist and economist from Wisconsin, was named as his running mate. In Iowa and Vermont, Anne Goeke was listed as Nader's running mate; in New Jersey it was Madelyn Hoffman and in New York it was Muriel Tillinghast.\nNader and his running mates drew 685,128 votes (0.71% of the popular vote).\nNatural Law Party nomination.\nThe Natural Law Party for a second time nominated scientist and researcher John Hagelin for president and Mike Tompkins for vice president. The party platform included preventive health care, sustainable agriculture and renewable energy technologies. During his campaigns, Hagelin favored abortion rights without public financing, campaign finance law reform, improved gun control, a flat tax, the eradication of PACs, a ban on soft money contributions, and school vouchers, and was a believer in \"yogic flying.\"\nHagelin and Tompkins drew 113,671 votes (0.1% of the popular vote).\nU.S. Taxpayers' Party nomination.\nThe U.S. Taxpayers' Party had run its first presidential ticket in 1992, headed by Howard Phillips, who had failed to find any prominent conservative willing to take the mantle. In 1996 the situation ultimately proved the same, though Pat Buchanan for a time was widely speculated to be planning on bolting to the Taxpayers' Party should the expected Republican nominee, Senator Bob Dole, name a pro-choice running mate. When Jack Kemp, who opposed abortion, was tapped for the position Buchanan agreed to endorse the Republican ticket. Phillips again led the Taxpayers' ticket, with Herbert Titus nominated for the vice presidency.\nPhillips and Titus drew 182,820 votes (0.2% of the popular vote).\nGeneral election.\nCampaign.\nWithout meaningful primary opposition, Clinton was able to focus on the general election early, while Dole was forced to move to the right and spend his campaign reserves fighting off challengers. Political adviser Dick Morris urged Clinton to raise huge sums of campaign funds via soft money for an unprecedented early TV blitz of swing states promoting Clinton's agenda and record. As a result, Clinton could run a campaign through the summer defining his opponent as an aged conservative far from the mainstream before Dole was in a position to respond. Compared to the 50-year-old Clinton, then 73-year-old Dole appeared especially old and frail, as illustrated by an embarrassing fall off a stage during a campaign event in Chico, California. Dole further enhanced this contrast on September 18 when he made a reference to a no-hitter thrown the day before by Hideo Nomo of the \"Brooklyn Dodgers\", a team that had left Brooklyn for Los Angeles 38 years earlier. A few days later Dole would make a joke about the remark by saying, \"And I'd like to congratulate the St. Louis Cardinals on winning the N.L. Central. Notice I said the St. Louis Cardinals, not the St. Louis Browns.\" (The Browns had left St. Louis after the 1954 season to become the Baltimore Orioles.)\nDole chose to focus on Clinton (and the many Baby Boomer members of Clinton's administration) as representing a new \"corps of the elite who never grew up, never did anything real, never sacrificed, never suffered and never learned.\" Dole said, \"My generation won [World War II], and we may need to be called to service one last time.\" Although his message won appeal with older voters, surveys found that his age was widely held as a liability and his frequent allusions to WWII and the Great Depression in speeches and campaign ads \"unappealing\" to younger voters. To prove that he was still healthy and active, Dole released all of his medical records to the public and published photographs of himself running on a treadmill. After the falling incident in California, he joked that he \"was trying to do that new Democratic dance, the macarena.\"\nThe Clinton campaign avoided mentioning Dole's age directly, choosing to confront it in more subtle ways such as the slogan \"Building Bridges to the Future\" in contrast to the Republican candidate's frequent remarks that he was a \"bridge to the past\", before the social upheavals of the 1960s. Clinton, without actually calling Dole old, questioned the age of his ideas.\nWith respect to the issues, Dole promised a 15% across-the-board reduction in income tax rates and made former congressman and supply side advocate Jack Kemp his running mate. Bill Clinton framed the narrative against Dole early, painting him as a mere clone of House speaker Newt Gingrich, warning America that Dole would work in concert with the Republican Congress to slash popular social programs, like Medicare and Social Security, dubbed by Clinton as \"Dole-Gingrich\". Dole's tax-cut plan found itself under attack from the White House, who said it would \"blow a hole in the deficit,\" which had been cut nearly in half during his opponent's term.\nThe televised debates featured only Dole and Clinton, locking out Perot and the other minor candidates from the discussion. Perot, who had been allowed to participate in the 1992 debates, would eventually take his case to court, seeking damages from not being in the debate, as well as citing unfair coverage from the major media outlets.\nIn a first for either major party in a presidential election, both the Clinton and Dole campaigns had official websites. Dole invited viewers to visit his \"homepage\" at the end of the first debate.\nThroughout the campaign, Clinton maintained leads in the polls over Dole and Perot, generally by large margins. In October, Republican National Committee \"operatives urg[ed] their party's Congressional candidates to cut loose from Bob Dole and press voters to maintain a Republican majority\" and spent $4 million on advertising in targeted districts.\nPresidential debates.\nThree debates, organized by the Commission on Presidential Debates, took place\u2014two between the presidential candidates and one between the vice presidential candidates:\nCampaign donations controversy.\nIn late September 1995, questions arose regarding the Democratic National Committee's fund-raising practices. In February the following year, China's alleged role in the campaign finance controversy first gained public attention after \"The Washington Post\" published a story stating that a U.S. Department of Justice investigation had discovered evidence that agents of China sought to direct contributions from foreign sources to the DNC before the 1996 presidential campaign. The paper wrote that intelligence information had shown the Chinese Embassy in Washington, D.C. was used for coordinating contributions to the DNC in violation of U.S. law forbidding non-American citizens from giving monetary donations to U.S. politicians and political parties. Seventeen people were eventually convicted for fraud or for funneling Asian funds into the U.S. elections.\nOne of the more notable events learned involved Vice President Al Gore and a fund-raising event held at Hsi Lai Temple in Hacienda Heights, California. The Temple event was organized by DNC fund-raisers John Huang and Maria Hsia. It is illegal under U.S. law for religious organizations to donate money to politicians or political groups due to their tax-exempt status. The U.S. Justice Department alleged Hsia facilitated $100,000 (~$ in 2024) in illegal contributions to the 1996 Clinton-Gore re-election campaign through her efforts at the Temple. Hsia was eventually convicted by a jury in March 2000. The DNC eventually returned the money donated by the Temple's monks and nuns. Twelve nuns and employees of the Temple refused to answer questions by pleading the Fifth Amendment when they were subpoenaed to testify before Congress in 1997.\nResults.\nOn election day, President Clinton won a decisive victory over Dole, becoming the first Democrat to win two consecutive presidential elections since Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1936, 1940, and 1944. In the popular vote, he out-polled Dole by over 8.2 million votes. The Electoral College map did not change much from the previous election, with the Democratic incumbent winning 379 votes to the Republican ticket's 159.\nSince Dole was the vice presidential nominee in the 1976 election, Dole's 1996 loss made him the only unsuccessful major party nominee for both president and vice president in the history of the United States. Although Clinton's margin of victory in the popular vote was slightly greater than that of George H.W. Bush in 1988, Dole won more states than Bush did in 1992 in part due to Clinton's relatively poor performance in areas of low population density, a precursor of the trend where future Democratic contenders for the presidency perform very well in populous metropolitan areas but vastly under-perform in rural counties. In the West, Dole managed to narrowly win Colorado and Montana (both had voted for Clinton four years earlier), while Clinton became the first Democrat to win Arizona since Harry S. Truman in 1948. In the South, Clinton won Florida, a state he had failed to win in 1992, but lost Georgia, a state that he had carried. The election helped to cement Democratic presidential control in California, Vermont, Maine, Illinois, New Jersey and Connecticut; all went on to vote Democratic in every subsequent presidential election after having voted Republican in the five prior to 1992. 1996 marked the first time that Vermont voted for a Democrat in two successive elections. Pennsylvania and Michigan both voted Democratic, and would remain in the Democratic presidential fold until 2016 and 2024.\nReform Party nominee Ross Perot won approximately 8% of the popular vote. His vote total was less than half of his performance in 1992. The 1996 national exit poll showed that just as in 1992, Perot drew supporters from Clinton and Dole equally. In polls directed at Perot voters as to who would be a second choice, Clinton consistently held substantial leads. Perot's best showing was in states that tended to strongly favor either Clinton (such as Maine) or Dole (particularly Montana, though the margin of victory there was much closer). Perot once again received his lowest amount of support in the South.\nAlthough Clinton is a native of Arkansas and his running mate hailed from Tennessee, the Democratic ticket carried just four of the eleven states of the former Confederacy (and of those four only Florida and Georgia have voted Democratic in any election since). As such, Clinton's 1992 run was tied for the weakest performance in the region by a nationally successful Democratic presidential candidate up until that point. Clinton's performance both followed and preceded a substantial decline in support for the Democratic Party in the South; in the 2000 and 2004 elections, the Democrats would fail to carry even one of the former Confederate states, contributing to their defeat both times. This completed the Republican takeover of the American South, a region in which Democrats had held a near monopoly from 1880 to 1948. In 2008, the Democrats were able to win three former Confederate states (Virginia, North Carolina, and Florida), however this was still a worse performance than either of Clinton's. Since 1984, no winning presidential candidate has surpassed Bill Clinton's 8.5 percent popular vote margin, or his 220 electoral vote margin since 1988. Additionally, since 1964, no other Democratic presidential candidate has surpassed Clinton's electoral vote margin and, except Lyndon B. Johnson in that election, no Democratic presidential candidate has surpassed Clinton's 8.5 percentage popular vote margin since 1940.\nThe election also marked the first time in U.S. history that the winner was elected without winning the male vote, and the third time in U.S. history that a candidate won two terms as president without winning a majority of the popular vote either time (after Grover Cleveland and Woodrow Wilson, both Democrats.) Clinton also remains the last presidential candidate of either party to win at least one county in every state. Clinton maintained a consistent polling edge over Dole, and he won re-election with a substantial margin in the popular vote and the Electoral College. Clinton became the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win two consecutive presidential elections. Dole won 40.7% of the popular vote and 159 electoral votes, while Perot won 8.4% of the popular vote. Despite Dole's defeat, the Republican Party was able to maintain majorities in both the House of Representatives and the Senate. Voter turnout was registered at 48.99% of the voting-age population (or 51.7% of the voting-eligible population), the lowest for a presidential election since 1924.\nThis is the most recent election in which a candidate got 70% or more of the electoral vote. As of 2024, this remains the last time that the states of Kentucky, Louisiana, West Virginia, Arkansas, Missouri, and Tennessee were carried by a Democratic presidential nominee. This was the last election where Arizona voted Democratic until 2020, and Florida, Nevada, and Ohio until 2008. Five states switched party predominance in 1996 with their presidential voting: Montana, Colorado, and Georgia were flipped by Senator Dole, while Florida and Arizona were flipped by President Clinton. Having carried Georgia in 1992 and Arizona in 1996, Clinton was the last Democrat to win those two states until 2020. This is also the most recent time a third-party candidate finished with over 5% of the vote nationwide. This is the last time a Democratic president was re-elected with a higher share of the electoral or popular vote, while also being the last time when an incumbent Democratic candidate would flip any states (Arizona, and Florida in this instance) which they failed to win in their previous election bid. Since Dole was the losing vice presidential candidate in 1976, Dole's loss makes him the only person in U.S. history to lose elections for both the vice presidency and the presidency while serving in neither office. This was the first presidential election since 1944 in which an incumbent Democratic president won a second full term in office. It is the most recent election in which the Democratic presidential nominee never served as a senator. This is also the only presidential election between 1980 and 2004 in which a Bush did not appear on the Republican ticket, the last winning Democratic ticket that did not have Joe Biden on it, and the most recent election when the Republican candidate would win fewer than 20 states. It also has the lowest voter turnout since 1980, when the statistic began being measured across the voting-eligible population rather than the voting-age population.\nOfficial source (popular vote): https://\nSource (popular and electoral vote): http://\nunofficial\nSecondary source (popular vote): \nVoting age population: 196,511,000\nPercent of voting age population casting a vote for president: 48.99%\nResults by state.\nSource: \n\u2020Maine and Nebraska each allow for their electoral votes to be split between candidates. In both states, two electoral votes are awarded to the winner of the statewide race and one electoral vote is awarded to the winner of each congressional district.\nClose states.\nState where the margin of victory was under 1% (8 electoral votes):\nStates where the margin of victory was under 5% (109 electoral votes):\nStates where the margin of victory was between 5% and 10% (143 electoral votes):\nStatistics.\nCounties with highest percent of vote (Democratic)\nCounties with highest percent of vote (Republican)\nCounties with highest percent of vote (other)\nVoter demographics.\nSource: Voter News Service exit poll, reported in \"The New York Times\", November 10, 1996, 28.\nPolling controversy.\nThe polling in the election was criticized by Everett Carll Ladd, who argued that \"polls had overestimated Clinton's lead during the campaign and had thereby dampened interest in the election.\" Others such as Warren J. Mitofsky rebutted Ladd's view; in an analysis in \"Public Opinion Quarterly\", Mitofsky wrote that \"1996 was not the best but was far from the worst year for the polls\", with accuracy surpassing the polling in 1948 and in 1980. Because Clinton won the election by a comfortable margin, there was no major reaction towards the impreciseness of the polls.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32078", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32078", "title": "Whig Party (United States)", "text": "19th-century political party in the U.S.\nThe Whig Party was a mid-19th century political party in the United States. Alongside the Democratic Party, it was one of two major parties from the late 1830s until the early 1850s and part of the Second Party System. As well as four Whig presidents (William Henry Harrison, John Tyler, Zachary Taylor, and Millard Fillmore), other prominent members included Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, Rufus Choate, William Seward, John J. Crittenden, and John Quincy Adams (whose presidency ended prior to the formation of the Whig Party). The Whig base of support was amongst entrepreneurs, professionals, Protestant Christians (particularly Evangelicals), the urban middle class, and nativists.\nThe party was hostile towards the ideology of \"manifest destiny\", territorial expansion into Texas and the Southwest, and the Mexican\u2013American War. It disliked presidential power, as exhibited by Andrew Jackson and James K. Polk, and preferred congressional dominance in lawmaking. Members advocated modernization, meritocracy, the rule of law, protections against majority rule, and vigilance against executive tyranny. They favored an economic program known as the American System, which called for a protective tariff, federal subsidies for the construction of infrastructure, and support for a national bank. The party was active in both the Northern and Southern United States and did not take a firm stance on slavery, but Northern Whigs tended to be less supportive than their Democratic counterparts.\nThe Whigs emerged in the 1830s in opposition to U.S. president Andrew Jackson, pulling together former members of the National Republican Party, the Anti-Masonic Party, and disaffected Democrats. The Whigs had some weak links to the defunct Federalist Party, but the Whig Party was not a successor to that party, and many Whig leaders, including Henry Clay, had aligned with the rival Democratic-Republican Party. In the 1836 presidential election, four different Whig candidates received electoral votes, but the party failed to defeat Jackson's chosen successor, Martin Van Buren. Whig nominee William Henry Harrison unseated Van Buren in the 1840 presidential election but died one month into his term. Harrison's successor, John Tyler, a former Democrat, broke with the Whigs in 1841 after clashing with Clay and other party leaders over economic policies such as the re-establishment of a national bank.\nClay clinched his party's nomination in the 1844 presidential election but was defeated by Democrat James K. Polk, who subsequently presided over the Mexican\u2013American War. Whig nominee Zachary Taylor won the 1848 presidential election, but Taylor died in 1850 and was succeeded by Millard Fillmore. Fillmore, Clay, Daniel Webster, and Democrat Stephen A. Douglas led the passage of the Compromise of 1850, which helped to defuse sectional tensions in the aftermath of the Mexican\u2013American War for a time. Nonetheless, the Whigs suffered a decisive defeat in the 1852 presidential election partly due to sectional divisions within the party. The Whigs collapsed following the passage of the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act in 1854, with most Northern Whigs eventually joining the anti-slavery Republican Party and most Southern Whigs joining the nativist American Party and later the Constitutional Union Party. The last vestiges of the Whig Party faded away after the start of the American Civil War, but Whig ideas remained influential for decades. During the presidency of Abraham Lincoln, ex-Whigs dominated the Republican Party and enacted much of their American System. Presidents Abraham Lincoln, Rutherford B. Hayes, Chester A. Arthur, and Benjamin Harrison were Whigs before switching to the Republican Party, from which they were elected to office. It is considered the primary predecessor party of the modern-day Republicans.\nBackground.\nDuring the 1790s, the first major U.S. parties arose in the form of the Federalist Party, led by Alexander Hamilton, and the Democratic-Republican Party, led by Thomas Jefferson. After 1815, the Democratic-Republicans emerged as the sole major party at the national level but became increasingly polarized. A nationalist wing led by Henry Clay favored policies such as the Second Bank of the United States and the implementation of a protective tariff. A second group, the Old Republicans, opposed these policies, favoring a strict interpretation of the Constitution and a weak federal government.\nIn the 1824 presidential election, Speaker of the House Henry Clay, Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, and General Andrew Jackson all sought the presidency as members of the Democratic-Republican Party. Crawford favored state sovereignty and a strict constructionist view of the Constitution, while Clay and Adams favored high tariffs and the national bank; regionalism played a central role, with Jackson strongest in the West. Jackson won a plurality of the popular and electoral vote in the 1824 election, but not a majority. The House of Representatives had to decide. Speaker Clay supported Adams, who was elected as president by the House, and Clay was appointed Secretary of State. Jackson called it a \"corrupt bargain\".\nIn the years following the 1824 election, former members of the Democratic-Republican Party split into hostile factions. Supporters of President Adams and Clay joined with many former Federalists such as Daniel Webster to form a group informally known as the \"Adams party\". Meanwhile, supporters of Jackson, Crawford, and Vice President John C. Calhoun joined in opposing the Adams administration's nationalist agenda, becoming informally known as \"Jacksonians\". Due in part to the superior organization (by Martin Van Buren) of the Jacksonians, Jackson defeated Adams in the 1828 presidential election, taking 56 percent of the popular vote. Clay became the leader of the National Republican Party, which opposed President Jackson. By the early 1830s, the Jacksonians organized into the new Democratic Party.\nDespite Jackson's decisive victory in the 1828 election, National Republicans initially believed that Jackson's party would collapse once Jackson took office. Vice President Calhoun split from the administration in 1831. Still, differences over the tariff prevented Calhoun's followers from joining the National Republicans. Meanwhile, the Anti-Masonic Party formed following the disappearance and possible murder of William Morgan in 1826. The Anti-Masonic movement, strongest in the Northeast, gave rise to or expanded the use of many innovations that became an accepted practice among other parties, including nominating conventions and party newspapers. Clay rejected overtures from the Anti-Masonic Party, and his attempt to convince Calhoun to serve as his running mate failed, leaving the opposition to Jackson split among different leaders when the National Republicans nominated Clay for president.\nHoping to make the national bank a key issue of the 1832 election, the National Republicans convinced national bank president Nicholas Biddle to request an extension of the national bank's charter, but their strategy backfired when Jackson successfully portrayed his veto of the recharter as a victory for the people against an elitist institution. Jackson won another decisive victory in the 1832 presidential election, taking 55 percent of the national popular vote and 88 percent of the popular vote in the slavery states south of Kentucky and Maryland. Clay's defeat discredited the National Republican Party, encouraging those opposed to Jackson to seek to create a more effective opposition party. Jackson, by 1832, was determined to destroy the bank (the Second Bank of the United States), which Whigs supported.\nHistory.\nCreation, 1833\u20131836.\nShortly after Jackson's re-election, South Carolina passed a measure to \"nullify\" the Tariff of 1832, beginning the Nullification Crisis. Jackson strongly denied the right of South Carolina to nullify federal law, but the crisis was resolved after Congress passed the Tariff of 1833. The Nullification Crisis briefly scrambled the partisan divisions that had emerged after 1824, as many within the Jacksonian coalition opposed President Jackson's threats of force against South Carolina, while some opposition leaders like Daniel Webster supported them. \nThe name \"Whig\" was first suggested for Jackson's opponents by James Watson Webb, editor of the \"Courier and Enquirer\" of New York City. In South Carolina and other states, those opposed to Jackson began to form small \"Whig\" parties. The Whig label implicitly compared \"King Andrew\" to King George III, the King of Great Britain at the time of the American Revolution.\nJackson's decision to remove government deposits from the national bank ended any possibility of a Webster-Jackson alliance and helped to solidify partisan lines. The removal of the deposits drew opposition from both pro-bank National Republicans and states' rights Southerners like Willie Person Mangum of North Carolina, the latter of whom accused Jackson of flouting the Constitution. In late 1833, Clay began to hold a series of dinners with opposition leaders to settle on a candidate to oppose Martin Van Buren, the likely Democratic nominee in the 1836 presidential election. While Jackson's opponents could not agree on a single presidential candidate, they coordinated in the Senate to oppose Jackson's initiatives. Historian Michael Holt writes that the \"birth of the Whig Party\" can be dated to Clay and his allies taking control of the Senate in December 1833.\nThe National Republicans, including Clay and Webster, formed the core of the Whig Party, but many Anti-Masons such as William H. Seward of New York and Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania also joined. Several prominent Democrats defected to the Whigs, including Mangum, former Attorney General John Berrien, and John Tyler of Virginia. The Whig Party's first significant action was to censure Jackson for the removal of the national bank deposits, thereby establishing opposition to Jackson's executive power as the organizing principle of the new party.\nIn doing so, the Whigs were able to shed the elitist image that had persistently hindered the National Republicans. Throughout 1834 and 1835, the Whigs successfully incorporated National Republican and Anti-Masonic state-level organizations and established new state party organizations in Southern states like North Carolina and Georgia. The Anti-Masonic heritage of the Whigs included a distrust of behind-the-scenes political maneuvering by party bosses instead of encouraging direct appeals to the people through gigantic rallies, parades, and rhetorical rabble-rousing.\nRise, 1836\u20131841.\nEarly successes in various states made many Whigs optimistic about victory in 1836, but an improving economy bolstered Van Buren's standing ahead of the election. The Whigs also faced the difficulty of uniting former National Republicans, Anti-Masons, and states' rights Southerners around one candidate, and the party suffered an early blow when Calhoun announced that he would refuse to support any candidate opposed to the doctrine of nullification. Northern Whigs cast aside both Clay and Webster in favor of General William Henry Harrison, a former senator who had led U.S. forces in the 1811 Battle of Tippecanoe.\nThough he had not previously been affiliated with the National Republicans, Harrison indicated that he shared the party's concerns over Jackson's executive power and favored federal investments in infrastructure. Southern Whigs coalesced around Senator Hugh Lawson White, a long-time Jackson ally who opposed Van Buren's candidacy. Ultimately, Van Buren won a majority of the electoral and popular vote in the 1836 election, though the Whigs improved on Clay's 1832 performance in the South and West.\nShortly after Van Buren took office, an economic crisis known as the Panic of 1837 struck the nation. Land prices plummeted, industries laid off employees, and banks failed. According to historian Daniel Walker Howe, the economic crisis of the late 1830s and early 1840s was the most severe recession in U.S. history until the Great Depression. Van Buren's economic response centered on establishing the Independent Treasury system, essentially a series of vaults that would hold government deposits. As the debate over the Independent Treasury continued, William Cabell Rives and some other Democrats who favored a more activist government defected to the Whig Party, while Calhoun and his followers joined the Democratic Party. Whig leaders agreed to hold the party's first national convention in December 1839 in order to select the Whig presidential nominee.\nBy early 1838, Clay had emerged as the front-runner due to his southern support and spirited opposition to Van Buren's Independent Treasury. A recovering economy convinced other Whigs to support Harrison, who was generally seen as the Whig candidate best able to win over Democrats and new voters. With the crucial support of Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and Thurlow Weed of New York, Harrison won the presidential nomination on the fifth ballot of the 1839 Whig National Convention.\nFor vice president, the Whigs nominated John Tyler, a former states' rights Democrat selected for the Whig ticket primarily because other Southern supporters of Clay refused to serve as Harrison's running mate. Log cabins and hard cider became the dominant symbols of the Whig campaign as the party sought to portray Harrison as a man of the people. The Whigs also assailed Van Buren's handling of the economy. They argued that traditional Whig policies, such as the restoration of a national bank and the implementation of protective tariff rates, would help to restore the economy. With the economy still in a downturn, Harrison decisively defeated Van Buren, taking a wide majority of the electoral vote and just under 53 percent of the popular vote.\nHarrison and Tyler, 1841\u20131845.\nWith the election of the first Whig presidential administration in the party's history, Clay and his allies prepared to pass ambitious domestic policies such as the restoration of the national bank, the distribution of federal land sales revenue to the states, a national bankruptcy law, and increased tariff rates. Harrison died just one month into his term, thereby elevating Vice President Tyler to the presidency. Tyler had never accepted much of the Whig economic program and he soon clashed with Clay and other congressional Whigs. In August 1841, Tyler vetoed Clay's national bank bill, holding that the legislation was unconstitutional.\nCongress passed a second bill based on an earlier proposal made by Treasury Secretary Ewing that was tailored to address Tyler's constitutional concerns, but Tyler vetoed that bill as well. In response, every Cabinet member but Webster resigned, and the Whig congressional caucus expelled Tyler from the party on September 13, 1841. The Whigs later began impeachment proceedings against Tyler, but they ultimately failed to impeach him because they believed his likely acquittal would devastate the party.\nBeginning in mid-1842, Tyler increasingly began to court Democrats, appointing them to his Cabinet and other positions. At the same time, many Whig state organizations repudiated the Tyler administration and endorsed Clay as the party's candidate in the 1844 presidential election. After Webster resigned from the Cabinet in May 1843 following the conclusion of the Webster-Ashburton Treaty, Tyler made the annexation of Texas his key priority. The annexation of Texas was widely viewed as a pro-slavery initiative as it would add another slave state to the union, and most leaders of both parties opposed opening the question of annexation in 1843 due to the fear of stoking the debate over slavery. Tyler was nonetheless determined to pursue annexation because he believed that the British conspired to abolish slavery in Texas and because he saw the issue as a means to reelection, either through the Democratic Party or through a new party. In April 1844, Secretary of State John C. Calhoun reached a treaty with Texas providing for the annexation of that country.\nClay and Van Buren, the two front-runners for major-party presidential nominations in the 1844 election, both announced their opposition to annexation, and the Senate blocked the annexation treaty. To the surprise of Clay and other Whigs, the 1844 Democratic National Convention rejected Van Buren in favor of James K. Polk and established a platform calling for the acquisition of both Texas and Oregon Country. Having won the presidential nomination at the 1844 Whig National Convention unopposed, Clay and other Whigs were initially confident that they would defeat the divided Democrats and their relatively obscure candidate.\nNonetheless, Southern voters responded to Polk's calls for annexation, while in the North, Democrats benefited from the growing animosity towards the Whig Party among Catholic and foreign-born voters. Ultimately, Polk won the election, taking 49.5% of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote; the swing of just over one percent of the vote in New York would have given Clay the victory.\nPolk and the Mexican\u2013American War, 1845\u20131849.\nIn the final weeks of Tyler's presidency, a small group of Southern Whigs joined with congressional Democrats to pass a joint resolution providing for the annexation of Texas, and Texas subsequently became a state in 1845. Following the annexation of Texas, Polk began preparations for a potential war with Mexico, which still regarded Texas as a part of its republic and contended that Texas's true southern border was the Nueces River rather than the Rio Grande. After a skirmish known as the Thornton Affair broke out on the northern side of the Rio Grande, Polk called on Congress to declare war against Mexico, arguing that Mexico had invaded American territory by crossing the Rio Grande.\nMany Whigs argued that Polk had provoked war with Mexico by sending a force under General Zachary Taylor to the Rio Grande, but only a minority of Whigs voted against the declaration of war as they feared that opposing the war would be politically unpopular. Polk received the declaration of war against Mexico and also pushed through the restoration of the Independent Treasury System and a bill that reduced tariffs; opposition to the passage of these Democratic policies helped to reunify and reinvigorate the Whigs.\nIn August 1846, Polk asked Congress to appropriate $2\u00a0million (~$ in 2024) in hopes of using that money as a down payment for the purchase of California in a treaty with Mexico. Democratic Congressman David Wilmot of Pennsylvania offered an amendment known as the Wilmot Proviso, which would ban slavery in any newly acquired lands. The Wilmot Proviso passed the House with the support of both Northern Whigs and Northern Democrats, breaking the typical pattern of partisan division in congressional votes, but it was defeated in the Senate.\nNonetheless, clear divisions remained between the two parties on territorial acquisitions, as most Democrats joined Polk in seeking to acquire vast tracts of land from Mexico, but most Whigs opposed territorial growth. In February 1848, Mexican and U.S. negotiators reached the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which provided for the cession of Alta California and New Mexico. Despite Whig objections to the acquisition of Mexican territory, the treaty was ratified with the support of a majority of the Democratic and Whig senators; Whigs voted for the treaty largely because ratification brought the war to an immediate end.\nDuring the war, Whig leaders like John J. Crittenden of Kentucky began to look to General Taylor as a presidential candidate, hoping the party could run on Taylor's personal popularity rather than economic issues. Taylor's candidacy faced significant resistance in the Whig Party due to his lack of public commitment to Whig policies and his association with the Mexican\u2013American War. In late 1847, Clay emerged as Taylor's main opponent for the Whig nomination, appealing especially to Northern Whigs with his opposition to the war and the acquisition of new territory.\nWith strong backing from slavery-state delegates, Taylor won the presidential nomination on the fourth ballot of the 1848 Whig National Convention. The Whigs nominated Millard Fillmore of New York, a pro-Clay Northerner, for vice president. Anti-slavery Northern Whigs disaffected with Taylor joined with Democratic supporters of Martin Van Buren and some members of the Liberty Party to found the new Free Soil Party; the party nominated a ticket of Van Buren and Whig Charles Francis Adams Sr. and campaigned against the spread of slavery into the territories.\nThe Whig campaign in the North received a boost when Taylor released a public letter in which he stated that he favored Whig principles and would defer to Congress after taking office, thereby reassuring some wavering Whigs. During the campaign, Northern Whig leaders touted traditional Whig policies like support for infrastructure spending and increased tariff rates, but Southern Whigs largely eschewed economic policy, instead emphasizing that Taylor's status as an enslaver meant that he could be trusted on the issue of slavery more so than Democratic candidate Lewis Cass of Michigan. Ultimately, Taylor won the election with a majority of the electoral vote and a plurality of the popular vote. Taylor improved on Clay's 1844 performance in the South and benefited from the defection of many Democrats to Van Buren in the North.\nTaylor and Fillmore, 1849\u20131853.\nReflecting the Taylor administration's desire to find a middle ground between traditional Whig and Democratic policies, Secretary of the Treasury William M. Meredith issued a report calling for an increase in tariff rates, but not to the levels seen under the Tariff of 1842. Even Meredith's moderate policies were not adopted, and, partly due to the strong economic growth of the late 1840s and late 1850s, traditional Whig economic stances would increasingly lose their salience after 1848. When Taylor assumed office, the organization of state and territorial governments and the status of slavery in the Mexican Cession remained the major issue facing Congress.\nTo sidestep the issue of the Wilmot Proviso, the Taylor administration proposed that the lands of the Mexican Cession be admitted as states without first organizing territorial governments; thus, slavery in the area would be left to the discretion of state governments rather than the federal government. In January 1850, Senator Clay introduced a separate proposal that included the admission of California as a free state, the cession by Texas of some of its northern and western territorial claims in return for debt relief, the establishment of New Mexico and Utah territories, a ban on the importation of slaves into the District of Columbia for sale, and a more stringent fugitive slave law.\nTaylor died in July 1850 and was succeeded by Vice President Fillmore. In contrast to John Tyler, Fillmore's legitimacy and authority as president were widely accepted by members of Congress and the public. Fillmore accepted the resignation of Taylor's entire Cabinet and appointed Whig leaders like Crittenden, Thomas Corwin of Ohio, and Webster, whose support for the Compromise had outraged his Massachusetts constituents. With the support of Fillmore and an impressive bipartisan and bi-sectional coalition, a Senate bill providing for a final settlement of Texas's borders won passage shortly after Fillmore took office.\nThe Senate quickly moved to other significant issues, passing bills that provided for the admission of California, the organization of New Mexico Territory, and the establishment of a new fugitive slave law. Passage of what became known as the Compromise of 1850 soon followed in the House of Representatives. Though the future of slavery in New Mexico, Utah, and other territories remained unclear, Fillmore himself described the Compromise of 1850 as a \"final settlement\" of sectional issues.\nFollowing the passage of the Compromise of 1850, Fillmore's enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 became the central issue of his administration. The Whig Party became badly split between pro-Compromise Whigs like Fillmore and Webster and anti-Compromise Whigs like William Seward, who demanded the repeal of the Fugitive Slave Act.\nThough Fillmore's enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act made him unpopular among many in the North, he retained considerable support in the South. Meanwhile, Secretary Webster had long coveted the presidency and, though in poor health, planned a final attempt to gain the White House. A third candidate emerged in the form of General Winfield Scott, who won the backing of many Northerners but whose association with Senator William Seward made him unacceptable to Southern Whigs.\nOn the first presidential ballot of the 1852 Whig National Convention, Fillmore received 133 of the necessary 147 votes, while Scott won 131 and Webster won 29. Fillmore and Webster's supporters were unable to broker a deal to unite behind either candidate, and Scott won the nomination on the 53rd ballot. The 1852 Democratic National Convention nominated a dark horse candidate in the form of former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce, a Northerner sympathetic to the Southern view on slavery.\nAs the Whig and Democratic national conventions had approved similar platforms, the 1852 election focused largely on the personalities of Scott and Pierce. The 1852 elections proved to be disastrous for the Whig Party, as Scott was defeated by a wide margin and the Whigs lost several congressional and state elections. Scott amassed more votes than Taylor had in most Northern states, but Democrats benefited from a surge of new voters in the North and the collapse of Whig strength in much of the South.\nCollapse.\nDespite their decisive loss in the 1852 elections, most Whig leaders believed the party could recover during the Pierce presidency in much the same way that it had recovered under President Polk. The strong economy still prevented the Whig economic program from regaining salience, however, and the party failed to develop an effective platform on which to campaign. The debate over the 1854 Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act, which effectively repealed the Missouri Compromise by allowing slavery in territories north of the 36\u00b030\u2032 parallel, shook up traditional partisan alignments.\nAcross the Northern states, opposition to the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act gave rise to anti-Nebraska coalitions consisting of Democrats focused on this opposition along with Free Soilers and Whigs. In Michigan and Wisconsin, these two coalitions labeled themselves as the Republican Party, but similar groups in other states initially took on different names. Like their Free Soil predecessors, Republican leaders generally did not call for the abolition of slavery but instead sought to prevent the extension of slavery into the territories.\nAnother political coalition appeared in the form of the nativist and anti-Catholic Know Nothing movement, which eventually organized itself into the American Party. Both the Republican Party and the Know-Nothings portrayed themselves as the natural Whig heirs in the battle against Democratic executive tyranny, but the Republicans focused on the \"Slave Power\" and the Know-Nothings focused on the supposed danger of mass immigration and a Catholic conspiracy. While the Republican Party almost exclusively appealed to Northerners, the Know-Nothings gathered many adherents in both the North and South; some individuals joined both groups even while they remained part of the Whig Party or the Democratic Party.\nCongressional Democrats suffered huge losses in the mid-term elections of 1854, as voters supported a wide array of new parties opposed to the Democratic Party. Though several successful congressional candidates had campaigned only as Whigs, most congressional candidates who were unaffiliated with the Democratic Party had campaigned either independently of the Whig Party or in collusion with another party. As cooperation between Northern and Southern Whigs increasingly appeared impossible, leaders from both sections continued to abandon the party. Though he did not share the nativist views of the Know-Nothings, in 1855, Fillmore became a member of the Know-Nothing movement and encouraged his Whig followers to join as well. In September 1855, Seward led his faction of Whigs into the Republican Party, effectively marking the end of the Whig Party as an independent and significant political force. Thus, the 1856 presidential election became a three-sided contest between Democrats, Know-Nothings, and Republicans.\nThe Know Nothing National Convention nominated Fillmore for president, but disagreements over the party platform's stance on slavery caused many Northern Know-Nothings to abandon the party. Meanwhile, the 1856 Republican National Convention chose John C. Fr\u00e9mont as the party's presidential candidate. The defection of many Northern Know-Nothings, combined with the caning of Charles Sumner and other events that stoked sectional tensions, bolstered Republicans throughout the North. During his campaign, Fillmore minimized the issue of nativism, instead of attempting to use his campaign as a platform for unionism and a revival of the Whig Party.\nSeeking to rally support from Whigs who had yet to join another party, Fillmore and his allies organized the sparsely attended 1856 Whig National Convention, which nominated Fillmore for president. Ultimately, Democrat James Buchanan won the election with a majority of the electoral vote and 45 percent of the popular vote; Fr\u00e9mont won most of the remaining electoral votes and took 33 percent of the popular vote, while Fillmore won 22 percent of the popular vote and just eight electoral votes. Fillmore largely retained Taylor and Scott voters in the South, but most former Whigs in the North voted for Fr\u00e9mont rather than Fillmore.\nFillmore's American Party collapsed after the 1856 election, and many former Whigs who refused to join the Democratic Party or the Republican Party organized themselves into a loose coalition known as the Opposition Party. For the 1860 presidential election, Senator John J. Crittenden and other unionist conservatives formed the Constitutional Union Party. The party nominated a ticket consisting of John Bell, a long-time Whig senator, and Edward Everett, who had succeeded Daniel Webster as Fillmore's Secretary of State. With the nomination of two former Whigs, many regarded the Constitutional Union Party as a continuation of the Whig Party; one Southern newspaper called the new party the \"ghost of the old Whig Party\".\nThe party campaigned on preserving the union and took an official non-stance on slavery. The Constitutional Union ticket won a plurality of the vote in three states, but Bell finished in fourth place in the national popular vote behind Republican Abraham Lincoln, Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, and pro-Southern Democrat John C. Breckinridge. In the North, most former Whigs, including the vast majority of those who had voted for Fillmore in 1856, voted for Lincoln in 1860.\nIn the secession crisis that followed Lincoln's election, Southern Democrats generally led secession efforts, while Southern former Whigs generally opposed immediate secession. During the American Civil War, former Whigs formed the core of a \"proto-party\" in the Confederacy that was opposed to the Jefferson Davis administration. In the Reconstruction Era, many former Whigs tried to regroup in the South, calling themselves \"conservatives\" and hoping to reconnect with ex-Whigs in the North. Thus, in Virginia and elsewhere, moderate, nationalist, and economically innovative ex-Whigs used the party name \"Conservative\" to avoid identifying with the Democratic Party. The Conservative Party ultimately merged into the Democratic Party in the South, but ex-Whigs continued to promote modernization policies such as large-scale railroad construction and the founding of public schools.\nThe Whig Party vanished after the 1850s, but Whiggism, as a modernizing policy orientation, persisted for decades. It played a major role in shaping the modernizing policies of the state governments during Reconstruction. During the Lincoln Administration, ex-Whigs dominated the Republican Party and enacted much of their American System. Presidents Abraham Lincoln, Rutherford B. Hayes, Chester A. Arthur, and Benjamin Harrison were Whigs before switching to the Republican Party, from which they were elected to office. In the long run, the United States adopted Whiggish economic policies coupled with a Democratic strong presidency.\nIdeology and policies.\nWhig thought.\nHistorian Frank Towers writes that \"Democrats stood for the 'sovereignty of the people' as expressed in popular demonstrations, constitutional conventions, and majority rule as a general principle of governing, whereas Whigs advocated the rule of law, written and unchanging constitutions, and protections for minority interests against majority tyranny.\" Historian Daniel Walker Howe argues the Whigs were modernizers, \"who attached a great deal of importance to protecting property, maintaining social order, and preserving a distinct cultural heritage, three characteristic conservative concerns\". The Whigs themselves adopted the word \"conservative\", which they associated with \"'law and order', social caution, and moral restraint\". Political scientists John H. Aldrich and John D. Griffin note that the labeling of Whig ideology as conservative is \"somewhat [counterintuitive] for those who associate a small role for government rather than a pro-business orientation with conservatism\". Others, like historian Joseph W. Pearson, note that the Whigs were \"essentially middle class.\"\nHistorian John Ashworth writes that the two parties were polarized on essential questions of economic development, describing their competition as a \"clash of democracy with capitalism\". Whigs held that the government had a duty to promote economic prosperity for the people, especially during economic downturns. The Whigs further believed that individual regions of the country lacked the capital necessary for economic growth; thus, the federal government should subsidize large infrastructure projects and promote policies to facilitate the operations of banks and corporations.\nDemocrats, by contrast, argued that government action would inevitably favor the privileged few; thus, Democrats held that government should intervene in the economy as little as possible, especially at the federal level. Gregory Bowen notes that the two parties were polar opposite and highly ideological: \"At the heart of Democratic ideology was a militant egalitarianism [for white men], which contrasted sharply with the Whigs' support for equality of opportunity to produce a meritocratic society.\" Democrats glorified individualism while Whigs said it was a dangerous impulse that must be subordinated to the greater good of an organic society; they called for individuals to restrain themselves and focus on doing their duty.\nHowe characterizes the Whigs' anti-individualism as an \"Aristotlean\" desire to perfect human nature by subordinating animal impulses to reason and self-control. Historian John Burt expands on Howe's argument, noting that Whigs \"saw unmediated expressions of popular will in roughly the same way as they saw unmediated compulsions of appetite...[a]s a person driven by appetites is not free but the slave of the body, so a polity driven by popular will is not free but the slave of whatever urgencies drive King Numbers\". The Whigs opposed President Jackson because they saw him as a demagogue recklessly exploiting the will of the majority, and they supported a strong Congress as a means of restraining that will within the bounds of a stable, constitutional framework.\nDespite their differences, both parties sought to portray themselves as the true protectors of an American political tradition of equality and self-government. Though their Democratic rivals cast them as a continuation of the Federalists, the Whig Party's ideology was rooted in the agenda proposed by Clay and other nationalist Democratic-Republican Party leaders in the aftermath of the War of 1812. Many of these nationalist ideas were influenced by the economic program of Federalist leader Alexander Hamilton, but after the War of 1812, they were also supported by President James Madison, one of the founders of the Democratic-Republican Party.\nUnlike their Democratic rivals, many Whigs held an aversion to party organizations that was rooted in the traditional American wariness of political parties. Whig opposition to parties waned after the 1830s, but many leading Whigs, including Webster and John Quincy Adams, never fully gave up their independence in favor of a party label. The Whigs were also deeply committed to preventing executive tyranny, which they saw as an existential threat to republican self-government.\nWhig thought was typically rooted in evangelical Christianity, as expressed in the Second Great Awakening. Many Whigs would argue that the Bible was the best of Western civilization. Whigs linked moral progress and material progress\u2014each needed the other. They supported Protestant religiosity and missions while being fearful of Catholics. Whigs believed that a higher stage of morality would be achieved when America brought wealth and opportunity to everyone. Whigs would then promote voluntary associations like churches, temperance societies, and schools. Participating in these kinds of societies made the Whigs think that people would become more virtuous. The Whigs believed the rapid business expansion was good with a focus on voluntary associations, not the moral danger Democrats warned about. This optimism for the future (when compared with the Democrat's pessimism, seeing the rising middle class as an affront to the traditional working-class man) is what the historian Joseph W. Pearson notes as the starting difference between both the Whigs and the Democrat's economic views.\nWith this high degree of focus on voluntary associations, the Whigs would place a high degree of emphasis on public schooling. These public schools and Colleges would promote upward social mobility, discouraging immorality and dissipation. One Whig, Horace Mann, played a pivotal role in establishing a public school system in Massachusetts, and most states would emulate that.\nWhig policies.\nThe Whigs celebrated Clay's vision of the American System, which promoted rapid economic and industrial growth in the United States through support for a national bank, high tariffs, a distribution policy, and federal funding for infrastructure projects. After the Second Bank of the United States lost its federal charter in 1836, the Whigs favored the restoration of a national bank that could provide a uniform currency, ensure a consistent supply of credit, and attract private investors. Through high tariffs, Clay and other Whigs hoped to generate revenue and encourage the establishment of domestic manufacturing, thereby freeing the United States from dependence on foreign imports.\nHigh tariffs were also designed to prevent a negative balance of trade and stop the flow of currency and credit from the country. Whigs generally opposed Democratic efforts to reduce federal land prices, implement a \"preemption\" policy that would allow squatters the right to purchase land before it came to auction, and transfer ownership of western lands to the states. Instead, Whigs favored a \"distribution\" policy that would distribute revenues from federal land sales to the states; states could then invest that money in education, infrastructure projects, and other priorities. The Whigs supported federally financed internal improvements on the belief that only the federal government could construct the transportation system necessary for uniting the country commercially and culturally.\nAside from the Whig economic program, various other issues confronted the Whig Party. Temperance never became a purely partisan issue between Whigs and Democrats, but Whigs tended to be more favorable to state prohibition laws than were Democrats. Similarly, opinions on immigration did not break down strictly on party lines, but Whigs tended to have less favorable views towards immigration, partly because most recent immigrants aligned with the Democratic Party.\nIn the mid-1840s, a group of Whigs unsuccessfully pushed a bill that would have implemented new paperwork requirements for naturalization and monitored the movements of immigrants in the United States more closely. The unwillingness of Whig leaders to push for more far-reaching changes, such as an extension of the five-year naturalization period, encouraged some Whigs to join nativist third parties.\nWhigs were less in favor of expansionism than their Democratic counterparts, and Whigs tended to oppose the Mexican\u2013American War and the acquisition of new territories like Cuba. John Mack Faragher writes that Democrats sought to balance the rising power of industrialization in the United States by following \"Thomas Jefferson's vision of establishing agriculture in the new territories\", while Whigs were content to develop the country within its present borders and feared that expansion would cause a divisive debate over slavery in the territories.\nBase of support.\nPolitical scientist A. James Reichley writes that the Democrats and Whigs were \"political institutions of a kind that had never existed before in history\" because they commanded mass membership among voters and continued to function between elections. Both parties drew support from voters of various classes, occupations, religions, and ethnicities. Nonetheless, the Whig Party was based among middle-class conservatives. The central fault line between the parties concerned the emerging market economy, as Whigs embraced the economic and social changes caused by the market economy and Democrats rejected them.\nWhigs drew strength from the economic elites in both Northern cities and Southern plantation regions, but they also attracted support from other classes in most cities. In many states, local rivalries pushed groups into one party or the other, though areas that favored internal improvements tended to favor Whigs. Catholics overwhelmingly voted Democrat, while Protestants were split between the two parties. Recent Irish and German immigrants generally supported the Democrats, but recent immigrants from England, Scotland, and Wales tended to support the Whigs.\nAlthough the Whigs and the rival Democratic Party established party structures that were unprecedented in terms of mass membership and continued functionality, both parties were still essentially coalitions of state party organizations and lacked strong cohesion at the national level. The Whigs built on the strength of National Republicans and the Anti-Masonic Party to build up party organizations in Delaware, Maryland, and much of New England.\nAppealing to voters with a mix of economic and social policies, the Whigs established capable party organizations in Northeastern states like New York and Pennsylvania. Unlike the Federalists and the National Republicans, the Whigs were competitive in the South, building strong state parties in Tennessee and Kentucky, and competitive parties in Louisiana, Georgia, and Virginia. By emphasizing their moral conservatism, the Whigs were also able to expand into the Northwest and win elections in a state like Ohio and Indiana. The Whigs were generally not as competitive in Democratic strongholds like New Hampshire, Maine, Illinois, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas, Missouri, and Texas.\nParty leaders.\nHenry Clay of Kentucky was the party's congressional leader from the time of its formation in 1833 until his resignation from the Senate in 1842, and he remained an important Whig leader until his death in 1852. His frequent rival for leadership of the party was Daniel Webster, who represented Massachusetts in the Senate and served as Secretary of State under three Whig presidents. Clay and Webster each repeatedly sought the Whig presidential nomination, but, excepting Clay's nomination in 1844, the Whigs consistently nominated individuals who had served as generals, specifically William Henry Harrison, Zachary Taylor, and Winfield Scott. Harrison, Taylor, John Tyler, and Millard Fillmore all served as president, though Tyler was expelled from the Whig Party shortly after taking office in 1841. Benjamin Robbins Curtis was the lone Whig to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States, though later Supreme Court justices like John Marshall Harlan affiliated with the Whig Party early in their career before joining the Court as members of another party.\nDuring the time of the party's existence, numerous other Whig leaders emerged, including Truman Smith of Connecticut, who Holt describes as \"the Whigs' closest equivalent to a modern national party chairman\" for his efforts to raise money, deliver the Whig message, and build up the party nationwide. In New York, William Seward and Thurlow Weed established an influential organization and competed with Millard Fillmore's faction of the party. John M. Clayton of Delaware and John C. Crittenden of Kentucky were important border state Whigs who were influential in the Taylor administration.\nSupreme Court Justice John McLean of Ohio commanded a following in the party and was a perennial aspirant for the Whig presidential nomination, but he maintained his independence from the party and never ran for office as a Whig candidate. Thomas Corwin of Ohio emerged in the 1840s as a leading opponent of the Mexican\u2013American War, and he later served as Fillmore's Secretary of the Treasury. William Cabell Rives of Virginia joined the Whig Party over dissatisfaction with Van Buren's handling of the Independent Treasury, and he became a prominent conservative Whig.\nIn Georgia, future Confederate Vice President Alexander H. Stephens and Robert Toombs competed for influence with their intra-party rival, John M. Berrien. Future Republican President Abraham Lincoln served a single term as a Whig congressman representing Illinois.\nOne strength of the Whigs was a superb network of newspapers\u2014their leading editor was Horace Greeley of the powerful \"New-York Daily Tribune\". The \"Boston Atlas\", under the leadership of Richard Haughton and Richard Hildreth, also emerged as an important Whig paper. Influenced by the writings of Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo, Henry Charles Carey became the leading Whig economist in the 1830s. Other prominent Whig-aligned intellectuals and public figures include journalist John G. Palfrey of the \"North American Review\", novelist John P. Kennedy, and historian William H. Prescott.\nFactions.\nThe Whigs suffered greatly from factionalism throughout their existence and weak party loyalty, which stood in contrast to the strong party discipline that was the hallmark of a tight Democratic Party organization. Forged out of opposition to Jackson's perceived executive tyranny, the early Whig Party was divided between former National Republicans who favored federal measures to promote economic development and Southern states' rights advocates who wished to keep federal intervention in the economy to a minimum. By the 1840s, Southern Whigs like John M. Berrien of Georgia and John Botts of Virginia endorsed interventionist measures, but other Southern Whigs like William Cabell Rives of Virginia actively sought to shift the party away from economic nationalism.\nThe Whig Party faced persistent sectional divisions regarding slavery. Northern Whigs tended to be more anti-slavery than Northern Democrats, but during the 1830s, Southern Whigs tended to be more pro-slavery than their Democratic counterparts. By the late 1840s, Southern Democrats had become more insistent regarding the expansion of slavery and more open to the prospect of secession than their Whig counterparts. Northern Whigs divided into two major factions concerning slavery: the anti-slavery Conscience Whigs and the pro-South Cotton Whigs. While the \"Consciences\" were noted for their moral opposition to slavery\u2013many, like John Quincy Adams, brought over their crusading fervor from their Anti-Masonic days.\nThe other faction was tied to the cotton-based textile industry, which depended on Southern cotton. They de-emphasized the slavery issue. In Massachusetts, notable Consciences included Charles Sumner, Henry Wilson and Charles Francis Adams while the Cottons were led by such figures as Edward Everett, Robert C. Winthrop and Abbott Lawrence. During the mid-1850s, several Conscience leaders played an important role in the founding of the Republican Party.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nHistorian Allen C. Guelzo writes that \"no major political movement ... has suffered more sheer dismissal, more impatient contempt at the hands of political historians than the American Whigs\". Guelzo traces the start of this \"dismissal\" to the writings of Henry Adams, who dismissed the Whigs as bereft of ideas, and through to the writings of historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., who labeled the period during which the Whigs were active as the \"Age of Jackson\". The Whigs' historical reputation began to recover with the publication of \"The Political Culture of the American Whigs\" by historian Daniel Walker Howe in 1979. Rather than accepting the traditional understanding of the Whigs as Eastern elitists who sought to exploit the masses, Howe cast the Whigs as \"sober, industrious, thrifty people\" who sought to promote industrialization and national unity.\nIn today's American political discourse, historians and pundits often cite the Whig Party as an example of a political party that lost its followers and reason for being, as in the expression \"going the way of the Whigs\", a term referred to by Donald Critchlow in his book, \"The Conservative Ascendancy: How the GOP Right Made Political History\". Critchlow points out that the application of the term by Republicans in the Republican Party of 1974 may have been a misnomer\u2014the old Whig party enjoyed more political support before its demise than the Republican Party in the aftermath of Nixon's resignation.\nNamesakes.\nAfter the dissolution of the Whig Party, the term Whig remained part of the name of various newspapers, including the \"Quincy Herald-Whig\". Several ephemeral small parties in the United States, including the Florida Whig Party and the \"Modern Whig Party\", have adopted the Whig name. In Liberia, the True Whig Party was named in direct emulation of the American Whig Party. The True Whig Party was founded in 1869 and dominated politics in Liberia from 1878 until 1980.\nIn popular culture.\nTwo alternative history works depicting histories where the Confederacy won the American Civil War include a Whig Party having a major role in the postbellum world. In Ward Moore's \"Bring the Jubilee\", a revived Whig Party is one of the two main parties of the rump United States, being the right-wing party whose platform reflects an acceptance of the United States' humbled status following its defeat in the War of Southern Independence. Conversely, in Harry Turtledove's \"Southern Victory Series\" a Whig Party emerges as the dominant political party of an independent Confederacy, representing the interests of the plantocratic elite and dominating Confederate politics until the rise of the Freedom Party following the First Great War.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32080", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32080", "title": "Democratic-Republican Party", "text": "American political party (1792\u20131824)\nThe Democratic-Republican Party, known at the time as the Republican Party (also referred to by historians as the Jeffersonian Republican Party), was an American political party founded by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison in the early 1790s. It championed liberalism, republicanism, individual liberty, equal rights, separation of church and state, freedom of religion, anti-clericalism, emancipation of religious minorities, decentralization, free markets, free trade, and agrarianism. In foreign policy, it was hostile to Great Britain and in sympathy with the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars. The party became increasingly dominant after the 1800 elections as the opposing Federalist Party collapsed.\nIncreasing dominance over American politics led to increasing factional splits within the party. Old Republicans, led by John Taylor of Caroline and John Randolph of Roanoke, believed that the administrations of Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe\u2014and the Congresses led by Henry Clay\u2014had in some ways betrayed the republican \"Principles of '98\" by expanding the size and scope of the national government. The Republicans splintered during the 1824 presidential election. Those calling for a return to the older founding principles of the party were often referred to as \"Democratic Republicans\" (later Democrats) while those embracing the newer nationalist principles of \"The American System\" were often referred to as National Republicans (later Whigs).\nThe Republican Party originated in Congress to oppose the nationalist and economically interventionist policies of Alexander Hamilton, who served as Secretary of the Treasury under President George Washington. The Republicans and the opposing Federalist Party each became more cohesive during Washington's second term, partly as a result of the debate over the Jay Treaty. Though he was defeated by Federalist John Adams in the 1796 presidential election, Jefferson and his Republican allies came into power following the 1800 elections. As president, Jefferson presided over a reduction in the national debt and government spending, and completed the Louisiana Purchase with France.\nMadison succeeded Jefferson as president in 1809 and led the country during the largely inconclusive War of 1812 with Britain. After the war, Madison and his congressional allies established the Second Bank of the United States and implemented protective tariffs, marking a move away from the party's earlier emphasis on states' rights and a strict construction of the United States Constitution. The Federalists collapsed after 1815, beginning a period known as the Era of Good Feelings. Lacking an effective opposition, the Republicans split into rival groups after the 1824 presidential election: one faction supported President John Quincy Adams and became known as the National Republican Party which later merged into the Whig Party, while another faction, one that believed in Jeffersonian democracy, backed General Andrew Jackson and became the Democratic Party.\nRepublicans were deeply committed to the principles of republicanism, which they feared were threatened by the aristocratic tendencies of the Federalists. During the 1790s, the party strongly opposed Federalist programs, including the national bank. After the War of 1812, Madison and many other party leaders came to accept the need for a national bank and federally funded infrastructure projects. In foreign affairs, the party advocated western expansion and tended to favor France over Britain, though the party's pro-French stance faded after Napoleon took power. The Democratic-Republicans were strongest in the South and the western frontier, and weakest in New England.\nHistory.\nFounding, 1789\u20131796.\nIn the 1788\u201389 presidential election, the first such election following the ratification of the United States Constitution in 1788, George Washington won the votes of every member of the Electoral College. His unanimous victory in part reflected the fact that no formal political parties had formed at the national level in the United States prior to 1789, though the country had been broadly polarized between the Federalists, who supported ratification of the Constitution, and the Anti-Federalists, who opposed ratification. Washington selected Thomas Jefferson as Secretary of State and Alexander Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury, and he relied on James Madison as a key adviser and ally in Congress.\nHamilton implemented an expansive economic program, establishing the First Bank of the United States, and convincing Congress to assume the debts of state governments. Hamilton pursued his programs in the belief that they would foster a prosperous and stable country. His policies engendered an opposition, chiefly concentrated in the Southern United States, that objected to Hamilton's Anglophilia and accused him of unduly favoring well-connected wealthy Northern merchants and speculators. Madison emerged as the leader of the congressional opposition while Jefferson, who declined to publicly criticize Hamilton while both served in Washington's Cabinet, worked behind the scenes to stymie Hamilton's programs. Jefferson and Madison, leading an Anti-Administration group, established the \"National Gazette\", a newspaper which recast national politics not as a battle between Federalists and Anti-Federalists, but as a debate between aristocrats and republicans. In the 1792 election, Washington effectively ran unopposed for president, but Jefferson and Madison backed New York Governor George Clinton's unsuccessful attempt to unseat Vice President John Adams.\nPolitical leaders on both sides were reluctant to label their respective faction as a political party, but distinct and consistent voting blocs emerged in Congress by the end of 1793. Jefferson's followers became known as the Republicans (or sometimes as the Democratic-Republicans) and Hamilton's followers (the Pro-Administration group) became the Federalists. While economic policies were the original motivating factor in the growing partisan split, foreign policy became even more important as war broke out between Great Britain (favored by Federalists) and France, which Republicans favored until 1799. Partisan tensions escalated as a result of the Whiskey Rebellion and Washington's subsequent denunciation of the Democratic-Republican Societies, a type of new local political societies that favored democracy and generally supported the Jeffersonian position. Historians use the term \"Democratic-Republican\" to describe these new organizations, but that name was rarely used at the time. They usually called themselves \"Democratic\", \"Republican\", \"True Republican\", \"Constitutional\", \"United Freeman\", \"Patriotic\", \"Political\", \"Franklin\", or \"Madisonian\". The ratification of the Jay Treaty with Britain further inflamed partisan warfare, resulting in a hardening of the divisions between the Federalists and the Republicans.\nBy 1795\u201396, election campaigns\u2014federal, state and local\u2014were waged primarily along partisan lines between the two national parties, although local issues continued to affect elections, and party affiliations remained in flux. As Washington declined to seek a third term, the 1796 presidential election became the first contested president election. Having retired from Washington's Cabinet in 1793, Jefferson had left the leadership of the Democratic-Republicans in Madison's hands. Nonetheless, the Democratic-Republican congressional nominating caucus chose Jefferson as the party's presidential nominee, in the belief that he would be the party's strongest candidate; the caucus chose Senator Aaron Burr of New York as Jefferson's running mate. Meanwhile, an informal caucus of Federalist leaders nominated a ticket of John Adams and Thomas Pinckney. Though the candidates themselves largely stayed out of the fray, supporters of the candidates waged an active campaign; Federalists attacked Jefferson as a Francophile and atheist, while the Democratic-Republicans accused Adams of being an anglophile and a monarchist. Ultimately, Adams won the presidency by a narrow margin, garnering 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson, who became the vice president.\nAdams and the Revolution of 1800.\nShortly after Adams took office, he dispatched a group of envoys to seek peaceful relations with France, which had begun seizing American merchantmen trading with Britain after the ratification of the Jay Treaty. The failure of talks, and the French demand for bribes in what became known as the XYZ Affair, outraged the American public and led to the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war between France and the United States. The Federalist-controlled Congress passed measures to expand the American military and also pushed through the Alien and Sedition Acts. These acts restricted speech critical of the government while also implementing stricter naturalization requirements. Numerous journalists and other individuals aligned with the Democratic-Republicans were prosecuted under the Sedition Act, sparking a backlash against the Federalists. Meanwhile, Jefferson and Madison drafted the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, which held that state legislatures could determine the constitutionality of federal laws.\nIn the 1800 presidential election, the Democratic-Republicans once again nominated a ticket of Jefferson and Burr. Shortly after a Federalist caucus re-nominated President Adams on a ticket with Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Adams dismissed two Hamilton allies from his Cabinet, leading to an open break between the two key figures in the Federalist Party. Though the Federalist Party united against Jefferson's candidacy and waged an effective campaign in many states, the Democratic-Republicans won the election by winning most Southern electoral votes and carrying the crucial state of New York.\nA significant element in the party's success in New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore and other east-coast cities were United Irish exiles, and other Irish immigrants, whom the Federalists regarded with distinct suspicion. Among these was William Duane who in his newspaper, the \"Philadelphia Aurora\", exposed the details of the Ross Bill, by means of which the Federalist-controlled Congress sought to establish a closed-door Grand Committee with powers to disqualify College electors. Adams was to name Duane one of the three or four men most responsible for his eventual defeat.\nJefferson and Burr both finished with 73 electoral votes, more than Adams or Pinckney, necessitating a contingent election between Jefferson and Burr in the House of Representatives. Burr declined to take his name out of consideration, and the House deadlocked as most Democratic-Republican congressmen voted for Jefferson and most Federalists voted for Burr. Preferring Jefferson to Burr, Hamilton helped engineer Jefferson's election on the 36th ballot of the contingent election. Jefferson would later describe the 1800 election, which also saw Democratic-Republicans gain control of Congress, as the \"Revolution of 1800\", writing that it was \"as real of a revolution in the principles of our government as that of [1776] was in its form.\" In the final months of his presidency, Adams reached an agreement with France to end the Quasi-War and appointed several Federalist judges, including Chief Justice John Marshall.\nIdeology played a central role with a Jeffersonian \"left\" supporting the French Revolution, versus a Federalist \"right\" opposing it. According to historian Peter R. Henriques, \"Federalists tilted to the right; Republicans, to the left.\" He quotes a Federalist editor who summarized the Federalist rhetoric: You who are for French notions of government; for the tempestuous sea of anarchy and misrule; for arming the poor against the rich; for fraternizing with the foes of God and man; go to the left and support the leaders, or dupes of the anti-federal junto. But you that are sober, industrious, thriving, and happy, give your votes for those men who mean to preserve the union of the states, the purity and vigor of our excellent constitution, the sacred majesty of the laws, and the holy ordinances of religion.\nJefferson's presidency, 1801\u20131809.\nDespite the intensity of the 1800 election, the transition of power from the Federalists to the Democratic-Republicans was peaceful. In his inaugural address, Jefferson indicated that he would seek to reverse many Federalist policies, but he also emphasized reconciliation, noting that \"every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle\". He appointed a geographically balanced and ideologically moderate Cabinet that included Madison as Secretary of State and Albert Gallatin as Secretary of the Treasury; Federalists were excluded from the Cabinet, but Jefferson appointed some prominent Federalists and allowed many other Federalists to keep their positions. Gallatin persuaded Jefferson to retain the First Bank of the United States, a major part of the Hamiltonian program, but other Federalist policies were scrapped. Jefferson and his Democratic-Republican allies eliminated the whiskey excise and other taxes, shrank the army and the navy, repealed the Alien and Sedition Acts, and pardoned all ten individuals who had been prosecuted under the acts.\nWith the repeal of Federalist laws and programs, many Americans had little contact with the federal government in their daily lives, with the exception of the postal service. Partly as a result of these spending cuts, Jefferson lowered the national debt from $83 million to $57 million between 1801 and 1809. Though he was largely able to reverse Federalist policies, Federalists retained a bastion of power on the Supreme Court; Marshall Court rulings continued to reflect Federalist ideals until Chief Justice Marshall's death in the 1830s. In the Supreme Court case of \"Marbury v. Madison\", the Marshall Court established the power of judicial review, through which the judicial branch had the final word on the constitutionality of federal laws.\nBy the time Jefferson took office, Americans had settled as far west as the Mississippi River. Many in the United States, particularly those in the west, favored further territorial expansion, and especially hoped to annex the Spanish province of Louisiana. In early 1803, Jefferson dispatched James Monroe to France to join ambassador Robert Livingston on a diplomatic mission to purchase New Orleans. To the surprise of the American delegation, Napoleon offered to sell the entire territory of Louisiana for $15 million. After Secretary of State James Madison gave his assurances that the purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution, the Senate quickly ratified the treaty, and the House immediately authorized funding. The Louisiana Purchase nearly doubled the size of the United States, and Treasury Secretary Gallatin was forced to borrow from foreign banks to finance the payment to France. Though the Louisiana Purchase was widely popular, some Federalists criticized it; Congressman Fisher Ames argued that \"We are to spend money of which we have too little for land of which we already have too much.\"\nBy 1804, Vice President Burr had thoroughly alienated Jefferson, and the Democratic-Republican presidential nominating caucus chose George Clinton as Jefferson's running mate for the 1804 presidential election. That same year, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel after taking offense to a comment allegedly made by Hamilton; Hamilton died in the subsequent duel. Bolstered by a superior party organization, Jefferson won the 1804 election in a landslide over Federalist candidate Charles Cotesworth Pinckney. In 1807, as the Napoleonic Wars continued, the British government announced the Orders in Council, which called for a blockade on French-controlled ports. In response to subsequent British and French searches of American shipping, the Jefferson administration passed the Embargo Act of 1807, which cut off American trade with Europe. The embargo proved unpopular and difficult to enforce, especially in Federalist-leaning New England, and expired at the end of Jefferson's second term. Jefferson declined to seek a third term in the 1808 presidential election, but helped Madison triumph over George Clinton and James Monroe at the party's congressional nominating caucus. Madison won the general election in a landslide over Pinckney.\nMadison's presidency, 1809\u20131817.\nAs attacks on American shipping continued after Madison took office, both Madison and the broader American public moved towards war. Public resentment towards Britain led to the election of a new generation of Democratic-Republican leaders, including Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, who championed high tariffs, federally funded internal improvements and a jingoistic attitude towards Britain. On June 1, 1812, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war. The declaration was passed largely along sectional and party lines, with intense opposition coming from the Federalists and some other congressmen from the Northeast. For many who favored war, national honor was at stake; John Quincy Adams wrote that the only alternative to war was \"the abandonment of our right as an independent nation.\" George Clinton's nephew, DeWitt Clinton, challenged Madison in the 1812 presidential election. Though Clinton assembled a formidable coalition of Federalists and anti-Madison Democratic-Republicans, Madison won a close election.\nMadison initially hoped for a quick end to the War of 1812, but the war got off to a disastrous start as multiple American invasions of Canada were defeated. The United States had more military success in 1813, and American troops under William Henry Harrison defeated Tecumseh's confederacy in the Battle of the Thames in 1814, crushing Indian resistance to U.S. expansion. Britain shifted troops to North America in 1814 following Napoleon's abdication, and British forces captured and burnt Washington in August 1814. In early 1815, Madison learned that his negotiators in Europe had signed the Treaty of Ghent, ending the war without major concessions by either side. Though it had no effect on the treaty, Andrew Jackson's victory in the January 1815 Battle of New Orleans ended the war on a triumphant note. Napoleon's defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815 brought a final end to the Napoleonic Wars and European interference with American shipping. With Americans celebrating a successful \"second war of independence\", the Federalist Party slid towards national irrelevance. The subsequent period of virtually one-party rule by the Democratic-Republican Party is known as the \"Era of Good Feelings.\"\nIn his first term, Madison and his allies had largely hewed to Jefferson's domestic agenda of low taxes and a reduction of the national debt, and Congress allowed the national bank's charter to expire during Madison's first term. The challenges of the War of 1812 led many Democratic-Republicans to reconsider the role of the federal government. When the 14th Congress convened in December 1815, Madison proposed the re-establishment of the national bank, increased spending on the army and the navy, and a tariff designed to protect American goods from foreign competition. Madison's proposals were strongly criticized by strict constructionists like John Randolph, who argued that Madison's program \"out-Hamiltons Alexander Hamilton.\" Responding to Madison's proposals, the 14th Congress compiled one of the most productive legislative records up to that point in history, enacting the Tariff of 1816 and establishing the Second Bank of the United States. At the party's 1816 congressional nominating caucus, Secretary of State James Monroe defeated Secretary of War William H. Crawford in a 65-to-54 vote. The Federalists offered little opposition in the 1816 presidential election and Monroe won in a landslide election.\nMonroe and Era of Good Feelings, 1817\u20131825.\nMonroe believed that the existence of political parties was harmful to the United States, and he sought to usher in the end of the Federalist Party by avoiding divisive policies and welcoming ex-Federalists into the fold. Monroe favored infrastructure projects to promote economic development and, despite some constitutional concerns, signed bills providing federal funding for the National Road and other projects. Partly due to the mismanagement of national bank president William Jones, the country experienced a prolonged economic recession known as the Panic of 1819. The panic engendered a widespread resentment of the national bank and a distrust of paper money that would influence national politics long after the recession ended. Despite the ongoing economic troubles, the Federalists failed to field a serious challenger to Monroe in the 1820 presidential election, and Monroe won re-election essentially unopposed.\nDuring the proceedings over the admission of Missouri Territory as a state, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr. of New York \"tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings\" by proposing amendments providing for the eventual exclusion of slavery from Missouri. The amendments sparked the first major national slavery debate since the ratification of the Constitution, and instantly exposed the sectional polarization over the issue of slavery. Northern Democratic-Republicans formed a coalition across partisan lines with the remnants of the Federalist Party in support of the amendments, while Southern Democratic-Republicans were almost unanimously against such the restrictions. In February 1820, Congressman Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois proposed a compromise, in which Missouri would be admitted as a slave state, but slavery would be excluded in the remaining territories north of the parallel 36\u00b030\u2032 north. A bill based on Thomas's proposal became law in April 1820.\nBy 1824, the Federalist Party had largely collapsed as a national party, and the 1824 presidential election was waged by competing members of the Democratic-Republican Party. The party's congressional nominating caucus was largely ignored, and candidates were instead nominated by state legislatures. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, former Speaker of the House Henry Clay, Secretary of the Treasury William Crawford, and General Andrew Jackson emerged as the major candidates in the election. The regional strength of each candidate played an important role in the election; Adams was popular in New England, Clay and Jackson were strong in the West, and Jackson and Crawford competed for the South.\nAs no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote in the 1824 election, the House of Representatives held a contingent election to determine the president. Clay personally disliked Adams but nonetheless supported him in the contingent election over Crawford, who opposed Clay's nationalist policies, and Jackson, whom Clay viewed as a potential tyrant. With Clay's backing, Adams won the contingent election. After Clay accepted appointment as Secretary of State, Jackson's supporters claimed that Adams and Clay had reached a \"Corrupt Bargain\" in which Adams promised Clay the appointment in return for Clay's support in the contingent election. Jackson, who was deeply angered by the result of the contingent election, returned to Tennessee, where the state legislature quickly nominated him for president in the 1828 election.\nFinal years, 1825\u20131829.\nAdams shared Monroe's goal of ending partisan conflict, and his Cabinet included individuals of various ideological and regional backgrounds. In his 1825 annual message to Congress, Adams presented a comprehensive and ambitious agenda, calling for major investments in internal improvements as well as the creation of a national university, a naval academy, and a national astronomical observatory. His requests to Congress galvanized the opposition, spurring the creation of an anti-Adams congressional coalition consisting of supporters of Jackson, Crawford, and Vice President Calhoun. Following the 1826 elections, Calhoun and Martin Van Buren (who brought along many of Crawford's supporters) agreed to throw their support behind Jackson in the 1828 election. In the press, the two major political factions were referred to as \"Adams Men\" and \"Jackson Men\".\nThe Jacksonians formed an effective party apparatus that adopted many modern campaign techniques and emphasized Jackson's popularity and the supposed corruption of Adams and the federal government. Though Jackson did not articulate a detailed political platform in the same way that Adams did, his coalition was united in opposition to Adams's reliance on government planning and tended to favor the opening of Native American lands to white settlement. Ultimately, Jackson won 178 of the 261 electoral votes and just under 56 percent of the popular vote. Jackson won 50.3 percent of the popular vote in the free states and 72.6 percent of the vote in the slave states. The election marked the permanent end of the Era of Good Feelings and the start of the Second Party System. The dream of non-partisan politics, shared by Monroe, Adams, and many earlier leaders, was shattered, replaced with Van Buren's ideal of partisan battles between legitimated political parties.\nOrigins of party name.\nIn the 1790s, political parties were new in the United States and people were not accustomed to having formal names for them. There was no single official name for the Democratic-Republican Party, but party members generally called themselves Republicans and voted for what they called the \"Republican party\", \"republican ticket\" or \"republican interest\". Jefferson and Madison often used the terms \"republican\" and \"Republican party\" in their letters. As a general term (not a party name), the word republican had been in widespread usage from the 1770s to describe the type of government the break-away colonies wanted to form: a republic of three separate branches of government derived from some principles and structure from ancient republics; especially the emphasis on civic duty and the opposition to corruption, elitism, aristocracy and monarchy.\nThe term \"Democratic-Republican\" was used by contemporaries only occasionally, but is used by modern political scientists. Historians often refer to the \"Jeffersonian Republicans\". The term \"Democratic Party\" was first used pejoratively by Federalist opponents. \nIdeology.\nThe Democratic-Republican Party saw itself as a champion of republicanism and denounced the Federalists as supporters of monarchy and aristocracy.&lt;ref name=\"sharp/\"&gt;James Roger Sharp, \"American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis\" (1993).&lt;/ref&gt; Ralph Brown writes that the party was marked by a \"commitment to broad principles of personal liberty, social mobility, and westward expansion.\" Political scientist James A. Reichley writes that \"the issue that most sharply divided the Jeffersonians from the Federalists was not states rights, nor the national debt, nor the national Bank... but the question of social equality.\" In a world in which few believed in democracy or egalitarianism, Jefferson's belief in political equality stood out from many of the other leaders who held that the wealthy should lead society. His opponents, says Susan Dunn, warned that Jefferson's \"Republicans would turn America upside down, permitting the hoi polloi to govern the nation and unseating the wealthy social elite, long accustomed to wielding political power and governing the nation.\" Jefferson advocated a philosophy that historians call Jeffersonian democracy, which was marked by his belief in agrarianism and strict limits on the national government. Influenced by the Jeffersonian belief in equality, by 1824 all but three states had removed property-owning requirements for voting.\nThough open to some redistributive measures, Jefferson saw a strong centralized government as a threat to freedom. Thus, the Democratic-Republicans opposed Federalist efforts to build a strong, centralized state, and resisted the establishment of a national bank, the build-up of the army and the navy, and passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts. Jefferson was especially averse to a national debt, which he believed to be inherently dangerous and immoral. After the party took power in 1800, Jefferson became increasingly concerned about foreign intervention and more open to programs of economic development conducted by the federal government. In an effort to promote economic growth and the development of a diversified economy, Jefferson's Democratic-Republican successors would oversee the construction of numerous federally funded infrastructure projects and implement protective tariffs.\nWhile economic policies were the original catalyst to the partisan split between the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists, foreign policy was also a major factor that divided the parties. Most Americans supported the French Revolution prior to the Execution of Louis XVI in 1793, but Federalists began to fear the radical egalitarianism of the revolution as it became increasingly violent. Jefferson and other Democratic-Republicans defended the French Revolution until Napoleon ascended to power. Democratic-Republican foreign policy was marked by support for expansionism, as Jefferson championed the concept of an \"Empire of Liberty\" that centered on the acquisition and settlement of western territories. Under Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe, the United States completed the Louisiana Purchase, acquired Spanish Florida, and reached a treaty with Britain providing for shared sovereignty over Oregon Country. In 1823, the Monroe administration promulgated the Monroe Doctrine, which reiterated the traditional U.S. policy of neutrality with regard to European wars and conflicts, but declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master.\nSlavery.\nFrom the foundation of the party, slavery divided the Democratic-Republicans. Many Southern Democratic-Republicans, especially from the Deep South, defended the institution. Jefferson and many other Democratic-Republicans from Virginia held an ambivalent view on slavery; Jefferson believed it was an immoral institution, but he opposed the immediate emancipation of all slaves on social and economic grounds. Instead, he favored gradual phasing out of the institution. Meanwhile, Northern Democratic-Republicans often took stronger anti-slavery positions than their Federalist counterparts, supporting measures like the abolition of slavery in Washington. In 1807, with President Jefferson's support, Congress outlawed the international slave trade, doing so at the earliest possible date allowed by the Constitution.\nAfter the War of 1812, Southerners increasingly came to view slavery as a beneficial institution rather than an unfortunate economic necessity, further polarizing the party over the issue. Anti-slavery Northern Democratic-Republicans held that slavery was incompatible with the equality and individual rights promised by the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. They further held that slavery had been permitted under the Constitution only as a local and impermanent exception, and thus, slavery should not be allowed to spread outside of the original thirteen states. The anti-slavery positions developed by Northern Democratic-Republicans would influence later anti-slavery parties, including the Free Soil Party and the Republican Party. Some Democratic-Republicans from the border states, including Henry Clay, continued to adhere to the Jeffersonian view of slavery as a necessary evil; many of these leaders joined the American Colonization Society, which proposed the voluntary recolonization of Africa as part of a broader plan for the gradual emancipation of slaves.\nBase of support.\nMadison and Jefferson formed the Democratic-Republican Party from a combination of former Anti-Federalists and supporters of the Constitution who were dissatisfied with the Washington administration's policies. Nationwide, Democratic-Republicans were strongest in the South, and many of party's leaders were wealthy Southern slaveowners. The Democratic-Republicans also attracted middle class Northerners, such as artisans, farmers, and lower-level merchants, who were eager to challenge the power of the local elite. Every state had a distinct political geography that shaped party membership; in Pennsylvania, the Republicans were weakest around Philadelphia and strongest in Scots-Irish settlements in the west. The Federalists had broad support in New England, but in other places they relied on wealthy merchants and landowners. After 1800, the Federalists collapsed in the South and West, though the party remained competitive in New England and in some Mid-Atlantic states.\nFactions.\nHistorian Sean Wilentz writes that, after assuming power in 1801, the Democratic-Republicans began to factionalize into three main groups: moderates, radicals, and Old Republicans. The Old Republicans, led by John Randolph, were a loose group of influential Southern plantation owners who strongly favored states' rights and denounced any form of compromise with the Federalists. The radicals consisted of a wide array of individuals from different sections of the country who were characterized by their support for far-reaching political and economic reforms; prominent radicals include William Duane and Michael Leib, who jointly led a powerful political machine in Philadelphia. The moderate faction consisted of many former supporters of the ratification of the Constitution, including James Madison, who were more accepting of Federalist economic programs and sought conciliation with moderate Federalists.\nAfter 1810, a younger group of nationalist Democratic-Republicans, led by Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, rose to prominence. These nationalists favored federally funded internal improvements and high tariffs, positions that would form the basis for Clay's American System. In addition to its base among the leaders of Clay and Calhoun's generation, nationalist policies also proved attractive to many older Democratic-Republicans, including James Monroe. The Panic of 1819 sparked a backlash against nationalist policies, and many of those opposed to the nationalist policies rallied around William H. Crawford until he had a major stroke in 1823. After the 1824 election, most of Crawford's followers, including Martin Van Buren, gravitated to Andrew Jackson, forming a major part of the coalition that propelled Jackson to victory in the 1828 election.\nOrganizational strategy.\nThe Democratic-Republican Party invented campaign and organizational techniques that were later adopted by the Federalists and became standard American practice. It was especially effective in building a network of newspapers in major cities to broadcast its statements and editorialize its policies. Fisher Ames, a leading Federalist, used the term \"Jacobin\" to link members of Jefferson's party to the radicals of the French Revolution. He blamed the newspapers for electing Jefferson and wrote they were \"an overmatch for any Government... The Jacobins owe their triumph to the unceasing use of this engine; not so much to skill in use of it as by repetition\".\nAs one historian explained: \"It was the good fortune of the Republicans to have within their ranks a number of highly gifted political manipulators and propagandists. Some of them had the ability... to not only see and analyze the problem at hand but to present it in a succinct fashion; in short, to fabricate the apt phrase, to coin the compelling slogan and appeal to the electorate on any given issue in language it could understand\". Outstanding propagandists included editor William Duane (1760\u20131835) and party leaders Albert Gallatin, Thomas Cooper and Jefferson himself. Just as important was effective party organization of the sort that John J. Beckley pioneered. In 1796, he managed the Jefferson campaign in Pennsylvania, blanketing the state with agents who passed out 30,000 hand-written tickets, naming all 15 electors (printed tickets were not allowed). Beckley told one agent: \"In a few days a select republican friend from the City will call upon you with a parcel of tickets to be distributed in your County. Any assistance and advice you can furnish him with, as to suitable districts &amp; characters, will I am sure be rendered\". Beckley was the first American professional campaign manager and his techniques were quickly adopted in other states.\nThe emergence of the new organizational strategies can be seen in the politics of Connecticut around 1806, which have been well documented by Cunningham. The Federalists dominated Connecticut, so the Republicans had to work harder to win. In 1806, the state leadership sent town leaders instructions for the forthcoming elections. Every town manager was told by state leaders \"to appoint a district manager in each district or section of his town, obtaining from each an assurance that he will faithfully do his duty\". Then the town manager was instructed to compile lists and total the number of taxpayers and the number of eligible voters, find out how many favored the Republicans and how many the Federalists and to count the number of supporters of each party who were not eligible to vote but who might qualify (by age or taxes) at the next election. These highly detailed returns were to be sent to the county manager and in turn were compiled and sent to the state manager. Using these lists of potential voters, the managers were told to get all eligible people to town meetings and help the young men qualify to vote. The state manager was responsible for supplying party newspapers to each town for distribution by town and district managers. This highly coordinated \"get-out-the-vote\" drive would be familiar to future political campaigners, but was the first of its kind in world history.\nLegacy.\nThe Federalists collapsed after 1815, beginning a period known as the Era of Good Feelings. After the 1824 presidential election the Democratic-Republicans split into factions. The coalition of Jacksonians, Calhounites, and Crawfordites built by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren coalesced into the Democratic Party, which dominated presidential politics in the decades prior to the Civil War. Supporters of John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay would form the main opposition to Jackson as the National Republican Party, which in turn eventually formed part of the Whig Party, which was the second major party in the United States between the 1830s and the early 1850s. The diverse and changing nature of the Democratic-Republican Party allowed both major parties to claim that they stood for Jeffersonian principles. Historian Daniel Walker Howe writes that Democrats traced their heritage to the \"Old Republicanism of Macon and Crawford\", while the Whigs looked to \"the new Republican nationalism of Madison and Gallatin.\"\nThe Whig Party fell apart in the 1850s due to divisions over the expansion of slavery into new territories. The modern Republican Party was formed in 1854 to oppose the expansion of slavery, and many former Whig Party leaders joined the newly formed anti-slavery party. The Republican Party sought to combine Jefferson and Jackson's ideals of liberty and equality with Clay's program of using an active government to modernize the economy. The Democratic-Republican Party inspired the name of its two direct descedants or offshoots: the National Republican Party (Whigs) and the Democratic party, as well as the later newly created Republican Party.\nFear of a large debt is a major legacy of this party. Andrew Jackson believed the national debt was a \"national curse\" and he took special pride in paying off the entire national debt in 1835. Politicians ever since have used the issue of a high national debt to denounce the other party for profligacy and a threat to fiscal soundness and the nation's future.\nElectoral history.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCongressional representation.\nThe affiliation of many Congressmen in the earliest years is an assignment by later historians. The parties were slowly coalescing groups; at first there were many independents. Cunningham noted that only about a quarter of the House of Representatives up until 1794 voted with Madison as much as two-thirds of the time and another quarter against him two-thirds of the time, leaving almost half as fairly independent.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32081", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32081", "title": "United States President", "text": ""}
{"id": "32082", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32082", "title": "Ulvophyceae", "text": "Class of green algae\nThe Ulvophyceae or ulvophytes are a class of green algae, distinguished mainly on the basis of ultrastructural morphology, life cycle and molecular phylogenetic data. The sea lettuce, \"Ulva\", belongs here. Other well-known members include \"Caulerpa\", \"Codium\", \"Acetabularia\", \"Cladophora\", \"Trentepohlia\" and \"Monostroma\".\nThe Ulvophytes are diverse in their morphology and their habitat. Most are seaweeds such as those listed above. Others, such as \"Rhizoclonium\", \"Pithophora\" and some species of \"Cladophora\" live in fresh water and in some areas are considered weeds.\nMorphology.\nUlvophycean algae are diverse in morphology. The thalli are typically colonial (some are unicellular). A few taxa have flagella in their vegetative stage, such as \"Oltmannsiellopsis\". Common forms include filaments (both unbranched and branched), tubular and blade-like thalli (such as in \"Ulva\"), and siphonous thalli. Siphonous thalli are composed of a single giant cell (siphon) with thousands of nuclei and chloroplasts.\nThe life cycle of members of the Ulvophyceae are similarly diverse. Species often reproduce asexually by forming aplanospores, akinetes or zoospores; zoospores have two or four flagella. Asexual reproduction may also occur through fragmentation of the thallus, where the pieces of the thallus grow into a new organism. Sexual reproduction is isogamous or anisogamous, and may be haplontic or diplohaplontic (i.e., involving an alternation of generations). In several taxa, the zygote exists as a small, microscopic dormant stage (also interpreted as a unicellular sporophyte) and is called the \"Codiolum\" phase.\nUltrastructure.\nThe class Ulvophyceae was originally defined by K. R. Mattox and K. D. Stewart based on ultrastructural characters. These were: a counter-clockwise arrangement of the flagellar basal bodies, cytokinesis by furrowing, a closed persistent mitotic spindle, and the lack of a phycoplast. The cell wall composition and structure are highly variable, and in the flagellate life stages of some organisms, there is no cell wall altogether. The order Trentepohliales has a unique set of ultrastructural features (such as the presence of a phragmoplast), and was once considered to be its own separate class, the Trentepohliophyceae. Most of these ultrastructural characters are found in other lineages of algae, which has made defining Ulvophyceae difficult.\nEcology.\nThe Ulvophyceae are most diverse in marine habitats. A substantial number of species also live in brackish or freshwater habitats; in temperate regions they are typically most abundant during the spring and summer months. They may be found in still (e.g. lakes and ponds) or flowing waters (e.g. rivers and streams); they are typically attached to a substrate such as rocks, sediments, other aquatic algae, or occasionally animals like turtles or mollusc shells. Similarly, some species live in terrestrial habitats growing on soil, rocks, trees, plants, and other artificial substrates.\nUlvophycean algae are often beneficial to their habitats; for example, \"Cladophora\" has been described as an ecosystem engineer and provides a range of niches for other aquatic organisms. However, \"Cladophora\" and a few other taxa, such as \"Pithophora\" and \"Ulva\" often form nuisance blooms due to eutrophication.\nSome species of ulvophytes are endosymbiotic within other algae, such as \"Ulvella\" which grows within other filamentous algae. Within the terrestrial order Trentepohliales, some taxa form symbioses with lichens as their phycobionts. Marine lichens also host some Ulvophyceae as symbionts; the diversity of these symbiotic algae is currently under-studied.\nThe family Trentepohliaceae is unusual in that it contains a few parasitic genera. For example, \"Cephaleuros\" is an endophyte within the leaves of vascular plants. \"Cephaleuros\" can cause significant economic damage to crop plants.\nEvolution.\nThe origin and early diversification of the Ulvophyceae likely took place in the late Neoproterozoic, though may have taken place earlier, in the Mesoproterozoic. Although most contemporary ulvophytes are marine macroalgae (seaweeds), ancestral ulvophytes may have been freshwater, unicellular green algae. Molecular phylogenetic evidence suggests that macroscopic growth was achieved independently in the various major lineages of Ulvophyceae (Ulvales-Ulotrichales, Trentepohliales, Cladophorales, Bryopsidales and Dasycladales).\nThe fossil record of Ulvophyceae is generally sparse, as most algae do not biomineralize well. Nevertheless, some orders such as the Dasycladales and Bryopsidales have calcified thalli and a more extensive fossil record. The earliest known representative is the Cladophorales \"Proterocladus antiquus\" from the Mesoproterozoic-Neoproterozoic boundary in North China. However, its taxonomic placement is not certain.\nBecause Ulvophyceae lacks a consistent set of ultrastructural characteristics, its monophyly has been questioned. Molecular phylogenetic studies have found Ulvophyceae to be monophyletic, albeit without strong support. The internal relationships between the different clades is also unclear. Current hypothesis on relationships among the main clades of Ulvophyceae are shown below:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32084", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32084", "title": "U.S. Navy", "text": ""}
{"id": "32085", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32085", "title": "US Navy", "text": ""}
{"id": "32086", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32086", "title": "Federalist Party", "text": "American political party (1789\u2013c.1828)\nThe Federalist Party was a conservative and nationalist American political party and the first political party in the United States. It dominated the national government under Alexander Hamilton from 1789 to 1801. The party was defeated by the Democratic-Republican Party in 1800, and it became a minority party while keeping its stronghold in New England. It made a brief resurgence by opposing the War of 1812, then collapsed with its last presidential candidate in 1816. Remnants lasted for a few years afterwards.\nThe party appealed to businesses who favored banks, national over state government, and maintaining an army and navy. In world affairs, the party preferred Great Britain and strongly opposed involvement in the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. The party favored centralization, federalism, modernization, industrialization, and protectionism.\nThe Federalists called for a strong national government that promoted economic growth and fostered friendly relationships with Great Britain in opposition to Revolutionary France. The Federalist Party came into being between 1789 and 1790 as a national coalition of bankers and businessmen in support of Hamilton's fiscal policies. These supporters worked in every state to build an organized party committed to a fiscally sound and nationalistic government. The only Federalist president was John Adams. George Washington was broadly sympathetic to the Federalist program, but he remained officially non-partisan during his entire presidency. The Federalist Party controlled the national government until 1801, when it was overwhelmed by the Democratic-Republican opposition led by President Thomas Jefferson.\nFederalist policies called for a national bank, tariffs, and good relations with Great Britain as expressed in the Jay Treaty negotiated in 1794. Hamilton developed the concept of implied powers and successfully argued the adoption of that interpretation of the Constitution. The Democratic-Republicans led by Jefferson denounced most of the Federalist policies, especially the bank and implied powers, and vehemently attacked the Jay Treaty as a sell-out of American interests to Britain. The Jay Treaty passed and the Federalists won most of the major legislative battles in the 1790s. They held a strong base in the nation's cities and in New England. They factionalized when President Adams secured peace with France, to the anger of Hamilton's larger faction. The Jeffersonians won the presidential election of 1800, and the Federalists never returned to power. They recovered some strength through their intense opposition to the War of 1812, but they practically vanished during the Era of Good Feelings that followed the end of the war in 1815.\nThe Federalists left a lasting legacy in the form of a strong federal government. After losing executive power, they decisively shaped Supreme Court policy for another three decades through Chief Justice John Marshall.\nBackground.\nThe term \"Federalist\" was previously used to refer to a somewhat different coalition of nationalists led by Washington, which advocated replacing the weaker national government under the Articles of Confederation with a new Constitution in 1789. This early coalition included Hamilton and James Madison.\nThe Federalists of this time were rivaled by the Anti-Federalists, who opposed the ratification of the Constitution and objected to creating a stronger central government. The critiques of the Constitution raised by the Anti-Federalists influenced the creation of the Bill of Rights. Federalists responded to these objections by promising to add a bill of rights as amendments to the Constitution to satisfy these concerns, which aided in securing acceptance and ratification of the Constitution by the states. The new United States Congress, initially with a Federalist majority, submitted to the states a series of amendments to guarantee specific freedoms and rights; once ratified, these would become the first ten amendments to the Constitution.\nHistory.\nOrigins (1789\u20131792).\nUpon taking office in 1789, President Washington nominated his wartime chief of staff Alexander Hamilton to the new office of Secretary of the Treasury. Hamilton wanted a strong national government with financial credibility, and he proposed the ambitious Hamiltonian economic program that involved the assumption of the state debts incurred during the American Revolution. This created a national debt and the means to pay it off, and it set up a national bank along with tariffs, with James Madison playing major roles in the program. Parties were considered to be divisive and harmful to republicanism, and no similar parties existed anywhere in the world.\nBy 1789, Hamilton started building a nationwide coalition (a \"Pro-Administration\" faction), realizing the need for vocal political support in the states. He formed connections with like-minded nationalists and used his network of treasury agents to link together friends of the government, especially merchants and bankers, in the new nation's dozen major cities. His attempts to manage politics in the national capital to get his plans through Congress brought strong responses across the country. In the process, what began as a capital faction soon assumed status as a national faction and then as the new Federalist Party. The Federalist Party supported Hamilton's vision of a strong centralized government and agreed with his proposals for a national bank and heavy government subsidies. In foreign affairs, they supported neutrality in the war between France and Great Britain.\nHamilton proposed to fund the national and state debts, and Madison and John J. Beckley began organizing a party to oppose it. This \"Anti-Administration\" faction became what is now called the Democratic-Republican Party, led by Madison and Thomas Jefferson. This party attracted many Anti-Federalists who were wary of a centralized government.\nRise (1793\u20131796).\nBy the early 1790s, newspapers started calling Hamilton supporters \"Federalists\" and their opponents \"Republicans\", \"Jeffersonians\", or \"Democratic-Republicans\". Jefferson's supporters usually called themselves \"Republicans\" and their party the \"Republican Party\". The Federalist Party became popular with businessmen and New Englanders, and Republicans were mostly farmers who opposed a strong central government. Cities were usually Federalist strongholds, whereas frontier regions were heavily Republican. The Congregationalists of New England and the Episcopalians in the larger cities supported the Federalists, while other minority denominations tended toward the Republican camp. Urban Catholics were generally Federalists.\nThe state networks of both parties began to operate in 1794 or 1795, and patronage became a factor. The winner-takes-all election system opened a wide gap between winners, who got all the patronage, and losers who got none. Hamilton had many lucrative Treasury jobs to dispense\u2014there were 1,700 of them by 1801. Jefferson had one part-time job in the State Department, which he gave to journalist Philip Freneau to attack the Federalists. In New York, George Clinton won the election for governor and used the vast state patronage fund to help the Republican cause.\nWashington tried and failed to moderate the feud between his two top cabinet members. He was re-elected without opposition in 1792. The Democratic-Republicans nominated New York's Governor Clinton to replace Federalist John Adams as vice president, but Adams won. The balance of power in Congress was close, with some members still undecided between the parties. In early 1793, Jefferson secretly prepared resolutions introduced by Virginia Congressman William Branch Giles designed to repudiate Hamilton and weaken the Washington Administration. Hamilton defended his administration of the nation's complicated financial affairs, which none of his critics could decipher until the arrival in Congress of Republican Albert Gallatin in 1793.\nFederalists counterattacked by claiming that the Hamiltonian program had restored national prosperity, as shown in one 1792 anonymous newspaper essay: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To what physical, moral, or political energy shall this flourishing state of things be ascribed? There is but one answer to these inquiries: Public credit is restored and established. The general government, by uniting and calling into action the pecuniary resources of the states, has created a new capital stock of several millions of dollars, which, with that before existing, is directed into every branch of business, giving life and vigor to industry in its infinitely diversified operation. The enemies of the general government, the funding act and the National Bank may bellow tyranny, aristocracy, and speculators through the Union and repeat the clamorous din as long as they please; but the actual state of agriculture and commerce, the peace, the contentment and satisfaction of the great mass of people, give the lie to their assertions.\nJefferson wrote on 12 February 1798: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Two political Sects have arisen within the U. S. the one believing that the executive is the branch of our government which the most needs support; the other that like the analogous branch in the English Government, it is already too strong for the republican parts of the Constitution; and therefore in equivocal cases they incline to the legislative powers: the former of these are called federalists, sometimes aristocrats or monocrats, and sometimes tories, after the corresponding sect in the English Government of exactly the same definition: the latter are stiled republicans, whigs, jacobins, anarchists, disorganizers, etc. these terms are in familiar use with most persons.\nFrench Revolution.\nThe French Revolution and the subsequent war between royalist Britain and republican France decisively shaped American politics in 1793\u20131800 and threatened to entangle the country in wars that \"mortally threatened its very existence\". The French revolutionaries guillotined King Louis XVI in January 1793, and subsequently declared war on Britain. The French king had been decisive in helping the United States achieve independence, but now he was dead and many of the pro-American aristocrats in France were exiled or executed. Federalists warned that American republicans threatened to replicate the horrors of the French Revolution and successfully mobilized most conservatives and many clergymen. The Republicans, some of whom had been strong Francophiles, responded with support even through the Reign of Terror, when thousands were guillotined, though it was at this point that many began backing away from their pro-France leanings. Many of those executed had been friends of the United States, such as the Comte D'Estaing, whose fleet had fought alongside the Americans in the Revolution (Lafayette had already fled into exile, and Thomas Paine went to prison in France). The republicans denounced Hamilton, Adams and even Washington as friends of Britain, as secret monarchists, aristocrats and as enemies of the republican values. The level of rhetoric reached a fever pitch.\nIn 1793, Paris sent a new minister, Edmond-Charles Gen\u00eat (known as \"Citizen Gen\u00eat\"), who systematically mobilized pro-French sentiment and encouraged Americans to support France's war against Britain and Spain. Gen\u00eat funded local Democratic-Republican Societies that attacked Federalists. He hoped for a favorable new treaty and for repayment of the debts owed to France. Acting aggressively, Gen\u00eat outfitted privateers that sailed with American crews under a French flag and attacked British shipping. He tried to organize expeditions of Americans to invade Spanish Louisiana and Spanish Florida. When Secretary of State Jefferson told Gen\u00eat he was pushing American friendship past the limit, Gen\u00eat threatened to go over the government's head and rouse public opinion on behalf of France. Even Jefferson agreed this was blatant foreign interference in domestic politics. Gen\u00eat's extremism seriously embarrassed the Jeffersonians and cooled popular support for promoting the French Revolution and getting involved in its wars. Recalled to Paris for execution, Gen\u00eat kept his head and instead went to New York, where he became a citizen and married the daughter of Governor Clinton. Jefferson left office, ending the coalition cabinet and allowing the Federalists to dominate.\nThe Jay Treaty battle in 1794\u20131795 was the effort by Washington, Hamilton and John Jay to resolve numerous difficulties with Britain. Some of these issues dated to the Revolution, such as boundaries, debts owed in each direction and the continued presence of British forts in the Northwest Territory. In addition, the United States hoped to open markets in the British Caribbean and end disputes stemming from the naval war between Britain and France. Most of all the goal was to avert a war with Britain\u2014a war opposed by the Federalists, that some historians claim the Jeffersonians wanted.\nAs a neutral party, the United States argued it had the right to carry goods anywhere it wanted. The British nevertheless seized American ships carrying goods from the French West Indies. The Federalists favored Britain in the war and by far most of America's foreign trade was with Britain; hence a new treaty was called for. The British agreed to evacuate the western forts, open their West Indies ports to American ships, allow small vessels to trade with the French West Indies and set up a commission that would adjudicate American claims against Britain for seized ships and British claims against Americans for debts incurred before 1775. One possible alternative was war with Britain, a war that the United States was ill-prepared to fight.\nThe Republicans wanted to pressure Britain to the brink of war (and assumed that the United States could defeat a weak Britain). Therefore, they denounced the Jay Treaty as an insult to American prestige, a repudiation of the American-French alliance of 1777 and a severe shock to Southern planters who owed those old debts and who would now be never compensated for their escaped slaves who fled to British lines for their freedom. Republicans protested against the treaty and organized their supporters. The Federalists realized they had to mobilize their popular vote, so they mobilized their newspapers, held rallies, counted votes and especially relied on the prestige of President Washington. The contest over the Jay Treaty marked the first flowering of grassroots political activism in the United States, directed and coordinated by two national parties. Politics was no longer the domain of politicians as every voter was called on to participate. The new strategy of appealing directly to the public worked for the Federalists as public opinion shifted to support the Jay Treaty. The Federalists controlled the Senate and they ratified it by exactly the necessary two-thirds vote vote (20\u201310) in 1795. However, the Republicans did not give up and public opinion swung toward the Republicans after the Treaty fight and in the South the Federalists lost most of the support they had among planters.\nWhiskey Rebellion.\nThe excise tax of 1791 caused grumbling from the frontier including threats of tax resistance. Corn, the chief crop on the frontier, was too bulky to ship over the mountains to market unless it was first distilled into whiskey. This was profitable as the United States population consumed per capita relatively large quantities of liquor. After the excise tax, the backwoodsmen complained the tax fell on them rather than on the consumers. Cash poor, they were outraged that they had been singled out to pay off the \"financiers and speculators\" back in the East and to pay the salaries of the federal revenue officers who began to swarm the hills looking for illegal stills.\nInsurgents in western Pennsylvania shut the courts and hounded federal officials, but Jeffersonian leader Albert Gallatin mobilized the western moderates and thus forestalled a serious outbreak. Washington, seeing the need to assert federal supremacy, called out 13,000 state militia and marched toward Washington, Pennsylvania to suppress this Whiskey Rebellion. The rebellion evaporated in late 1794 as Washington approached, personally leading the army (only two sitting Presidents have directly led American military forces, Washington during the Whiskey Rebellion and Madison in an attempt to save the White House during the War of 1812). The rebels dispersed and there was no fighting. Federalists were relieved that the new government proved capable of overcoming rebellion while Republicans, with Gallatin their new hero, argued there never was a real rebellion and the whole episode was manipulated in order to accustom Americans to a standing army.\nAngry petitions flowed in from three dozen Democratic-Republican Societies created by Citizen Gen\u00eat. Washington attacked the societies as illegitimate, and many disbanded. Federalists now ridiculed Republicans as \"democrats\" (meaning in favor of mob rule) or \"Jacobins\" (a reference to the Reign of Terror in France).\nWashington refused to run for a third term, establishing a two-term precedent that was to stand until 1940 and eventually to be enshrined in the Constitution as the 22nd Amendment. He warned in his Farewell Address against involvement in European wars and lamented the rising north\u2013south sectionalism and party spirit in politics that threatened national unity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The party spirits serves always to distract the Public Councils, and enfeeble the Public Administration. It agitates the Community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels of party passions. Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and will of another.\nWashington never considered himself a member of any party, but broadly supported most Federalist policies.\nAdams's administration (1797\u20131800).\nHamilton distrusted Vice President Adams\u2014who felt the same way about Hamilton\u2014but was unable to block his claims to the succession. The election of 1796 was the first partisan affair in the nation's history and one of the more scurrilous in terms of newspaper attacks. Adams swept New England and Jefferson the South, with the middle states leaning to Adams. Adams was the winner by a margin of three electoral votes and Jefferson, as the runner-up, became vice president under the system set out in the Constitution prior to the ratification of the 12th Amendment.\nThe Federalists were strongest in New England, but also had strengths in the middle states. They elected Adams as president in 1796, when they controlled both houses of Congress, the presidency, eight state legislatures and ten governorships.\nForeign affairs continued to be the central concern of American politics, for the war raging in Europe threatened to drag in the United States. Historian Sarah Kreps in 2018 argues the Federalist faction led by President Adams during the 1798 Quasi-War could correspond to \"today's right-of-center party\".\nThe new president was a loner, who made decisions without consulting Hamilton or other \"High Federalists\". Benjamin Franklin once quipped that Adams was a man always honest, often brilliant and sometimes mad. Adams was popular among the Federalist rank and file, but had neglected to build state or local political bases of his own and neglected to take control of his own cabinet. As a result, his cabinet answered more to Hamilton than to himself. Hamilton was especially popular because he rebuilt the Army\u2014and had commissions to give out.\nAlien and Sedition Acts.\nAfter an American delegation was insulted in Paris in the XYZ affair (1797), public opinion ran strongly against the French. An undeclared \"Quasi-War\" with France from 1798 to 1800 saw each side attacking and capturing the other's shipping. It was called \"quasi\" because there was no declaration of war, but escalation was a serious threat. At the peak of their popularity, the Federalists took advantage by preparing for an invasion by the French Army. To silence Administration critics, the Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798. The Alien Act empowered the President to deport such aliens as he declared to be dangerous. The Sedition Act made it a crime to print false, scandalous and malicious criticisms of the federal government, but it conspicuously failed to criminalize criticism of Vice President Thomas Jefferson.\nSeveral Republican newspaper editors were convicted under the Act and fined or jailed and three Democratic-Republican newspapers were shut down. In response, Jefferson and Madison secretly wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions passed by the two states' legislatures that declared the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional and insisted the states had the power to nullify federal laws.\nUndaunted, the Federalists created a navy, with new frigates; and a large new army, with Washington in nominal command and Hamilton in actual command. To pay for it all, they raised taxes on land, houses and slaves, leading to serious unrest. In one part of Pennsylvania, the Fries' Rebellion broke out, with people refusing to pay the new taxes. John Fries was sentenced to death for treason, but received a pardon from Adams. In the elections of 1798, the Federalists did very well, but this issue started hurting the Federalists in 1799. Early in 1799, Adams decided to free himself from Hamilton's overbearing influence, stunning the country and throwing his party into disarray by announcing a new peace mission to France. The mission eventually succeeded, the \"Quasi-War\" ended and the new army was largely disbanded. Hamiltonians called Adams a failure while Adams fired Hamilton's supporters still in the cabinet.\nHamilton and Adams intensely disliked one another, and the Federalists split between supporters of Hamilton (\"High Federalists\") and supporters of Adams. Hamilton became embittered over his loss of political influence and wrote a scathing criticism of Adams' performance as president in an effort to throw Federalist support to Charles Cotesworth Pinckney. Inadvertently, this split the Federalists and helped give the victory to Jefferson.\nElection of 1800.\nAdams's peace moves proved popular with the Federalist rank and file and he seemed to stand a good chance of re-election in 1800. If the Three-Fifths Compromise had not been enacted, he most likely would have won reelection since many Federalist legislatures removed the right to select electors from their constituents in fear of a Democratic victory. Jefferson was again the opponent and Federalists pulled out all stops in warning that he was a dangerous revolutionary, hostile to religion, who would weaken the government, damage the economy and get into war with Britain. Many believed that if Jefferson won the election, it would be the end of the newly formed United States. The Republicans crusaded against the Alien and Sedition laws as well as the new taxes and proved highly effective in mobilizing popular discontent.\nThe election hinged on New York as its electors were selected by the legislature and given the balance of North and South, they would decide the presidential election. Aaron Burr brilliantly organized his forces in New York City in the spring elections for the state legislature. By a few hundred votes, he carried the city\u2014and thus the state legislature\u2014and guaranteed the election of a Republican president. As a reward, he was selected by the Republican caucus in Congress as their vice-presidential candidate. Alexander Hamilton, knowing the election was lost anyway, went public with a sharp attack on Adams that further divided and weakened the Federalists.\nMembers of the Republican Party planned to vote evenly for Jefferson and Burr because they did not want for it to seem as if their party was divided. The party took the meaning literally and Jefferson and Burr tied in the election with 73 electoral votes. This sent the election to the House of Representatives to break the tie. The Federalists had enough weight in the House to swing the election in either direction. Many would rather have seen Burr in the office over Jefferson, but Hamilton, who had a strong dislike of Burr, threw his political weight behind Jefferson. During the election, neither Jefferson nor Burr attempted to swing the election in the House of Representatives. Jefferson remained at Monticello to oversee the laying of bricks to a section of his home. Jefferson allowed for his political beliefs and other ideologies to filter out through letters to his contacts. Thanks to Hamilton's support, Jefferson would win the election and Burr would become his vice president.\nThe 1800 election marked the first time power had been transferred between opposing political parties, an act that occurred remarkably without bloodshed. Though there had been strong words and disagreements, contrary to the Federalists fears, there was no war and no ending of one-government system to let in a new one. His patronage policy was to let the Federalists disappear through attrition. Those Federalists such as John Quincy Adams (John Adams' own son) and Rufus King willing to work with him were rewarded with senior diplomatic posts, but there was no punishment of the opposition.\nCollapse (1801\u20131806).\nJefferson had a very successful first term, typified by the Louisiana Purchase, which was supported by Hamilton, but opposed by most Federalists at the time as unconstitutional. Some Federalist leaders (Essex Junto) began courting Jefferson's vice president and Hamilton's nemesis Aaron Burr in an attempt to swing New York into an independent confederation with the New England states, which along with New York were supposed to secede from the United States after Burr's election to Governor. However, Hamilton's influence cost Burr the governorship of New York, a key in the Essex Junto's plan, just as Hamilton's influence had cost Burr the presidency nearly four years before. Hamilton's thwarting of Aaron Burr's ambitions for the second time was too much for Burr to bear. Hamilton had known of the Essex Junto (whom Hamilton now regarded as apostate Federalists) and Burr's plans and opposed them vehemently. This opposition by Hamilton would lead to his fatal duel with Burr in July 1804.\nThe thoroughly disorganized Federalists hardly offered any opposition to Jefferson's reelection in 1804 and Federalists seemed doomed. Jefferson had taken away most of their patronage, including federal judgeships. The party now controlled only five state legislatures and seven governorships. After again losing the presidency in 1804, the party was now down to three legislatures and five governorships (four in New England). Their majorities in Congress were long gone, dropping in the Senate from 23 in 1796, and 21 in 1800 to only six in 1804. In New England and in some districts in the middle states, the Federalists clung to power, but the tendency from 1800 to 1812 was steady slippage almost everywhere as the Republicans perfected their organization and the Federalists tried to play catch-up. Some younger leaders tried to emulate the Democratic-Republican tactics, but their overall disdain of democracy along with the upper class bias of the party leadership eroded public support. In the South, the Federalists steadily lost ground everywhere.\nThe Federalists continued for several years to be a major political party in New England and the Northeast, but never regained control of the presidency or the Congress. With the death of Washington and Hamilton and the retirement of Adams, the Federalists were left without a strong leader as Chief Justice John Marshall stayed out of politics. However, a few younger leaders did appear, notably Daniel Webster. Federalist policies favored factories, banking and trade over agriculture and therefore became unpopular in the growing Western states. They were increasingly seen as aristocratic and unsympathetic to democracy. In the South, the party had lingering support in Maryland, but elsewhere was crippled by 1800 and faded away by 1808.\nMassachusetts and Connecticut remained the party strongholds. Historian Richard J. Purcell explains how well organized the party was in Connecticut:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was only necessary to perfect the working methods of the organized body of office-holders who made up the nucleus of the party. There were the state officers, the assistants, and a large majority of the Assembly. In every county there was a sheriff with his deputies. All of the state, county, and town judges were potential and generally active workers. Every town had several justices of the peace, school directors and, in Federalist towns, all the town officers who were ready to carry on the party's work. Every parish had a \"standing agent\", whose anathemas were said to convince at least ten voting deacons. Militia officers, state's attorneys, lawyers, professors and schoolteachers were in the van of this \"conscript army\". In all, about a thousand or eleven hundred dependent officer-holders were described as the inner ring which could always be depended upon for their own and enough more votes within their control to decide an election. This was the Federalist machine.\nAfter 1800, the major Federalist role came in the judiciary. Although Jefferson managed to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801 and thus dismissed many lower-level Federalist federal judges, the effort to impeach Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase in 1804 failed. Led by the last great Federalist, John Marshall as Chief Justice from 1801 to 1835, the Supreme Court carved out a unique and powerful role as the protector of the Constitution and promoter of nationalism. \nRevival (1807\u20131815).\nEmbargo Act.\nAs the wars in Europe intensified, the United States became increasingly involved. The Federalists restored some of their strength by leading the anti-war opposition to Jefferson and Madison between 1807 and 1814. President Jefferson imposed an embargo on Britain in 1807 as the Embargo Act of 1807 prevented all American ships from sailing to a foreign port. The idea was that the British were so dependent on American supplies that they would come to terms. For 15 months, the Embargo wrecked American export businesses, largely based in the Boston-New York region, causing a sharp depression in the Northeast. Evasion was common and Jefferson and Treasury Secretary Gallatin responded with tightened police controls more severe than anything the Federalists had ever proposed. Public opinion was highly negative and a surge of support breathed fresh life into the Federalist Party.\nAs Jefferson refrained from seeking a third term, the Republicans nominated Madison for the presidency in 1808. Meeting in the first-ever national convention, Federalists considered the option of nominating Jefferson's Vice President George Clinton (who represented a different Clintonian party faction from New York, had run for the Republican candidacy in 1804 and had not wanted to become vice president) as their own candidate, but balked at working with him and again chose Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, their 1804 candidate. Madison lost New England excluding Vermont, but swept the rest of the country and carried a Republican Congress. Madison dropped the Embargo, opened up trade again and offered a carrot and stick approach. If either France or Britain agreed to stop their violations of American neutrality, the United States would cut off trade with the other country. Tricked by French Emperor Napoleon into believing France had acceded to his demands, Madison turned his wrath on Britain and the War of 1812 began. Young Daniel Webster, running for Congress from New Hampshire in 1812, first gained overnight fame with his anti-war speeches.\nWar of 1812.\nThe nation was at war during the 1812 presidential election and war was the burning issue. Opposition to the war was strong in traditional Federalist strongholds in New England and New York, where the party made a comeback in the elections of 1812 and 1814. In their second national convention in 1812, the Federalists, now the peace party, nominated DeWitt Clinton, the dissident Republican Mayor of New York City and an articulate opponent of the war, who had followed his uncle George Clinton as the leader of the Clintonian faction after his death. Madison ran for reelection promising a relentless war against Britain and an honorable peace. Clinton, denouncing Madison's weak leadership and incompetent preparations for war, could count on New England and New York. To win, he needed the middle states and there the campaign was fought out. Those states were competitive and had the best-developed local parties and most elaborate campaign techniques, including nominating conventions and formal party platforms. The Tammany Society in New York City highly favored Madison and the Federalists finally adopted the club idea in 1808. Their Washington Benevolent Societies were semi-secret membership organizations which played a critical role in every northern state as they held meetings and rallies and mobilized Federalist votes. New Jersey went for Clinton, but Madison carried Pennsylvania and thus was reelected with 59% of the electoral votes. However, the Federalists gained 14 seats in Congress.\nThe War of 1812 went poorly for the Americans for two years. Even though Britain was concentrating its military efforts on its war with Napoleon, the United States still failed to make any headway on land and was effectively blockaded at sea by the Royal Navy. The British raided and burned Washington, D.C. in 1814 and sent a force to capture New Orleans.\nThe war was especially unpopular in New England. The New England economy was highly dependent on trade and the British blockade threatened to destroy it entirely. In 1814, the British Navy finally managed to enforce their blockade on the New England coast, so the Federalists of New England sent delegates to the Hartford Convention in December 1814.\nDuring the proceedings of the Hartford Convention, secession from the Union was discussed, though the resulting report listed a set of grievances against the Democratic-Republican federal government and proposed a set of Constitutional amendments to address these grievances. They demanded financial assistance from Washington to compensate for lost trade and proposed constitutional amendments requiring a two-thirds vote in Congress before an embargo could be imposed, new states admitted, or war declared. It also indicated that if these proposals were ignored, then another convention should be called and given \"such powers and instructions as the exigency of a crisis may require\". The Federalist Massachusetts Governor had already secretly sent word to England to broker a separate peace accord. Three Massachusetts \"ambassadors\" were sent to Washington to negotiate on the basis of this report.\nBy the time the Federalist \"ambassadors\" got to Washington, the war was over and news of Andrew Jackson's stunning victory in the Battle of New Orleans had raised American morale immensely. The \"ambassadors\" hastened back to Massachusetts, but not before they had done fatal damage to the Federalist Party. The Federalists were thereafter associated with the disloyalty and parochialism of the Hartford Convention and destroyed as a political force. Across the nation, Republicans used the great victory at New Orleans to ridicule the Federalists as cowards, defeatists and secessionists. Pamphlets, songs, newspaper editorials, speeches and entire plays on the Battle of New Orleans drove home the point.\nDecline (1816\u20131828).\nThe Federalists fielded their last presidential candidate, Rufus King in 1816. With the party's passing, partisan hatreds and newspaper feuds declined and the nation entered the \"Era of Good Feelings\". Federalism in states like Massachusetts gradually blended into the conservative wing of the Democratic-Republicans. In the 1824 presidential election, New Englanders from both parties supported Adams, a native of the region. However, a few old Federalist leaders, who never forgave Adams for abandoning them, formed a ticket of unpledged electors with radical Democratic-Republicans. This ticket was overwhelmingly defeated and likely would have voted for Crawford.\nFollowing 1824, no Federalist ran for governor of any state and most left for the National Republicans. After the dissolution of the final Federalist congressional caucus in 1825, the last traces of Federalist activity came in Delaware and Massachusetts local politics in the late 1820s. In other states there still technically existed Federalists (for example James Buchanan) but they were engaged in patronage with either Jackson or Adams. In Massachusetts, the Federalist Party ceased to function as a state organization in 1825, surviving only as a local Boston group for the next three years. In Delaware, the Federalist Party lasted until 1826 and controlled the Delaware House of Representatives. When Daniel Webster, representative of Boston, resigned in 1827 to run for U.S. Senator, a caucus of Federalists met in Boston to nominate his replacement. A young William Lloyd Garrison persuaded the caucus to choose the Federalist Harrison Gray Otis, who ultimately declined. The caucus then nominated the Anti-Jacksonian Benjamin Gorham, their original choice.\nIn the 1828 presidential election, the Federalists were used as a scapegoat in Boston. The Democratic Boston \"Statesman\" accused Adams of being a secret Hartford Federalist attempting to revive the \"reign of terror\" under his father. Adams responded by accusing the old Hartford Federalists of treason and attempting to dissolve the union to form their own confederation. The \"Jackson Republican\", an ally of the Statesman and founded by former Federalist Theodore Lyman II, implicated Webster among the old Federalists Adams intended to impugn, leading to a libel suit. As a protest against Adams, several \"Federal young men\" who had been supporting Adams nominated a Federalist ticket of presidential electors. This ticket, headed by Otis and William Prescott Jr. and including three other members of the Hartford Convention, garnered a pitiful 156 votes in Boston and none elsewhere in the state. As with the previous election, Adams swept the city and state.\nThat ticket, according to the best of knowledge of Samuel Eliot Morison, was \"the last ticket ever voted for that bore the name of the once powerful party of Washington and Hamilton\".\nIdeology and policies.\nFederalism.\nFisher Ames (1758\u20131808) of Massachusetts ranks as one of the more influential figures of his era. Ames led Federalist ranks in the House of Representatives. His acceptance of the Bill of Rights garnered support in Massachusetts for the new Constitution. His greatest fame came as an orator who defined the principles of the Federalist Party and the follies of the Republicans. Ames offered one of the first great speeches in American Congressional history when he spoke in favor of the Jay Treaty. Ames was part of Hamilton's faction and cautioned against the excesses of democracy unfettered by morals and reason: \"Popular reason does not always know how to act right, nor does it always act right when it knows\". He warned his countrymen of the dangers of flattering demagogues, who incite dis-union and lead their country into bondage: \"Our country is too big for union, too sordid for patriotism, too democratic for liberty. What is to become of it, He who made it best knows. Its vice will govern it, by practising upon its folly. This is ordained for democracies\".\nIntellectually, Federalists were profoundly devoted to liberty. As Samuel Eliot Morison explained, they believed that liberty is inseparable from union, that men are essentially unequal, that \"vox populi\" (\"voice of the people\") is seldom if ever \"vox Dei\" (\"the voice of God\") and that sinister outside influences are busy undermining American integrity. British historian Patrick Allitt concludes that Federalists promoted many positions that would form the baseline for later American conservatism, including the rule of law under the Constitution, republican government, peaceful change through elections, stable national finances, credible and active diplomacy and protection of wealth.\nIn terms of \"classical conservatism\", the Federalists had no truck with European-style aristocracy, monarchy, or established religion. Historian John P. Diggins says: \"Thanks to the framers, American conservatism began on a genuinely lofty plane. James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, John Marshall, John Jay, James Wilson, and, above all, John Adams aspired to create a republic in which the values so precious to conservatives might flourish: harmony, stability, virtue, reverence, veneration, loyalty, self-discipline, and moderation. This was classical conservatism in its most authentic expression\".\nFederalists led the successful battles to abolish the international slave trade in New York City and the battle to abolish slavery in the state of New York. The Federalists' approach to nationalism was coined \"open\" nationalism in that it creates space for minority groups to have a voice in government. Many Federalists also created space for women to have a significant political role, which was not evident on the Democratic-Republican side.\nThe Federalists were dominated by businessmen and merchants in the major cities who supported a strong national government. The party was closely linked to the modernizing, urbanizing, financial policies of Alexander Hamilton. These policies included the funding of the national debt and also assumption of state debts incurred during the Revolutionary War, the incorporation of a national Bank of the United States, the support of manufactures and industrial development, and the use of a tariff to fund the Treasury. While it has long been accepted that commercial groups are in support of the Federalists and agrarian groups are in support of the Democratic-Republicans, recent studies have shown that support for Federalists was also evident in agrarian groups. In foreign affairs, the Federalists opposed the French Revolution, engaged in the \"Quasi War\" (an undeclared naval war) with France in 1798\u201399, sought good relations with Britain and sought a strong army and navy. Ideologically, the controversy between Democratic-Republicans and Federalists stemmed from a difference of principle and style. In terms of style, the Federalists feared mob rule, thought an educated elite should represent the general populace in national governance and favored national power over state power. Democratic-Republicans distrusted Britain, bankers, merchants and did not want a powerful national government. The Federalists, notably Hamilton, were distrustful of \"the people\", the French and the Republicans. In the end, the nation synthesized the two positions, adopting representative democracy and a strong nation state. Just as importantly, American politics by the 1820s accepted the two-party system whereby rival parties stake their claims before the electorate and the winner takes control of majority in state legislatures and the Congress and gains governorships and the presidency.\nAs time went on, the Federalists lost appeal with the average voter and were generally not equal to the tasks of party organization; hence they grew steadily weaker as the political triumphs of the Democratic-Republican Party grew. For economic and philosophical reasons, the Federalists tended to be pro-British\u2014the United States engaged in more trade with Great Britain than with any other country\u2014and vociferously opposed Jefferson's Embargo Act of 1807 and the seemingly deliberate provocation of war with Britain by the Madison Administration. During \"Mr. Madison's War\", as they called it, the Federalists made a temporary comeback. However, they lost all their gains and more during the patriotic euphoria that followed the war. The membership was aging rapidly, but a few young men from New England did join the cause, most notably Daniel Webster.\nAfter 1816, the Federalists had no national power base apart from John Marshall's Supreme Court. They had some local support in New England, New York, eastern Pennsylvania, Maryland and Delaware. After the collapse of the Federalist Party in the course of the 1824 presidential election, most surviving Federalists (including Daniel Webster) joined former Democratic-Republicans like Henry Clay to form the National Republican Party, which was soon combined with other anti-Jackson groups to form the Whig Party in 1833. By then, nearly all remaining Federalists joined the Whigs. However, some former Federalists like James Buchanan, Louis McLane and Roger B. Taney became Jacksonian Democrats.\nThe \"Old Republicans\", led by John Randolph of Roanoke, refused to form a coalition with the Federalists and instead set up a separate opposition since Jefferson, Madison, Gallatin, Monroe, John C. Calhoun and Clay had in effect adopted Federalist principles of implied powers to purchase the Louisiana Territory and after the failures and lessons of the War of 1812 raised tariffs to protect factories, chartered the Second National Bank, promoted a strong army and navy and promoted internal improvements. All these measures were opposed to the strict construction of the Constitution, which was the formal basis of the Democratic-Republicans, but the drift of the party to support them could not be checked. It was aided by the Supreme Court, whose influence under John Marshall as a nationalizing factor now first became apparent. The whole change reconciled the Federalists to their absorption into the Democratic-Republican Party. Indeed, they claimed, with considerable show of justice, that the absorption was in the other direction: that the Democratic-Republicans had recanted and that the \"Washington-Monroe policy\", as they termed it after 1820, was all that Federalists had ever desired.\nThe name \"Federalist\" came increasingly to be used in political rhetoric as a term of abuse and was denied by the Whigs, who pointed out that their leader Henry Clay was the Democratic-Republican Party leader in Congress during the 1810s.\nThe Federalists had a weak base in the South, with their main base in the Northeast and especially New England, although there were some prominent southern Federalists like Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, who had been supported by Hamilton in the presidential election of 1800.\nReligion.\nIn New England, the Federalist Party was closely linked to the Congregational church. When the party collapsed, the church was disestablished. In 1800 and other elections, the Federalists targeted infidelity in any form. They repeatedly charged that Republican candidates were atheistic or anti-religious, especially Jefferson, Paine, and Franklin. Conversely, the Baptists, Methodists, and other dissenters favored the Republican cause. Jefferson told the Baptists of Connecticut that there should be a \"wall of separation\" between church and state, alluding to the writings of Rhode Island's Roger Williams.\nSlavery.\nWhile some Federalists advocated strategic support for the Haitian Revolution, the Federalist press strongly condemned Gabriel's Rebellion during the acrimonious presidential campaign of 1800 and claimed that \"Jefferson would liberate all Negroes if elected.\" Prominent southern Federalists, including John Marshall, Thomas Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, and Edward Rutledge, were slaveholders. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney successfully defended slavery at the Constitutional Convention and led the Federalist Party in the elections of 1804 and 1808. New York prior to 1799 and New Jersey prior to 1804 were slave states as well, and several leading northern Federalists from these states owned slaves, including John Jay and Philip Schuyler. Federalists supported the Fugitive Slave Act of 1793's nearly unanimous passage through Congress, and the Federalist-aligned administration of George Washington signed the bill into law.\nAfter 1800, as their political base contracted to New England, Federalists were increasingly opposed to slavery, both on principle and because the Three-fifths Compromise gave a political advantage to their opponents, who gained increased representation because of the weight given to disenfranchised enslaved people. Rufus King was a prominent opponent of slavery and became the final Federalist presidential candidate in 1816.\nRecent scholarship has laid increasing emphasis on later Federalist opposition to slavery \nDay states\nThe Federalist Party is currently undergoing a renaissance among historians of the early Republic. This development is based largely on their occasional criticism of slavery. As the Democratic Republicans' stock has fallen in response to rising concerns over their leader Thomas Jefferson's racial views and deep entanglement with slavery, the Federalists who denounced Jefferson, the Republicans, and democracy itself have begun to look much better in comparison. While it has long been known that certain Federalist leaders\u2014notably Alexander Hamilton and John Jay\u2014opposed slavery and that attacks on slaveholding Virginia nabobs were part of the Federalist rhetorical arsenal after 1800, recent historians have found new significance in these facts.\nHowever, Day argues that concerns about the political weight of the slaveholding states were more significant than moral opposition to slavery.\nCeremonies and civil religion.\nThe Federalists were conscious of the need to boost voter identification with their party. Elections remained of central importance, but the rest of the political calendar was filled with celebrations, parades, festivals, and visual sensationalism. The Federalists employed multiple festivities, exciting parades, and even quasi-religious pilgrimages and \"sacred\" days that became incorporated into the American civil religion. George Washington was always their hero and after his death he became viewed as a sort of demigod looking down from heaven to bestow his blessings on the party. At first, the Federalists focused on commemorating the ratification of the Constitution and organized parades to demonstrate widespread popular support for the new Federalist Party. The parade organizers incorporated secular versions of traditional religious themes and rituals, thereby fostering a highly visible celebration of the nation's new civil religion.\nThe Fourth of July became a semi-sacred day\u2014a status it has maintained for much of American history. Its celebration in Boston emphasized national over local patriotism and included orations, dinners, militia musters, parades, marching bands, floats and fireworks. By 1800, the Fourth of July was closely identified with the Federalist Party. Republicans were annoyed and staged their own celebrations on the same day\u2014with rival parades sometimes clashing with each other, which generated even more excitement and larger crowds. After the collapse of the Federalists starting in 1815, the Fourth of July became a nonpartisan holiday.\nBases of support.\nPress.\nThe spoils system helped finance Federalist printers until 1801 and Republican editors after that. Federalist Postmasters General, Timothy Pickering (1791\u201394) and Joseph Habersham (1795\u20131801) appointed and removed local postmasters to maximize party funding. Numerous printers were appointed as postmasters. They did not deliver the mail, but they did collect fees from mail users and obtained free delivery of their own newspapers and business mail.\nTo strengthen their coalitions and hammer away constantly at the opposition, both parties sponsored newspapers in the capital (Philadelphia) and other major cities. On the Republican side, Philip Freneau and Benjamin Franklin Bache blasted the administration with all the scurrility at their command. Bache in particular targeted Washington himself as the front man for monarchy who must be exposed. To Bache, Washington was a cowardly general and a money-hungry baron who saw the Revolution as a means to advance his fortune and fame; Adams was a failed diplomat who never forgave the French their love of Benjamin Franklin and who craved a crown for himself and his descendants; and Alexander Hamilton was the most inveterate monarchist of them all.\nThe Federalists, with twice as many newspapers at their command, slashed back with equal vituperation. John Fenno and \"Peter Porcupine\" (William Cobbett) were their nastiest penmen and Noah Webster their most learned. Hamilton subsidized the Federalist editors, wrote for their papers and in 1801 established his own paper, the \"New York Evening Post.\" Though his reputation waned considerably following his death, Joseph Dennie ran three of the most popular and influential newspapers of the period, \"The Farmer's Weekly Museum\", the \"Gazette of the United States\" and \"The Port Folio\".\nElectoral history.\nPresidential tickets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCongressional representation.\nThe affiliation of many Congressmen in the earliest years is an assignment by later historians. The parties were slowly coalescing groups; at first there were many independents. Cunningham noted that only about a quarter of the House of Representatives up until 1794 voted with Madison as much as two-thirds of the time and another quarter against him two-thirds of the time, leaving almost half as fairly independent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32087", "revid": "50964715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32087", "title": "United States Army", "text": "Land service branch of the U.S. military\nMilitary unit\nThe United States Army (U.S. Army) is the land service branch of the United States Armed Forces. It is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution. It operates under the authority, direction, and control of the United States secretary of defense. As a part of the United States Department of Defense, it is one of the six armed forces of the United States and one of the eight uniformed services of the United States. The Army is the most senior branch in order of precedence amongst the armed services. It has its roots in the Continental Army, formed on 14 June 1775 to fight against the British for independence during the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783). After the Revolutionary War, the Congress of the Confederation created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 to replace the disbanded Continental Army.\nThe U.S. Army is part of the Department of the Army, which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense. The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the secretary of the Army (SECARMY), and by a chief military officer, the chief of staff of the Army (CSA) who is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It is the largest military branch, and in the fiscal year 2022, the projected end strength for the Regular Army (USA) was 480,893 soldiers; the Army National Guard (ARNG) had 336,129 soldiers and the U.S. Army Reserve (USAR) had 188,703 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,005,725 soldiers. The Army's mission is \"to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of combatant commanders\". The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States of America.\u200c\nMission.\nThe United States Army serves as the primary land-based branch of the United States Department of Defense. https:// defines the purpose of the army as:\nIn 2018, the \"Army Strategy 2018\" articulated an eight-point addendum to the Army Vision for 2028. While the Army Mission remains constant, the Army Strategy builds upon the Army's Brigade Modernization by adding focus to corps and division-level echelons. The Army Futures Command oversees reforms geared toward conventional warfare. The Army's current reorganization plan is due to be completed by 2028.\nThe Army's five core competencies are prompt and sustained land combat, combined arms operations (to include combined arms maneuver and wide\u2013area security, armored and mechanized operations and airborne and air assault operations), special operations forces, to set and sustain the theater for the joint force and to integrate national, multinational, and joint power on land.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Second Continental Congress as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain, with George Washington appointed as its commander. The army was initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources, and military thinking helped shape the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, who taught Prussian Army tactics and organizational skills.\nThe Army fought numerous pitched battles, and sometimes used Fabian strategy and hit-and-run tactics in the South in 1780 and 1781; under Major General Nathanael Greene, it hit where the British were weakest to wear down their forces. Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton, but lost a series of battles in the New York and New Jersey campaign in 1776 and the Philadelphia campaign in 1777. With a decisive victory at Yorktown and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.\nAfter the war, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, except a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon considered necessary to field a trained standing army. The Regular Army was at first very small and after General St. Clair's defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, where more than 800 soldiers were killed, the Regular Army was reorganized as the Legion of the United States, established in 1791 and renamed the United States Army in 1796.\nIn 1798, during the Quasi-War with France, the U.S. Congress established a three-year \"Provisional Army\" of 10,000 men, consisting of twelve regiments of infantry and six troops of light dragoons. In March 1799, Congress created an \"Eventual Army\" of 30,000 men, including three regiments of cavalry. Both \"armies\" existed only on paper, but equipment for 3,000 men and horses was procured and stored.\n19th century.\nWar of 1812.\nThe War of 1812 was the second and last war between the United States and Great Britain. The war was split between a Northern, Southern, and naval campaign. While a large part of the war was fought between the United States and Great Britain, there were a variety of native tribes that fought on both sides of the conflict. The result of the war is the Treaty of Ghent and is generally considered to be inconclusive, and brought upon a period of peace between the United States and Great Britain that has lasted for over two centuries.\nSeminole Wars.\nThere was a long period of war between the United States and the Seminoles that lasted over 50 years. The usual strategies utilized against Native American tribes were to seize winter food supplies and to form alliances with enemies of a tribe. These were not viable options against the Seminoles, largely due to the fact of lack of climate variability in Florida and because of the long history of warring between the Seminole tribe and other tribes in the Florida region.\nMexican\u2013American War.\nThe U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican\u2013American War, which was a defining event for both countries. The U.S. victory resulted in Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, conceded a large portion of land to the United States which included the modern-day states of California, Nevada, New Mexico, Arizona, Texas, and parts of Colorado and Wyoming.\nAmerican Civil War.\nThe American Civil War was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most slave states, located in the southern U.S., formed the Confederate States, the Confederate States Army, led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the \"Union\" or \"the North\") formed the Union Army, consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except South Carolina.\nFor the first two years, Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states. The Confederates had the advantage of defending a large territory in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863, the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River. In the Vicksburg Campaign of 1862\u20131863, General Ulysses Grant seized the Mississippi River and cut off the Southwest. Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had General Robert E. Lee under siege in Richmond as General William T. Sherman captured Atlanta and marched through Georgia and the Carolinas. The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House. All other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.\nThe war remains the deadliest conflict in U.S. history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 men on both sides. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in the North and 18% in the South.\nLater 19th century.\nFollowing the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on the Indian reservations. They set up many forts, and engaged in the last of the American Indian Wars. U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the Reconstruction Era to protect freedmen.\nThe key battles of the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly new volunteers, the U.S. forces defeated Spain in land campaigns in Cuba and played the central role in the Philippine\u2013American War.\n20th century.\nStarting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft. In 1910, during the Mexican Revolution, the army was deployed to U.S. towns near the border to ensure the safety of lives and property. In 1916, Pancho Villa, a major rebel leader, attacked Columbus, New Mexico, prompting a U.S. intervention in Mexico until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.\nWorld Wars.\nThe United States joined World War I as an \"Associated Power\" in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and the other Allies. U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.\nIn 1939, estimates of the Army's strength ranged between 174,000 and 200,000 soldiers, smaller than that of Portugal's, which ranked it 17th or 19th in the world in size. General George C. Marshall became Army chief of staff in September 1939 and set about expanding and modernizing the Army in preparation for war.\nThe United States joined World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Some 11 million Americans were to serve in various Army operations. On the European front, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that landed in French North Africa and took Tunisia and then moved on to Sicily and later fought in Italy. In the June 1944 landings in northern France and in the subsequent and defeat of Nazi Germany, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In 1947, the number of soldiers in the US Army had decreased from eight million in 1945 to 684,000 soldiers and the total number of active divisions had dropped from 89 to 12. The leaders of the Army saw this demobilization as a success.\nIn the Pacific War, U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the United States Marine Corps in capturing the Pacific Islands from Japanese control. Following the Axis surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the United States Air Force in September 1947. In 1948, the army was desegregated by order 9981 of President Harry S. Truman.\nCold War.\n1945\u20131960.\nThe end of World War II set the stage for the East\u2013West confrontation known as the Cold War. With the outbreak of the Korean War, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, V and VII, were reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and U.S. strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.\nDuring the Cold War, U.S. troops and their allies fought communist forces in Korea and Vietnam. The Korean War began in June 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a UN Security Council meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea and later to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides and the Chinese People's Volunteer Army's entry into the war, the returned the peninsula to the status quo in July 1953.\n1960\u20131970.\nThe Vietnam War is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of drafted personnel, the unpopularity of the war with the U.S. public and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by U.S. political leaders. While U.S. forces had been stationed in South Vietnam since 1959, in intelligence and advising/training roles, they were not deployed in large numbers until 1965, after the Gulf of Tonkin Incident. U.S. forces effectively established and maintained control of the \"traditional\" battlefield, but they struggled to counter the guerrilla hit and run tactics of the communist Viet Cong and the People's Army of Vietnam (NVA).\nDuring the 1960s, the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. In 1967, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to eight divisions (one mechanized infantry, two armored, and five infantry), but increased the number of brigades from seven to 18 (one airborne, one armored, two mechanized infantry and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not sit well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. However, no reduction in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.\n1970\u20131990.\nThe Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General Creighton Abrams in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involved treating the three components of the army \u2013 the Regular Army, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve as a single force. General Abrams' intertwining of the three components of the army effectively made extended operations impossible without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and Army Reserve in a predominantly combat support role. The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training to specific performance standards driven by the reforms of General William E. DePuy, the first commander of United States Army Training and Doctrine Command. Following the Camp David Accords that was signed by Egypt, Israel that was brokered by president Jimmy Carter in 1978, as part of the agreement, both the United States and Egypt agreed that there would be a joint military training led by both countries that would usually take place every 2 years, that exercise is known as Exercise Bright Star.\nThe 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The Goldwater\u2013Nichols Act of 1986 created unified combatant commands bringing the army together with the other four military services under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983 (Operation Urgent Fury) and Panama in 1989 (Operation Just Cause).\nBy 1989, Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000. A number of incentives such as early retirement were used.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Iraq invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and U.S. land forces quickly deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia. In January 1991 Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to drive out Iraqi forces. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army. Some of the largest tank battles in history were fought during the Gulf war. The Battle of Medina Ridge, Battle of Norfolk and the Battle of 73 Easting were tank battles of historical significance.\nAfter Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for \"rebalancing\" after a review of the Total Force Policy, but in 2004, USAF Air War College scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an \"essential ingredient to the successful application of military force\".\n21st century.\nOn 11 September 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in the Pentagon in a terrorist attack when American Airlines Flight 77 commandeered by five Al-Qaeda hijackers slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the September 11 attacks. In response to the 11 September attacks and as part of the global war on terror, U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in October 2001, displacing the Taliban government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied invasion of Iraq in 2003; it served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations. In the following years, the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S. service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more. 23,813 insurgents were killed in Iraq between 2003 and 2011.\nUntil 2009, the army's chief modernization plan, its most ambitious since World War II, was the Future Combat Systems program. In 2009, many systems were canceled, and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization program. By 2017, the Brigade Modernization project was completed and its headquarters, the Brigade Modernization Command, was renamed the Joint Modernization Command, or JMC. In response to Budget sequestration in 2013, Army plans were to shrink to 1940 levels, although actual Active-Army end-strengths were projected to fall to some 450,000 troops by the end of FY2017. From 2016 to 2017, the Army retired hundreds of OH-58 Kiowa Warrior observation helicopters, while retaining its Apache gunships. The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32\u00a0billion projected in 2012 for FY15 to $21\u00a0billion for FY15 expected in 2014.\nOrganization.\nPlanning.\nBy 2017, a task force was formed to address Army modernization, which triggered shifts of units: CCDC, and ARCIC, from within Army Materiel Command (AMC), and Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), respectively, to a new Army Command (ACOM) in 2018. AFC's mission is modernization reform: to design hardware, as well as to work within the acquisition process which defines materiel for AMC. TRADOC's mission is to define the architecture and organization of the Army, and to train and supply soldiers to FORSCOM. AFC's cross-functional teams (CFTs) are Futures Command's vehicle for sustainable reform of the acquisition process for the future. In order to support the Army's modernization priorities, its FY2020 budget allocated $30\u00a0billion for the top six modernization priorities over the next five years. The $30\u00a0billion came from $8\u00a0billion in cost avoidance and $22\u00a0billion in terminations.\nArmy Components.\nThe task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775. In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army.\nBy the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the \"National Army\" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers. It was demobilized at the end of World War I and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the state militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the \"career\" soldiers were known as the \"Regular Army\" with the \"Enlisted Reserve Corps\" and \"Officer Reserve Corps\" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.\nIn 1941, the \"Army of the United States\" was founded to fight World War II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard, and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the United States Army Reserve. The Army of the United States was re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized upon the suspension of the draft.\nCurrently, the Army is divided into the Regular Army, the Army Reserve, and the Army National Guard. Some states further maintain state defense forces, as a type of reserve to the National Guard, while all states maintain regulations for state militias.\nThe U.S. Army is also divided into several branches and functional areas. Branches include officers, warrant officers, and enlisted Soldiers while functional areas consist of officers who are reclassified from their former branch into a functional area. However, officers continue to wear the branch insignia of their former branch in most cases, as functional areas do not generally have discrete insignia. Some branches, such as Special Forces, operate similarly to functional areas in that individuals may not join their ranks until having served in another Army branch. Careers in the Army can extend into cross-functional areas for officers, warrant officers, enlisted, and civilian personnel.\nBefore 1933, the Army National Guard members were considered state militia until they were mobilized into the U.S. Army, typically at the onset of war. Since the 1933 amendment to the National Defense Act of 1916, all Army National Guard soldiers have held dual status. They serve as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and as reserve members of the U.S. Army under the authority of the president, in the Army National Guard of the United States.\nSince the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the Gulf War, peacekeeping in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nArmy commands and army service component commands.\n Headquarters, United States Department of the Army (HQDA):\nStructure.\nSee Structure of the United States Army for a detailed treatment of the history, components, administrative and operational structure and the branches and functional areas of the Army.\nThe U.S. Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month \u2013 known as battle assemblies or unit training assemblies (UTAs) \u2013 and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under Title 10 of the United States Code, while the National Guard is organized under Title 32. While the Army National Guard is organized, trained, and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors. However, the District of Columbia National Guard reports to the U.S. president, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.\nThe U.S. Army is led by a civilian secretary of the Army, who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction, and control of the secretary of defense. The chief of staff of the Army, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the president of the United States, the secretary of defense and the National Security Council on operational military matters, under the guidance of the chairman and vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In 1986, the Goldwater\u2013Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the president to the secretary of defense directly to the unified combatant commanders, who have control of all units in their geographic or functional area of responsibility, thus the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the secretary of defense.\nIn 2013, the army shifted to six geographical commands that align with the six geographical unified combatant commands (CCMD):\nThe army also transformed its base unit from divisions to brigades. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of brigade combat teams are:\nIn addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include aviation (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, fires (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery) and expeditionary military intelligence brigades. Combat service support brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.\n\"To track the effects of the 2018 budget cuts, see Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and brigades\"\nCombat maneuver organizations.\nThe U.S. Army's conventional combat capability currently consists of 11 active divisions and 1 non-deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division) as well as several independent maneuver units.\nFrom 2013 through 2017, the Army sustained organizational and end-strength reductions after several years of growth. In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active brigade combat teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active-duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army Chief of Staff Raymond Odierno projected that the Army was to shrink to \"450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve\" by 2018. However, this plan was scrapped by the incoming Trump administration, with subsequent plans to expand the Army by 16,000 soldiers to a total of 476,000 by October 2017. The National Guard and the Army Reserve will see a smaller expansion.\nThe Army's maneuver organization was most recently altered by the reorganization of United States Army Alaska into the 11th Airborne Division, transferring the 1st and 4th Brigade Combat Teams of the 25th Infantry Division under a separate operational headquarters to reflect the brigades' distinct, Arctic-oriented mission. As part of the reorganization, the 1\u201311 (formerly 1\u201325) Stryker Brigade Combat Team will reorganize as an Infantry Brigade Combat Team. Following this transition, the active component BCTs will number 11 Armored brigades, 6 Stryker brigades, and 14 Infantry brigades.\nWithin the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve, there are a further eight divisions, 27 brigade combat teams, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer, and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.\n United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM)\n\"For a description of U.S. Army tactical organizational structure, see: a U.S. context and also a global context.\"\nSpecial operations forces.\n United States Army Special Operations Command (Airborne) (USASOC):\nMedical Department.\nThe United States Army Medical Department (AMEDD), formerly the Army Medical Service (AMS), is the primary healthcare organization of the United States Army and is led by the Surgeon General of the United States Army (TSG), a three-star lieutenant general, who (by policy) also serves as the Commanding General, United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM). TSG is assisted by a Deputy Surgeon General and a full staff, the Office of the Surgeon General (OTSG). The incumbent Surgeon General is Lieutenant General Mary K. Izaguirre (since 25 January 2024).\nAMEDD encompasses the Army's six non-combat, medical-focused specialty branches (or \"Corps\"), these branches are: the Medical Corps, Nurse Corps, Dental Corps, Veterinary Corps, Medical Specialist Corps. Each of these branches is headed by a Corps Chief that reports directly to the Surgeon General.\nPersonnel.\nThe Army's Talent Management Task Force (TMTF) has deployed IPPS-A, the Integrated Personnel and Pay System - Army, an app which serves the National Guard, and on 17 January 2023 the Army Reserve and Active Army. Soldiers were reminded to update their information using the legacy systems to keep their payroll and personnel information current by December 2021. IPPS-A is the Human Resources system for the Army, is available for download for Android, or the Apple store. It will be used for future promotions and other personnel decisions. Among the changes are:\nBelow are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of General of the Army, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.\nOfficers.\nThere are several paths to becoming a commissioned officer including the United States Military Academy, Reserve Officers' Training Corps, Officer Candidate School, and direct commissioning. Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers and chaplains are commissioned directly into the Army.\nMost army commissioned officers (those who are generalists) are promoted based on an \"up or out\" system. A more flexible talent management process is underway. The Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980 establishes rules for the timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.\nArmy regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as \"General (last name)\" regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as \"Colonel (last name)\" and first and second lieutenants as \"Lieutenant (last name)\".\nWarrant officers.\nWarrant officers are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the secretary of the Army, but receive their commission upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).\nBy regulation, warrant officers are addressed as \"Mr. (last name)\" or \"Ms. (last name)\" by senior officers and as \"sir\" or \"ma'am\" by all enlisted personnel. However, many personnel address warrant officers as \"Chief (last name)\" within their units regardless of rank.\nEnlisted personnel.\nSergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for non-commissioned officers. This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists who have the same pay grade but do not exercise leadership responsibilities. Beginning in 2021, all corporals will be required to conduct structured self-development for the NCO ranks, completing the basic leader course (BLC), or else be laterally assigned as specialists. Specialists who have completed BLC and who have been recommended for promotion will be permitted to wear corporal rank before their recommended promotion as NCOs.\nPrivates and privates first class (E3) are addressed as \"Private (last name)\", specialists as \"Specialist (last name)\", corporals as \"Corporal (last name)\" and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class and master sergeants all as \"Sergeant (last name)\". First sergeants are addressed as \"First Sergeant (last name)\" and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as \"Sergeant Major (last name)\".\nTraining.\nTraining in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories \u2013 individual and collective. Because of COVID-19 precautions, the first two weeks of basic training \u2014 not including processing and out-processing \u2013 incorporate social distancing and indoor desk-oriented training. Once the recruits have tested negative for COVID-19 for two weeks, the remaining 8\u00a0weeks follow the traditional activities for most recruits, followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS). Some individual's MOSs range anywhere from 14 to 20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS. The length of time spent in AIT depends on the soldier's MOS. Certain highly technical MOS training requires many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the army's needs, Basic Combat Training for combat arms soldiers is conducted at several locations. Still, two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the Infantry School, both at Fort Moore, Georgia. Sergeant Major of the Army Dailey notes that an infantrymen's pilot program for One Station Unit Training (OSUT) extends 8 weeks beyond Basic Training and AIT, to 22 weeks. The pilot, designed to boost infantry readiness ended in December 2018. The new Infantry OSUT covered the M240 machine gun as well as the M249 squad automatic weapon. The redesigned Infantry OSUT started in 2019. Depending on the result of the 2018 pilot, OSUTs could also extend training in other combat arms beyond the infantry. One Station Unit Training will be extended to 22 weeks for Armor by Fiscal Year 2021. Additional OSUTs are expanding to Cavalry, Engineer, and Military Police (MP) in the succeeding Fiscal Years.\nA new training assignment for junior officers was instituted, that they serve as platoon leaders for Basic Combat Training (BCT) platoons. These lieutenants will assume many of the administrative, logistical, and day-to-day tasks formerly performed by the drill sergeants of those platoons and are expected to \"lead, train, and assist with maintaining and enhancing the morale, welfare and readiness\" of the drill sergeants and their BCT platoons. These lieutenants are also expected to stem any inappropriate behaviors they witness in their platoons, to free up the drill sergeants for training.\nThe United States Army Combat Fitness Test (ACFT) was introduced in 2018 to 60 battalions spread throughout the Army. The test and scoring system is the same for all soldiers, regardless of gender. It takes an hour to complete, including rest periods. The ACFT supersedes the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT), as being more relevant to survival in combat. Six events were determined to better predict which muscle groups of the body were adequately conditioned for combat actions: three deadlifts, a standing power throw of a ten-pound medicine ball, hand-release pushups (which replace the traditional pushup), a sprint/drag/carry 250 yard event, three pull-ups with leg tucks (or a plank test in lieu of the leg tuck), a mandatory rest period, and a two-mile run. As of 1 October 2020 all soldiers from all three components (Regular Army, Reserve, and National Guard) are subject to this test. The ACFT now tests all soldiers in basic training as of October 2020[ [update]]. The ACFT became the official test of record on 1 October 2020; before that day, every Army unit was required to complete a diagnostic ACFT (All Soldiers with valid APFT scores can use them until March 2022. The Holistic Health and Fitness (H2F) System is one way that soldiers can prepare.). The ACFT movements directly translate to movements on the battlefield. Following their basic and advanced training at the individual level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an \"additional skill identifier\" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide-ranging MOS and focus it on a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, training includes pre-commissioning training, known as Basic Officer Leader Course A, either at USMA or via ROTC, or by completing OCS. After commissioning, officers undergo branch-specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course B, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according to their future assignments. Officers will continue to attend standardized training at different stages of their careers.\nCollective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Johnson, Louisiana and the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in Hohenfels and Grafenw\u00f6hr, Germany. ReARMM is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2020 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment at the unit level and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental U.S. (CONUS) replacement center (CRC) at Fort Bliss, in New Mexico and Texas before their individual deployment.\nChief of Staff Milley notes that the Army is suboptimized for training in cold-weather regions, jungles, mountains, or urban areas. In contrast, the Army does well when training for deserts or rolling terrain. Post 9/11, Army unit-level training was for counter-insurgency (COIN); by 2014\u20132017, training had shifted to decisive action training.\nFuture Soldier Prep Course.\nThe United States Army has faced recruiting challenges since the COVID-19 pandemic. The Army has implemented the Future Soldier Prep Course (FSPC) to address these issues. This program is designed to assist potential recruits who may initially need to meet the Army's physical fitness or academic standards.\nIn the fiscal year ending 30 September 2023, approximately 13,000 of the 55,000 recruits, or 24%, participated in the FSPC. This indicates a significant reliance on the program to fill recruitment quotas.\nThe FSPC offers both physical fitness and academic training. However, most participants enroll in the academic component, which focuses on subjects like basic math, English, and other essential skills.\nEquipment.\nThe chief of staff of the Army has identified six modernization priorities, these being (in order): artillery, ground vehicles, aircraft, network, air/missile defense, and soldier lethality.\nWeapons.\nIndividual weapons.\nThe United States Army employs various weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapon type used by the army is the M4 carbine, a compact variant of the M16 rifle, which is being replaced gradually by the M7 rifle among close combat units. The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the M17 pistol through the Modular Handgun System program. Soldiers are also equipped with various hand grenades, such as the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade.\nMany units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the squad level. Indirect fire is provided by the M320 grenade launcher. The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters combat. The M14EBR is used by designated marksmen. Snipers use the M107 Long Range Sniper Rifle, the M2010 Enhanced Sniper Rifle and the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper Rifle.\nCrew-served weapons.\nThe army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.\nThe M240 is the U.S. Army's standard Medium Machine Gun. The M2 heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40\u00a0mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by motorized units.\nThe U.S. Army uses three types of mortar for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60\u00a0mm M224, normally assigned at the infantry company level. At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81\u00a0mm M252 mortars. The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120\u00a0mm M120/M121, which is usually employed by mechanized units.\nFire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105\u00a0mm M119A1 and the 155\u00a0mm M777.\nThe U.S. Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The AT4 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters. The FIM-92 Stinger is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile. The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.\nVehicles.\nU.S. Army doctrine puts a premium on mechanized warfare. It fields the highest vehicle-to-soldier ratio in the world as of 2009. The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform and ambulance, among many other roles. While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of HEMTT vehicles. The M1A2 Abrams is the army's main battle tank, while the M2A3 Bradley is the standard infantry fighting vehicle. Other vehicles include the Stryker, the M113 armored personnel carrier and multiple types of Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.\nThe U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A7 Paladin self-propelled howitzer and the M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS), both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.\nAviation.\nWhile the United States Army Aviation Branch operates a few fixed-wing aircraft, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter, the UH-60 Black Hawk utility tactical transport helicopter and the CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift transport helicopter. Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from seven to four types. The Army is evaluating two fixed-wing aircraft demonstrators; ARES, and Artemis are under evaluation to replace the Guardrail ISR (Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) aircraft. Under the Johnson-McConnell agreement of 1966, the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions). For UAVs, the Army is deploying at least one company of drone MQ-1C Gray Eagles to each Active Army division.\nUniforms.\nThe Army Combat Uniform (ACU) currently features a camouflage pattern known as Operational Camouflage Pattern (OCP); OCP replaced a pixel-based pattern known as Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) in 2019.\nOn 11 November 2018, the Army announced a new version of 'Army Greens' based on uniforms worn during World War II that will become the standard garrison service uniform. The blue Army Service Uniform will remain as the dress uniform. The Army Greens are projected to be first fielded in the summer of 2020.\nBerets.\nThe beret flash of enlisted personnel displays their distinctive unit insignia (shown above). The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap. After years of complaints that it was not suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers who are currently in a unit in jump status still wear berets, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified or not (maroon beret), while members of Security Force Assistance Brigades (SFABs) wear brown berets. Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret) and Special Forces (rifle green beret) may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.\nTents.\nThe Army has relied heavily on tents to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment (Force Provider Expeditionary (FPE)). The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining facilities), forward operating bases (FOBs), after-action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities, as well as security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center. Each FPE contains billeting, latrines, showers, laundry and kitchen facilities for 50\u2013150 Soldiers, and is stored in Army Prepositioned Stocks 1, 2, 4 and 5. This provisioning allows combatant commanders to position soldiers as required in their Area of Responsibility, within 24 to 48 hours.\nThe U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter (DRASH). In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32089", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32089", "title": "US Air Force", "text": ""}
{"id": "32090", "revid": "50964715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32090", "title": "United States Air Force", "text": "Air service branch of the U.S. military\nMilitary unit\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) is the air service branch of the United States Armed Forces. It is a part of the United States Department of Defense and is one of the six armed forces and one of the eight uniformed services of the United States. Tracing its origins to 1 August 1907, as a part of the United States Army Signal Corps, the USAF was established by transfer of personnel from the Army Air Forces with the enactment of the National Security Act of 1947. It is the second youngest branch of the United States Armed Forces and the fourth in order of precedence. The United States Air Force articulates its core missions as air supremacy, global integrated intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, rapid global mobility, global strike, and command and control.\nThe Department of the Air Force, which serves as the USAF's headquarters and executive department, is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense. The Department of the Air Force is headed by the civilian secretary of the Air Force, who reports to the secretary of defense and is appointed by the president with Senate confirmation. The highest-ranking military officer in the Air Force is the chief of staff of the Air Force, who exercises supervision over Air Force units and serves as one of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. As directed by the secretary of defense and secretary of the Air Force, certain Air Force components are assigned to unified combatant commands. Combatant commanders are delegated operational authority of the forces assigned to them, while the secretary of the Air Force and the chief of staff of the Air Force retain administrative authority over their members.\nAlong with conducting independent air operations, the United States Air Force provides air support for land and naval forces and aids in the recovery of troops in the field. As of 2020[ [update]], the service operates approximately 5,500 military aircraft and approximately 400 ICBMs. The world's largest air force, it has a $179.7\u00a0billion budget and is the second largest service branch of the U.S. Department of Defense, with 321,848 active duty airmen, 147,879 civilian personnel, 68,927 reserve airmen, 105,104 Air National Guard airmen, and approximately 65,000 Civil Air Patrol auxiliaries.\nMission, vision, and functions.\nMissions.\nAccording to the National Security Act of 1947 (61 \"Stat\". 502), which created the USAF:\n\"In general, the United States Air Force shall include aviation forces both combat and service not otherwise assigned. It shall be organized, trained, and equipped primarily for prompt and sustained offensive and defensive air operations. The Air Force shall be responsible for the preparation of the air forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war except as otherwise assigned and, in accordance with integrated joint mobilization plans, for the expansion of the peacetime components of the Air Force to meet the needs of war.\"\nSection 9062 of Title 10 US Code defines the purpose of the USAF as:\nCore missions.\nThe five core missions of the Air Force have not changed dramatically since the Air Force became independent in 1947, but they have now evolved and are articulated as air superiority, global integrated ISR (intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance), rapid global mobility, global strike, and command and control. The purpose of all of these core missions is to provide what the Air Force states as global vigilance, global reach, and global power.\nAir superiority.\nAir superiority is \"that degree of dominance in the air battle of one force over another which permits the conduct of operations by the former and its related land, sea, air, and special operations forces at a given time and place without prohibitive interference by the opposing force\" (JP 1-02).\nOffensive Counter-Air (OCA) is defined as \"offensive operations to destroy, disrupt, or neutralize enemy aircraft, missiles, launch platforms, and their supporting structures and systems both before and after launch, but as close to their source as possible\" (JP 1-02). OCA is the preferred method of countering air and missile threats since it attempts to defeat the enemy closer to its source and typically enjoys the initiative. OCA comprises attack operations, sweep, escort, and suppression/destruction of enemy air defense.\nDefensive Counter-Air (DCA) is defined as \"all the defensive measures designed to detect, identify, intercept, and destroy or negate enemy forces attempting to penetrate or attack through friendly airspace\" (JP 1-02). In concert with OCA operations, a major goal of DCA operations is to provide an area from which forces can operate, secure from air and missile threats. The DCA mission comprises both active and passive defense measures. Active defense is \"the employment of limited offensive action and counterattacks to deny a contested area or position to the enemy\" (JP 1-02). It includes both ballistic missile defense and airborne threat defense and encompasses point defense, area defense, and high-value airborne asset defense. Passive defense is \"measures taken to reduce the probability of and to minimize the effects of damage caused by hostile action without the intention of taking the initiative\" (JP 1-02). It includes detection and warning; chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear defense; camouflage, concealment, and deception; hardening; reconstitution; dispersion; redundancy; and mobility, counter-measures, and stealth.\nAirspace control is \"a process used to increase operational effectiveness by promoting the safe, efficient, and flexible use of airspace\" (JP 1-02). It promotes the safe, efficient, and flexible use of airspace, mitigates the risk of fratricide, enhances both offensive and defensive operations, and permits greater agility of air operations as a whole. It both deconflicts and facilitates the integration of joint air operations.\nGlobal integrated ISR.\nGlobal integrated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) is the synchronization and integration of the planning and operation of sensors, assets, and processing, exploitation, dissemination systems across the globe to conduct current and future operations.\nPlanning and directing is \"the determination of intelligence requirements, development of appropriate intelligence architecture, preparation of a collection plan, and issuance of orders and requests to information collection agencies\" (JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations). These activities enable the synchronization and integration of collection, processing, exploitation, analysis, and dissemination activities/resources to meet information requirements of national and military decision-makers.\nCollection is \"the acquisition of information and the provision of this information to processing elements\" (JP 2-01). It provides the ability to obtain required information to satisfy intelligence needs (via use of sources and methods in all domains). Collection activities span the Range of Military Operations (ROMO).\nProcessing and exploitation is \"the conversion of collected information into forms suitable to the production of intelligence\" (JP 2-01). It provides the ability to transform, extract, and make available collected information suitable for further analysis or action across the ROMO.\nAnalysis and production is \"the conversion of processed information into intelligence through the integration, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of all source data and the preparation of intelligence products in support of known or anticipated user requirements\" (JP 2-01). It provides the ability to integrate, evaluate, and interpret information from available sources to create a finished intelligence product for presentation or dissemination to enable increased situational awareness.\nDissemination and integration is \"the delivery of intelligence to users in a suitable form and the application of the intelligence to appropriate missions, tasks, and functions\" (JP 2-01). It provides the ability to present information and intelligence products across the ROMO enabling understanding of the operational environment to military and national decision-makers.\nRapid global mobility.\nRapid global mobility is the timely deployment, employment, sustainment, augmentation, and redeployment of military forces and capabilities across the ROMO. It provides joint military forces the capability to move from place to place while retaining the ability to fulfill their primary mission. Rapid Global Mobility is essential to virtually every military operation, allowing forces to reach foreign or domestic destinations quickly, thus seizing the initiative through speed and surprise.\nAirlift is \"operations to transport and deliver forces and materiel through the air in support of strategic, operational, or tactical objectives\" (Annex 3\u201317, Air Mobility Operations). The rapid and flexible options afforded by airlift allow military forces and national leaders the ability to respond and operate in a variety of situations and time frames. The global reach capability of airlift provides the ability to apply US power worldwide by delivering forces to crisis locations. It serves as a US presence that demonstrates resolve and compassion in humanitarian crisis.\nAir refueling is \"the refueling of an aircraft in flight by another aircraft\" (JP 1-02). Air refueling extends presence, increases range, and serves as a force multiplier. It allows air assets to more rapidly reach any trouble spot around the world with less dependence on forward staging bases or overflight/landing clearances. Air refueling significantly expands the options available to a commander by increasing the range, payload, persistence, and flexibility of receiver aircraft.\nAeromedical evacuation is \"the movement of patients under medical supervision to and between medical treatment facilities by air transportation\" (JP 1-02). JP 4-02, Health Service Support, further defines it as \"the fixed wing movement of regulated casualties to and between medical treatment facilities, using organic and/or contracted mobility airframes, with aircrew trained explicitly for this mission.\" Aeromedical evacuation forces can operate as far forward as fixed-wing aircraft are able to conduct airland operations.\nGlobal strike.\nGlobal precision attack is the ability to hold at risk or strike rapidly and persistently, with a wide range of munitions, any target and to create swift, decisive, and precise effects across multiple domains.\nStrategic attack is defined as \"offensive action specifically selected to achieve national strategic objectives. These attacks seek to weaken the adversary's ability or will to engage in conflict, and may achieve strategic objectives without necessarily having to achieve operational objectives as a precondition\" (Annex 3\u201370, Strategic Attack).\nAir Interdiction is defined as \"air operations conducted to divert, disrupt, delay, or destroy the enemy's military potential before it can be brought to bear effectively against friendly forces, or to otherwise achieve JFC objectives. Air Interdiction is conducted at such distance from friendly forces that detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of friendly forces is not required\" (Annex 3-03, Counterland Operations).\nClose Air Support is defined as \"air action by fixed- and rotary-winged aircraft against hostile targets that are in close proximity to friendly forces and which require detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces\" (JP 1-02). This can be as a pre-planned event or on demand from an alert posture (ground or airborne). It can be conducted across the ROMO.\nThe purpose of nuclear deterrence operations (NDO) is to operate, maintain, and secure nuclear forces to achieve an assured capability to deter an adversary from taking action against vital US interests. In the event deterrence fails, the US should be able to appropriately respond with nuclear options. The sub-elements of this function are:\nAssure/Dissuade/Deter is a mission set derived from the Air Force's readiness to carry out the nuclear strike operations mission as well as from specific actions taken to assure allies as a part of extended deterrence. Dissuading others from acquiring or proliferating WMD and delivering them contributes to promoting security and is also an integral part of this mission. Moreover, different deterrence strategies are required to deter various adversaries, whether they are a nation state, or non-state/transnational actor. The Air Force maintains and presents credible deterrent capabilities through successful visible demonstrations and exercises that assure allies, dissuade proliferation, deter potential adversaries from actions that threaten US national security or the populations, and deploy military forces of the US, its allies, and friends.\nNuclear strike is the ability of nuclear forces to rapidly and accurately strike targets which the enemy holds dear in a devastating manner. If a crisis occurs, rapid generation and, if necessary, deployment of nuclear strike capabilities will demonstrate US resolve and may prompt an adversary to alter the course of action deemed threatening to our national interest. Should deterrence fail, the President may authorize a precise, tailored response to terminate the conflict at the lowest possible level and lead to a rapid cessation of hostilities. Post-conflict, regeneration of a credible nuclear deterrent capability will deter further aggression. The Air Force may present a credible force posture in either the Continental United States, within a theater of operations, or both to effectively deter the range of potential adversaries envisioned in the 21st century. This requires the ability to engage targets globally using a variety of methods; therefore, the Air Force should possess the ability to induct, train, assign, educate and exercise individuals and units to rapidly and effectively execute missions that support US NDO objectives. Finally, the Air Force regularly exercises and evaluates all aspects of nuclear operations to ensure high levels of performance.\nNuclear surety ensures the safety, security and effectiveness of nuclear operations. Because of their political and military importance, destructive power, and the potential consequences of an accident or unauthorized act, nuclear weapons and nuclear weapon systems require special consideration and protection against risks and threats inherent in their peacetime and wartime environments. In conjunction with other entities within the Departments of Defense or Energy, the Air Force achieves a high standard of protection through a stringent nuclear surety program. This program applies to materiel, personnel, and procedures that contribute to the safety, security, and control of nuclear weapons, thus assuring no nuclear accidents, incidents, loss, or unauthorized or accidental use (a Broken Arrow incident). The Air Force continues to pursue safe, secure and effective nuclear weapons consistent with operational requirements. Adversaries, allies, and the American people must be highly confident of the Air Force's ability to secure nuclear weapons from accidents, theft, loss, and accidental or unauthorized use. This day-to-day commitment to precise and reliable nuclear operations is the cornerstone of the credibility of the NDO mission. Positive nuclear command, control, communications; effective nuclear weapons security; and robust combat support are essential to the overall NDO function.\nCommand and control.\nCommand and control is \"the exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of the mission. Command and control functions are performed through an arrangement of personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures employed by a commander in planning, directing, coordinating, and controlling forces and operations in the accomplishment of the mission\" (JP 1-02). This core function includes all of the C2-related capabilities and activities associated with air, cyberspace, nuclear, and agile combat support operations to achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives.\nAt the strategic level command and control, the US determines national or multinational security objectives and guidance, and develops and uses national resources to accomplish these objectives. These national objectives in turn provide the direction for developing overall military objectives, which are used to develop the objectives and strategy for each theater.\nAt the operational level command and control, campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, sustained, and assessed to accomplish strategic goals within theaters or areas of operations. These activities imply a broader dimension of time or space than do tactics; they provide the means by which tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic and operational objectives.\nTactical Level Command and Control is where individual battles and engagements are fought. The tactical level of war deals with how forces are employed, and the specifics of how engagements are conducted and targets attacked. The goal of tactical level C2 is to achieve commander's intent and desired effects by gaining and keeping offensive initiative.\nHistory.\nThe origins of the United States Air Force can be traced back to the Union Army Balloon Corps of the American Civil War. The Union Balloon Corps, established by aeronaut Thaddeus S. C. Lowe, provided aerial reconnaissance for the Union Army. This early use of balloons for military purposes marked the beginning of modern aerial warfare and set the stage for the development of the United States Air Force.\nThe U.S. War Department created the first antecedent of the U.S. Air Force, as a part of the U.S. Army, on 1 August 1907, which through a succession of changes of organization, titles, and missions advanced toward eventual independence 40 years later. In World War II, almost 68,000 U.S. airmen died helping to win the war, with only the infantry suffering more casualties. In practice, the U.S. Army Air Forces (USAAF) was virtually independent of the Army during World War II, and in virtually every way functioned as an independent service branch, but airmen still pressed for formal independence. The National Security Act of 1947 was signed on 26 July 1947, which established the Department of the Air Force, but it was not until 18 September 1947, when the first secretary of the Air Force, W. Stuart Symington, was sworn into office that the Air Force was officially formed as an independent service branch.\nThe act created the \"National Military Establishment\" (renamed Department of Defense in 1949), which was composed of three subordinate Military Departments, namely the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the newly created Department of the Air Force. Prior to 1947, the responsibility for military aviation was shared between the Army Air Forces and its predecessor organizations (for land-based operations), the Navy (for sea-based operations from aircraft carriers and amphibious aircraft), and the Marine Corps (for close air support of Marine Corps operations). The 1940s proved to be important for military aviation in other ways as well. In 1947, Air Force Captain Chuck Yeager broke the sound barrier in his X-1 rocket-powered aircraft, beginning a new era of aeronautics in America.\nAntecedents.\nThe predecessor organizations in the Army of today's Air Force are:\n21st century.\nDuring the early 2000s, two USAF aircraft procurement projects took longer than expected, the KC-X and F-35 programs. As a result, the USAF was setting new records for average aircraft age.\nSince 2005, the USAF has placed a strong focus on the improvement of Basic Military Training (BMT) for enlisted personnel. While the intense training has become longer, it also has shifted to include a deployment phase. This deployment phase, now called the BEAST, places the trainees in a simulated combat environment that they may experience once they deploy. While the trainees do tackle the massive obstacle courses along with the BEAST, the other portions include defending and protecting their base of operations, forming a structure of leadership, directing search and recovery, and basic self aid buddy care. During this event, the Military Training Instructors (MTI) act as mentors and opposing forces in a deployment exercise. In November 2022, the USAF announced that it will discontinue BEAST and replace it with another deployment training program called PACER FORGE.\nIn 2007, the USAF undertook a Reduction-in-Force (RIF). Because of budget constraints, the USAF planned to reduce the service's size from 360,000 active duty personnel to 316,000. The size of the active duty force in 2007 was roughly 64% of that of what the USAF was at the end of the first Gulf War in 1991. However, the reduction was ended at approximately 330,000 personnel in 2008 in order to meet the demand signal of combatant commanders and associated mission requirements. These same constraints have seen a sharp reduction in flight hours for crew training since 2005 and the Deputy Chief of Staff for Manpower and Personnel directing Airmen's Time Assessments.\nOn 5 June 2008, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates accepted the resignations of both the secretary of the Air Force, Michael Wynne, and the chief of staff of the Air Force, General T. Michael Moseley. In his decision to fire both men Gates cited \"systemic issues associated with... declining Air Force nuclear mission focus and performance\". Left unmentioned by Gates was that he had repeatedly clashed with Wynne and Moseley over other important non-nuclear related issues to the service. This followed an investigation into two incidents involving mishandling of nuclear weapons: specifically a nuclear weapons incident aboard a B-52 flight between Minot AFB and Barksdale AFB, and an accidental shipment of nuclear weapons components to Taiwan. To put more emphasis on nuclear assets, the USAF established the nuclear-focused Air Force Global Strike Command on 24 October 2008, which later assumed control of all USAF bomber aircraft.\nOn 26 June 2009, the USAF released a force structure plan that cut fighter aircraft and shifted resources to better support nuclear, irregular and information warfare. On 23 July 2009, The USAF released their Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) Flight Plan, detailing Air Force UAS plans through 2047. One third of the planes that the USAF planned to buy in the future were to be unmanned. According to Air Force chief scientist Greg Zacharias the USAF anticipates having hypersonic weapons by the 2020s, hypersonic unmanned aerial vehicles (also known as remotely-piloted vehicles, or RPAs) by the 2030s and recoverable hypersonic RPAs aircraft by the 2040s. The USAF intends to deploy a Sixth-generation jet fighter by the mid-2030s.\nOn 22 October 2023, the USAF conducted its first-ever trilateral exercise with the South Korean and Japanese air forces near the Korean Peninsula. On 29 November 2023, a USAF Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey crashed in the Japan island of Yakushima killing 1 airman.\nIn 2024, citing the Supreme Court's ruling in \"Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo\", the Air Force refused to comply with an EPA order that they develop a cleanup plan for drinking water around Tucson, Arizona after the region's groundwater was contaminated by PFAS runoff from nearby Air Force bases.\nGeneral David Allvin, the head of the U.S. Air Force (USAF), stated earlier in 2024 that the United States cannot rely on its air dominance for an extended period.\nConflicts.\nThe United States Air Force has been involved in many wars, conflicts and operations using military air operations. The USAF possesses the lineage and heritage of its predecessor organizations, which played a pivotal role in U.S. military operations since 1907:\nIn addition since the USAF dwarfs all other U.S. and allied air components, it often provides support for allied forces in conflicts to which the United States is otherwise not involved, such as the 2013 French campaign in Mali.\nHumanitarian operations.\nThe USAF has also taken part in numerous humanitarian operations. Some of the more major ones include the following:\nCulture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe culture of the United States Air Force is primarily driven by pilots, at first those piloting bombers (driven originally by the Bomber Mafia), followed by fighters (Fighter Mafia).\nIn response to a 2007 United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates accepted in June 2009 the resignations of Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and Chief of Staff of the Air Force General T. Michael Moseley. Moseley's successor, General Norton A. Schwartz, a former airlift and special operations pilot, was the first officer appointed to that position who did not have a background as a fighter or bomber pilot. The Washington Post reported in 2010 that General Schwartz began to dismantle the rigid class system of the USAF, particularly in the officer corps.\nIn 2014, following morale and testing/cheating scandals in the Air Force's missile launch officer community, Secretary of the Air Force Deborah Lee James admitted that there remained a \"systemic problem\" in the USAF's management of the nuclear mission.\nDaniel L. Magruder Jr. defines USAF culture as a combination of the rigorous application of advanced technology, individualism and progressive airpower theory. Major General Charles J. Dunlap Jr. adds that the U.S. Air Force's culture also includes an egalitarianism bred from officers perceiving themselves as their service's principal \"warriors\" working with small groups of enlisted airmen either as the service crew or the onboard crew of their aircraft. Air Force officers have never felt they needed the formal social \"distance\" from their enlisted force that is common in the other U.S. armed services. Although the paradigm is changing, for most of its history, the Air Force, completely unlike its sister services, has been an organization in which mostly its officers fought, not its enlisted force, the latter being primarily a rear echelon support force. When the enlisted force did go into harm's way, such as crew members of multi-crewed aircraft, the close comradeship of shared risk in tight quarters created traditions that shaped a somewhat different kind of officer/enlisted relationship than exists elsewhere in the military.\nCultural and career issues in the U.S. Air Force have been cited as one of the reasons for the shortfall in needed UAV operators. In spite of demand for UAVs or drones to provide round the clock coverage for American troops during the Iraq War, the USAF did not establish a new career field for piloting them until the last year of that war and in 2014 changed its RPA training syllabus again, in the face of large aircraft losses in training, and in response to a GAO report critical of handling of drone programs. Paul Scharre has reported that the cultural divide between the USAF and US Army has kept both services from adopting each other's drone handling innovations.\nMany of the U.S. Air Force's formal and informal traditions are an amalgamation of those taken from the Royal Air Force (e.g., dining-ins/mess nights) or the experiences of its predecessor organizations such as the U.S. Army Air Service, U.S. Army Air Corps and the U.S. Army Air Forces. Some of these traditions range from \"Friday Name Tags\" in flying units to an annual \"Mustache Month\". The use of \"challenge coins\" dates back to World War I when a member of one of the aero squadrons bought his entire unit medallions with their emblem, while another cultural tradition unique to the Air Force is the \"roof stomp\", practiced by Airmen to welcome a new commander or to commemorate another event, such as a retirement.\nOrganization.\nAdministrative organization.\nThe Department of the Air Force is one of three military departments within the Department of Defense, and is managed by the civilian secretary of the Air Force, under the authority, direction, and control of the secretary of defense. The senior officials in the Office of the Secretary are the under secretary of the Air Force, four assistant secretaries of the Air Force and the general counsel, all of whom are appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate. The senior uniformed leadership in the Air Staff is made up of the chief of staff of the Air Force and the vice chief of staff of the Air Force.\nThe directly subordinate commands and units are named Field Operating Agency (FOA), Direct Reporting Unit (DRU), and the currently unused Separate Operating Agency.\nThe Major Command (MAJCOM) is the superior hierarchical level of command. Including the Air Force Reserve Command, as of 30 September 2006, USAF has ten major commands. The Numbered Air Force (NAF) is a level of command directly under the MAJCOM, followed by Operational Command (now unused), Air Division (also now unused), Wing, Group, Squadron, and Flight.\nAir Force structure and organization.\n Headquarters, United States Air Force (HQ USAF):\nThe major components of the U.S. Air Force, as of 28 August 2015, are the following:\nThe USAF, including its Air Reserve Component (e.g., Air Force Reserve + Air National Guard), possesses a total of 302 flying squadrons.\nOperational organization.\nThe organizational structure as shown above is responsible for the peacetime organization, equipping, and training of air units for operational missions. When required to support operational missions, the secretary of defense (SECDEF) directs the secretary of the Air Force (SECAF) to execute a Change in Operational Control (CHOP) of these units from their administrative alignment to the operational command of a Regional Combatant commander (CCDR). In the case of AFSPC, AFSOC, PACAF, and USAFE units, forces are normally employed in-place under their existing CCDR. Likewise, AMC forces operating in support roles retain their componency to USTRANSCOM unless chopped to a Regional CCDR.\nAir Expeditionary Task Force.\n\"Chopped\" units are referred to as \"forces\". The top-level structure of these forces is the Air Expeditionary Task Force (AETF). The AETF is the Air Force presentation of forces to a CCDR for the employment of air power. Each CCDR is supported by a standing Component Numbered Air Force (C-NAF) to provide planning and execution of air forces in support of CCDR requirements. Each C-NAF consists of a Commander, Air Force Forces (COMAFFOR) and AFFOR/A-staff, and an Air Operations Center (AOC). As needed to support multiple Joint Force Commanders (JFC) in the CCMD's Area of Responsibility (AOR), the C-NAF may deploy Air Component Coordinate Elements (ACCE) to liaise with the JFC. If the Air Force possesses the preponderance of air forces in a JFC's area of operations, the COMAFFOR will also serve as the Joint Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC).\nCommander, Air Force Forces.\nThe commander, Air Force Forces (COMAFFOR) is the senior USAF officer responsible for the employment of air power in support of JFC objectives. The COMAFFOR has a special staff and an A-Staff to ensure assigned or attached forces are properly organized, equipped, and trained to support the operational mission.\nAir Operations Center.\nThe Air Operations Center (AOC) is the JFACC's Command and Control (C2) center. Several AOCs have been established throughout the Air Force worldwide. These centers are responsible for planning and executing air power missions in support of JFC objectives.\nAir Expeditionary Wings/Groups/Squadrons.\nThe AETF generates air power to support CCMD objectives from Air Expeditionary Wings (AEW) or Air Expeditionary Groups (AEG). These units are responsible for receiving combat forces from Air Force MAJCOMs, preparing these forces for operational missions, launching and recovering these forces, and eventually returning forces to the MAJCOMs. Theater Air Control Systems control employment of forces during these missions.\nPersonnel.\nThe classification of any USAF job for officers or enlisted airmen is the Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC).\nAFSCs range from officer specialties such as pilot, combat systems officer, special tactics, nuclear and missile operations, intelligence, cyberspace operations, judge advocate general (JAG), medical doctor, nurse or other fields, to various enlisted specialties. The latter range from flight combat operations such as loadmaster, to working in a dining facility to ensure that Airmen are properly fed. There are additional occupational fields such as computer specialties, mechanic specialties, enlisted aircrew, communication systems, cyberspace operations, avionics technicians, medical specialties, civil engineering, public affairs, hospitality, law, drug counseling, mail operations, security forces, and search and rescue specialties.\nBeyond combat flight crew personnel, other combat USAF AFSCs are Special Tactics Officer, Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD), Combat Rescue Officer, Pararescue, Security Forces, Combat Control, Tactical Air Control Party, Special Operations Weather Technician.\nNearly all enlisted career fields are \"entry level\", meaning that the USAF provides all training. Some enlistees are able to choose a particular field, or at least a field before actually joining, while others are assigned an AFSC at Basic Military Training (BMT). After BMT, new enlisted airmen attend a technical training school where they learn their particular AFSC. Second Air Force, a part of Air Education and Training Command, is responsible for nearly all enlisted technical training.\nTraining programs vary in length; for example, 3F1X1 (Services) has 29 days of tech school training, while 3E8X1 (Explosive Ordnance Disposal) is one year of training with a preliminary school and a main school consisting of over ten separate divisions, sometimes taking students close to two years to complete. Officer technical training conducted by Second Air Force can also vary by AFSC, while flight training for aeronautically rated officers conducted by AETC's Nineteenth Air Force can last well in excess of one year.\nUSAF rank is divided between enlisted airmen, non-commissioned officers, and commissioned officers, and ranges from the enlisted Airman Basic (E-1) to the commissioned officer rank of General (O-10), however in times of war officers may be appointed to the higher grade of General of the Air Force. Enlisted promotions are granted based on a combination of test scores, years of experience, and selection board approval while officer promotions are based on time-in-grade and a promotion selection board. Promotions among enlisted personnel and non-commissioned officers are generally designated by increasing numbers of insignia chevrons. Commissioned officer rank is designated by bars, oak leaves, a silver eagle, and anywhere from one to five stars. General of the Air Force Henry \"Hap\" Arnold is the only individual in the history of the US Air Force to attain the rank of five-star general.\nAs of 30 June 2017, 70% of the Air Force is White, 15% Black and 4.8% Asian. The average age is 35 and 21% of its members are female.\nCommissioned officers.\nThe commissioned officer ranks of the USAF are divided into three categories: company grade officers, field grade officers, and general officers. Company grade officers are those officers in pay grades O-1 to O-3, while field grade officers are those in pay grades O-4 to O-6, and general officers are those in pay grades of O-7 and above.\nAir Force officer promotions are governed by the Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980 and its companion Reserve Officer Personnel Management Act (ROPMA) for officers in the Air Force Reserve and the Air National Guard. DOPMA also establishes limits on the number of officers that can serve at any given time in the Air Force. Currently, promotion from second lieutenant to first lieutenant is virtually guaranteed after two years of satisfactory service. The promotion from first lieutenant to captain is competitive after successfully completing another two years of service, with a selection rate varying between 99% and 100%. Promotion to major through major general is through a formal selection board process, while promotions to lieutenant general and general are contingent upon nomination to specific general officer positions and subject to U.S. Senate approval.\nDuring the board process, an officer's record is reviewed by a selection board at the Air Force Personnel Center at Randolph Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. At the 10 to 11-year mark, captains will take part in a selection board to major. If not selected, they will meet a follow-on board to determine if they will be allowed to remain in the Air Force. Promotion from major to lieutenant colonel is similar and occurs approximately between the fourteen year and the fifteen year mark, where a certain percentage of majors will be in zone (i.e., \"on time\") or above zone (i.e., \"late\") for promotion to lieutenant colonel. This process will repeat at the 18-year mark to the 21-year mark for promotion to full colonel.\nThe Air Force has the largest ratio of general officers to total strength of all of the U.S. Armed Forces and this ratio has continued to increase even as the force has shrunk from its Cold War highs.\nWarrant officers.\nAlthough provisions were made in Title 10 of the United States Code for the secretary of the Air Force to appoint warrant officers, the Air Force had not used warrant officer grades for many years, and, along with the Space Force, were the only U.S. Armed Services not to do so until 2024. The Air Force inherited warrant officer ranks from the Army at its inception in 1947. The Air Force stopped appointing warrant officers in 1959, the same year the first promotions were made to the new top enlisted grade, chief master sergeant. The remaining warrant officers were slowly phased out.\nThe last active duty Air Force warrant officer, CWO4 James H. Long, retired in 1980, and the last Air Force Reserve warrant officer, CWO4 Bob Barrow, retired in 1992. Upon his retirement, he was honorarily promoted to CWO5, the only person in the Air Force ever to hold this grade. Since Barrow's retirement, the Air Force warrant officer ranks, while still authorized by law, were not used.\nIt was announced at the AFA Warfare Symposium on 12 February 2024, that warrant officer ranks in the cyber and information technology fields would be reintroduced, beginning in FY25. It was stated that this effort was to retain talent in these technical fields for airmen who did not wish to pursue a leadership path. The Air Force initially wanted a class of 30 warrant officers that would begin training by the summer 2024. By the end of July 2024, 78 airmen were selected to be among the first Air Force warrant officers in over 66 years, more than double than originally estimated. The 78 airmen will be spread out across three training classes, with the first starting in October 2024. On December 6, 2024, 30 airmen graduated from the Air Force's Warrant Officer Training School located at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. These are the first warrant officers to serve in the U.S. Air Force since 1992. The warrant officer candidates graduated as either Warrant Officer 1 or Chief Warrant Officer 2.\nEnlisted airmen.\nEnlisted airmen have pay grades from E-1 (entry level) to E-9 (senior enlisted). While all USAF personnel, enlisted and officer, are referred to as \"airmen\", in the same manner that all Army personnel, enlisted and officer, are referred to as \"soldiers\", the term also refers to the pay grades of E-1 through E-4, which are below the level of non-commissioned officers (NCOs). Above the pay grade of E-4 (i.e., pay grades E-5 through E-9) all ranks fall into the category of NCO and are further subdivided into \"NCOs\" (pay grades E-5 and E-6) and \"senior NCOs\" (pay grades E-7 through E-9); the term \"junior NCO\" is sometimes used to refer to staff sergeants and technical sergeants (pay grades E-5 and E-6).\nThe USAF, along with the US Space Force, are the only branches of the U.S. military where NCO status is achieved when an enlisted person reaches the pay grade of E-5. In all other branches, NCO status is generally achieved at the pay grade of E-4 (e.g., a corporal in the Army and Marine Corps, Petty Officer Third Class in the Navy and Coast Guard). The Air Force mirrored the Army from 1976 to 1991 with an E-4 being either a senior airman wearing three stripes without a star or a sergeant (referred to as \"buck sergeant\"), which was noted by the presence of the central star and considered an NCO. Despite not being an NCO, a senior airman who has completed Airman Leadership School can be a supervisor according to the AFI 36\u20132618.\nUniforms.\nThe first USAF dress uniform, in 1947, was dubbed and patented \"Uxbridge blue\" after \"Uxbridge 1683 blue\", developed at the former Bachman-Uxbridge Worsted Company. The current service dress uniform, which was adopted in 1994, consists of a three-button coat with decorative pockets, matching trousers, and either a service cap or flight cap, all in Shade 1620, \"Air Force blue\" (a darker purplish-blue). This is worn with a light blue shirt (shade 1550) and shade 1620 herringbone patterned necktie. Silver \"U.S.\" pins are worn on the collar of the coat, with a surrounding silver ring for enlisted airmen. Enlisted airmen wear sleeve rank on both the jacket and shirt, while officers wear metal rank insignia pinned onto the epaulet loops on the coat, and Air Force blue slide-on epaulet loops on the shirt. USAF personnel assigned to base honor guard duties wear, for certain occasions, a modified version of the standard service dress uniform that includes silver trim on the sleeves and trousers, with the addition of a ceremonial belt (if necessary), service cap with silver trim and Hap Arnold Device (instead of the seal of the United States worn on the regular cap), and a silver aiguillette placed on the left shoulder seam and all devices and accoutrements.\nThe Airman Combat Uniform (ACU) in the Operational Camouflage Pattern (OCP) replaced the previous Airman Battle Uniform (ABU) on 1 October 2018.\nAwards and badges.\nIn addition to basic uniform clothing, various badges are used by the USAF to indicate a billet assignment or qualification-level for a given assignment. Badges can also be used as merit-based or service-based awards. Over time, various badges have been discontinued and are no longer distributed.\nTraining.\nAll enlisted airmen attend Basic Military Training (BMT) at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442 weeks. Individuals who have prior service of over 24 months of active duty in the other service branches who seek to enlist in the Air Force must go through a 10-day Air Force familiarization course rather than enlisted BMT, however prior service opportunities are severely limited.\nOfficers may be commissioned upon graduation from the United States Air Force Academy, upon graduation from another college or university through the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) program, or through the Air Force Officer Training School (OTS). OTS, located at Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Alabama since 1993, in turn encompasses two separate commissioning programs: Basic Officer Training (BOT), which is for officer candidates for the Regular Air Force and the Air Force Reserve; and the Academy of Military Science (AMS), which is for officer candidates of the Air National Guard.\nThe Air Force also provides Commissioned Officer Training (COT) for officers of all three components who are direct-commissioned into medicine, law, religion, biological sciences, or healthcare administration. COT is fully integrated into the OTS program and today encompasses extensive coursework as well as field exercises in leadership, confidence, fitness, and deployed-environment operations.\nAir Force Fitness Test.\nThe US Air Force Fitness Test (AFFT) is designed to test the abdominal circumference, muscular strength/endurance and cardiovascular respiratory fitness of airmen in the USAF. As part of the \"Fit to Fight\" program, the USAF adopted a more stringent physical fitness assessment; the new fitness program was put into effect on 1 June 2010. The annual ergo-cycle test which the USAF had used for several years had been replaced in 2004. In the AFFT, Airmen are given a score based on performance consisting of four components: waist circumference, the sit-up, the push-up, and a run. Airmen can potentially earn a score of 100, with the run counting as 60%, waist circumference as 20%, and both strength tests counting as 10% each. A passing score is 75 points. Effective 1 July 2010, the AFFT is administered by the base Fitness Assessment Cell (FAC), and is required twice a year. Personnel earning a score over 90% may test once a year. Additionally, only meeting the minimum standards on each one of these tests will not get you a passing score of 75%, and failing any one component will result in a failure for the entire test.\nAircraft inventory.\nThe U.S. Air Force has a total force of approximately 5,500 aircraft. Of these, an estimated 4,131 are in active service. Until 1962, the Army and Air Force maintained one system of aircraft naming, while the U.S. Navy maintained a separate system. In 1962, these were unified into a single system heavily reflecting the Army and Air Force method. For more complete information on the workings of this system, refer to United States military aircraft designation systems. The various aircraft of the Air Force include:\nA \u2013 Attack.\nThe attack aircraft of the USAF are designed to attack targets on the ground and are often deployed as close air support for, and in proximity to, U.S. ground forces. The proximity to friendly forces require precision strikes from these aircraft that are not always possible with bomber aircraft. Their role is tactical rather than strategic, operating at the front of the battle rather than against targets deeper in the enemy's rear. Current USAF attack aircraft are operated by Air Combat Command, Pacific Air Forces, and Air Force Special Operations Command. On 1 August 2022, USSOCOM selected the Air Tractor-L3Harris AT-802U Sky Warden as a result of the Armed Overwatch program, awarding an indefinite quantity contract (IDIQ) to deliver as many as 75 aircraft.\nB \u2013 Bomber.\nUS Air Force bombers are strategic weapons, primarily used for long range strike missions with either conventional or nuclear ordnance. Traditionally used for attacking strategic targets, today many bombers are also used in the tactical mission, such as providing close air support for ground forces and tactical interdiction missions. All Air Force bombers are under Global Strike Command.\nThe service's B-2A aircraft entered service in the 1990s, its B-1B aircraft in the 1980s and its current B-52H aircraft in the early 1960s. The B-52 Stratofortress airframe design is over 60 years old and the B-52H aircraft currently in the active inventory were all built between 1960 and 1962. The B-52H is scheduled to remain in service for another 30 years, which would keep the airframe in service for nearly 90 years, an unprecedented length of service for any aircraft. The B-21 is projected to replace the B-2 and parts of the B-1B force by the mid-2020s.\nC \u2013 Cargo/Transport.\nCargo aircraft are typically used to deliver troops, weapons and other military equipment by a variety of methods to any area of military operations around the world, usually outside of the commercial flight routes in uncontrolled airspace. The workhorses of the USAF airlift forces are the C-130 Hercules, C-17 Globemaster III, and C-5 Galaxy. The CV-22 is used by the Air Force for special operations. It conducts long-range, special operations missions, and is equipped with extra fuel tanks and terrain-following radar. Some aircraft serve specialized cargo and transport roles such as executive or embassy support (C-12), Antarctic support (LC-130H), and AFSOC support (C-27J and C-146A). Although most of the US Air Force's cargo aircraft were specially designed with the Air Force in mind, some aircraft such as the C-12 Huron (Beechcraft Super King Air) and C-146 (Dornier 328) are militarized conversions of existing civilian aircraft. Transport aircraft are operated by Air Mobility Command, Air Force Special Operations Command, and United States Air Forces in Europe \u2013 Air Forces Africa.\nE \u2013 Special Electronic.\nThe purpose of electronic warfare is to deny the opponent an advantage in the EMS and ensure friendly, unimpeded access to the EM spectrum portion of the information environment. Electronic warfare aircraft are used to keep airspaces friendly, and send critical information to anyone who needs it. They are often called \"the eye in the sky\". The roles of the aircraft vary greatly among the different variants to include electronic warfare and jamming (EC-130H), psychological operations and communications (EC-130J), airborne early warning and control (E-3), airborne command post (E-4B), range control (E-9A), and communications relay (E-11A, EQ-4B).\nF \u2013 Fighter.\nThe fighter aircraft of the USAF are small, fast, and maneuverable military aircraft primarily used for air-to-air combat. Many of these fighters have secondary ground-attack capabilities, and some are dual-roled as fighter-bombers (e.g., the F-16 Fighting Falcon); the term \"fighter\" is also sometimes used colloquially for dedicated ground-attack aircraft, such as the F-117 Nighthawk. Other missions include interception of bombers and other fighters, reconnaissance, and patrol. The F-16 is currently used by the USAF Air Demonstration squadron, the Thunderbirds, while a small number of both man-rated and non-man-rated F-4 Phantom II are retained as QF-4 aircraft for use as full-scale aerial targets (FSATs) or as part of the USAF Heritage Flight program. These extant QF-4 aircraft are being replaced in the FSAT role by early model F-16 aircraft converted to QF-16 configuration. The USAF had 2,025 fighters in service as of September 2012.\nH \u2013 Search and rescue.\nThese aircraft are used for search and rescue and combat search and rescue on land or sea. The HC-130N/P aircraft are being replaced by newer HC-130J models. HH-60W are replacement aircraft for \"G\" models that have been lost in combat operations or accidents. New HH-60W helicopters are under development to replace the \"G\" model Pave Hawks. The Air Force also has four HH-60U \"Ghost Hawks\", which are converted \"M\" variants. They are based out of Area 51.\nK \u2013 Tanker.\nThe USAF's KC-135 and KC-46 aerial refueling aircraft are based on civilian jets. The USAF aircraft are equipped primarily for providing the fuel via a tail-mounted refueling boom, and can be equipped with \"probe and drogue\" refueling systems. Air-to-air refueling is extensively used in large-scale operations and also used in normal operations; fighters, bombers, and cargo aircraft rely heavily on the lesser-known \"tanker\" aircraft. This makes these aircraft an essential part of the Air Force's global mobility and the U.S. force projection. The KC-10A Extender was retired in 2024. The KC-46A Pegasus began to be delivered to USAF units in 2019.\nM \u2013 Multi-mission.\nSpecialized multi-mission aircraft provide support for global special operations missions. These aircraft conduct infiltration, exfiltration, resupply, and refueling for SOF teams from improvised or otherwise short runways. The MC-130J is currently being fielded to replace \"H\" and \"P\" models used by U.S. Special Operations Command.\nInitial generations of RPAs were primarily surveillance aircraft, but some were fitted with weaponry (such as the MQ-1 Predator, which used AGM-114 Hellfire air-to-ground missiles). An armed RPA is known as an \"unmanned combat aerial vehicle\" (UCAV).\nR \u2013 Reconnaissance.\nThe reconnaissance aircraft of the USAF are used for monitoring enemy activity, originally carrying no armament. Although the U-2 is designated as a \"utility\" aircraft, it is a reconnaissance platform. The roles of the aircraft vary greatly among the different variants to include general monitoring, ballistic missile monitoring (RC-135S), electronic intelligence gathering (RC-135U), signal intelligence gathering (RC-135V/W), and high altitude surveillance (U-2).\nSeveral unmanned remotely controlled reconnaissance aircraft (RPAs), have been developed and deployed. Recently, the RPAs have been seen to offer the possibility of cheaper, more capable fighting machines that can be used without risk to aircrews.\nT \u2013 Trainer.\nThe Air Force's trainer aircraft are used to train pilots, combat systems officers, and other aircrew in their duties.\nTG \u2013 Trainer gliders.\nSeveral gliders are used by the USAF, primarily used for cadet flying training at the U.S. Air Force Academy.\nU \u2013 Utility.\nUtility aircraft are used basically for what they are needed for at the time. For example, a Huey may be used to transport personnel around a large base or launch site, while it can also be used for evacuation. These aircraft are all around use aircraft. Mostly for troops and cargo.\nV \u2013 VIP staff transport.\nThese aircraft are used for the transportation of Very Important Persons (VIPs). Notable people include the president, vice president, cabinet secretaries, government officials (e.g., senators and representatives), the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other key personnel.\nW \u2013 Weather reconnaissance.\nThese aircraft are used to study meteorological events such as hurricanes and typhoons.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32092", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32092", "title": "Cape Breton University", "text": "Public university in Sydney, Nova Scotia, Canada\nCape Breton University (CBU) is a public university located in Sydney, Nova Scotia, Canada. It is the only post-secondary degree-granting institution within the Cape Breton Regional Municipality and on Cape Breton Island. \nThe university is enabled by the \"Cape Breton University Act\" passed by the Nova Scotia House of Assembly. Prior to this, CBU was enabled by the \"University College of Cape Breton Act\" (amended). The University College of Cape Breton's Coat of Arms were registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on May 27, 1995.\nCBU is an ordinary (full) member of Universities Canada (UC), the Association of Atlantic Universities (AAU), the Canadian Bureau for International Education (CBIE), and Colleges and Institutes Canada (CICan).\nHistory.\nIn 1951, the St. Francis Xavier University Sydney Campus was opened as a satellite campus of St. Francis Xavier University in the Sydney Lyceum, situated in the central business district of Sydney, Nova Scotia. It was also referred to as \"St. Francis Xavier Junior College\" or \"Xavier Junior College\" (XJC), and colloquially as \"Little X.\" The building was reduced to three stories due to a fire, which caused the fourth story to collapse. The college underwent an expansion in 1960, which included a new arts building along with classrooms in Holy Angels High School and Navy League buildings. In 1963 the institution was renamed Xavier College.\nIn 1955, Mother St. Margaret of Scotland (Sister Margaret Beaton) came to Cape Breton to become the first full librarian of Xavier Junior College. During her time at the college, she recognized that documents of historical significance to Cape Breton Island were being lost. In response, she began to grow the collection of the college library by collecting books and archival material specific to the culture and history of Cape Breton Island and the various cultural groups (e.g. Mi\u2019kmaq, Italian, Polish, Lebanese, Gaelic) which inhabited it. In 1957 she named this collection Cape Bretoniana. In 1966 she began overseeing the collection on a full-time basis. In 1975, Cape Bretoniana was expanded and branched into two main divisions: an Archive and institute Library and the Centre for Ethnic Studies, Folklore and the Social and Cultural History of Cape Breton Island. Sister Beaton died in a car accident that same year. The collection and additional institutions built around it were renamed the Beaton Institute in her honor.\nIn the early 1960s, Harry Boadmore emigrated from England to Canada, where he met and later married Elizabeth 'Liz' Boardmore (n\u00e9e MacDonald). Both later joined Xavier Junior College as English teachers in 1966. Within that year, they collaborated with the college and community to produce a stage version of \"The Crucible\" by Arthur Miller, which was presented at the Vogue Theatre in Sydney, and a version of \"The Collection\" by Harold Pinter. The Boardmores went on the Xavier College Drama Society and host drama festivals on the top floor of the Sydney Lyceum, where Xavier Junior College was hosted at the time. This would later become the Xavier College Theatre.\nIn 1968, the Nova Scotia Eastern Institute of Technology (NSEIT) opened on Grand Lake Road several kilometres east of the Sydney city limits. The institution focused on business technology and trades. It was created with the help of provincial and federal funding in response to serious challenges faced by the coal and steel industries in Industrial Cape Breton. In 1974, NSEIT and Xavier College were officially amalgamated into the College of Cape Breton (CCB). The college was consolidated at the location of the former NSEIT and began expanding.\nBetween 1978 and 1982, several new buildings were added to the campus including a campus centre, the Sullivan Field House, an art gallery, and the current location of the Beaton Institute. In 1979, the Xavier College Drama Society moved its operations to the CCB with the construction of a new playhouse as part of college expansions. This would go on to be named the Boardmore Playhouse in honor of Liz and Harry Boardmore in 1990.\nIn 1982, the Nova Scotia government granted CCB a charter for granting university degrees and the institution renamed itself as the University College of Cape Breton (UCCB). UCCB was the first university college in Canada and united diverse education streams such as the liberal arts and sciences with technological and vocational diploma programs.\nA major expansion for the 1987 Canada Winter Games included the construction of sports facilities built at the campus. During the 1990s several campus expansions were built, including the Culture and Heritage Centre as well as academic and research facilities.\nAs a result of a 2004 study the decision was made to rename the institution to reflect its transformation over the previous two decades into primarily a university level institution. The process led to UCCB transferring its trades and technology programs to the Nova Scotia Community College (NSCC), which operated its \"Marconi Campus\" (the former Adult Vocational Training Centre - AVTC) which is located immediately next to the CBU Grand Lake Road campus.\nOn September 23, 2004, the university's Board of Governors voted unanimously to rename the institution Breton University; however, the proposed name was opposed by a number of groups in the institution and local community over the removal of the word \"Cape\" from the name, and the name Cape Breton University was thus adopted instead. The name change became official through the \"University College of Cape Breton Act (amended)\" which received Royal Assent on May 19, 2005.\nThe university is an extreme case of replacing declining domestic enrolment with international students. Growing from under 2,600 students in 2017 to 9,100 in fall 2023 with 80% of those being international. The increase in numbers has led to a rise in reported incidents of racism and criticism from their students regarding a lack of housing and other infrastructure. The death of international student Rajesh Gollapudi in 2022 house fire focused attention on the issue.\n\"Rise Again\" is the official school song of Cape Breton University.\nCampus.\nThe Beaton Institute, housed at CBU, is the second largest public archive in Nova Scotia. Sister Margaret Beaton of Scotland, recognizing that many documents of significance to Cape Breton were being lost to neglect during her career as librarian at Xavier Junior College, began collecting these documents back in 1957. Preceded by Cape Bretoniana, the Beaton Institute operates as a regional archive from and about Cape Breton Island's history, society, politics, economy, health, people, places, and events. The building is 17,000 square feet and includes a reading room, vault, work room, and several offices and specialized rooms. The collection includes paper records, photographs, film, video, audio materials, books, maps, plans, and microfilms, housing 3,000 manuscript collections, 60,000 images, 2,500 sound recordings, 1,500 video cassettes and film reels, 1,500 reference books, 2,000 maps and plans. Materials in the collection reflect the Mi'kmaq, Jewish, Acadian, Ukrainian, African Nova Scotian, Lithuanian, Polish, and Italian communities of Cape Breton, along with a collection of Gaelic materials.\nCBU's library is located adjacent to the Campus Center, along with the main cafeteria, Art Gallery 1, and Boardmore Theatre. The library features twelve special collections, apart from the main collection, including a CBU thesis repository, the Bernier LGBT Collection, the Fortress of Louisbourg Collection, and the F.A.C.E. Collection which provides access to the publications and contributions of the CBU faculty. There is also has a collection of Cape Breton Post and Chronicle Herald publications on microfilm, which can be read on the microfilm readers located on the first floor. CBU Library has access to Novanet Search, Novanet Classic, and WorldCat, allowing students to search for publications from libraries all across Nova Scotia and the world. Interlibrary loaning services are available to access publications and journal articles not held in the CBU Library's collection or accessible through CBU's electronic resources.\nThe university continued to expand with major campus additions initiated in 2009. As a collaborative player, CBU became a lead partner in the establishment of the Cape Breton Health Recreation Complex. The $10 million project is a newly opened health and recreation community facility situated on the CBU campus. It provides CBU students and the community with access to a track and field operation and year-round indoor soccer facilities as well as a fitness centre.\nCBU is growing in terms or residence and enhanced food services through the construction of Harriss Hall, a new student residence and dining hall, in September 2010, giving the campus a total of four residences. Harriss Hall is also the new location for residence mail services, replacing MacDonald, and holds the office of the Residence Life Coordinator. With this new addition, the residence halls now offer meal service and living space for over 550 students. Recently, each dorm, along with the off-campus students, have been assigned colors and animals to represent them in residence competitions. The four residences on campus include Cabot Residence, MacDonald Residence, Harriss Hall, and Alumni Hall. MacDonald offers single and double rooms, Harriss offers single suites, Cabot offers four-bedroom apartments, and Alumni offers five-bedroom apartments along with two-bedroom dorms.\nIn 2010, funded by both public and private investment, construction began on the Verschuren Centre for Sustainability in Energy &amp; Environment (CSEE). The purpose of this centre was to plan and carry out research about new sources of energy and ways of increasing environmental sustainability on the east coast of Canada. In October of 2020, the Centre incorporated as a non-profit and separated from the university.\nIn 2012, the new Shannon School of Business building opened and became the new home of the Shannon School of Business faculty and programs. \nThe university built a three-turbine, 5.4-megawatt wind farm off campus, at a cost of $17.6 million in partnership with Natural Forces Technologies, with the aim of producing enough electricity to offset its carbon dioxide emissions. The project took advantage of a government program which paid a premium rate per kilowatt for energy from small-scale green energy facilities. The farm is expected to generate approximately $2.1 million in annual revenue.\nNova Scotia Premier Tim Houston announced that a medical school will be established at CBU, in conjunction with Dalhousie University, opening no later than fall 2025.\nAcademics.\nEnrolment.\nCape Breton University currently has about 7,000 full-time and part-time students, of which roughly three quarters are international. Since 2017, a focus on international enrolment at CBU has more than doubled enrolment, with the number of students increasing by over 1,000 per year in 2018, 2019, and 2022. Public criticism of CBU's foreign enrolment policies came after the death of a CBU student in a house fire. In 2023, total enrolment at CBU increased by 53.6% compared to the previous year.\nRankings.\nCape Breton University has ranked 20th in the MacLean's primarily undergraduate university rankings for 2024, and 47th in their 2024 reputational survey. The university ranked 17th out of 20 in the 2024 in the Reputational Survey for primarily undergraduate universities.\nMembership and Accreditation.\nCape Breton University is a regular institutional member of the Association of Atlantic Universities (AAU), Universities Canada (UC), Colleges and Institutes Canada (CICan), and the Canadian Bureau for International Education (CBIE).\nBoth elementary and secondary streams of the Bachelor of Education are recognized by the Nova Scotia Office of Teacher Certification. All four tracks of the Nursing program are accredited by the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing (CASN). Two Engineering programs are accredited by the Canadian Council of Technicians and Technologists (CCTT). The Bachelor of Health Sciences, Public Health (BHSc) is accredited by the Board of Certification of the Canadian Institute of Public Health Inspectors.\nCape Breton University is an active member of the University of the Arctic. UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.\nAcademic structure.\nVirtually all Cape Breton University degree, diploma and certificate programs offer a transition-to-work component through co-op education, work placements, internships and work-study programs. The university is composed of the following schools and affiliated colleges:\nSchool of Arts and Social Sciences.\nDean: Dr. Andrew Parnaby\nThe School of Arts and Social Sciences offers 15 Bachelor of Arts (BA) options, 12 Bachelor of Arts Community Studies (BACS) options, 1 diploma option, and 9 certificate options. It also includes a minor in Gaelic. Both the BA and BACS include an Honours option.\nIn 2016, the university began offering an interdisciplinary Bachelor of Arts and Science in Environment (BASE) degree. In 2023, the School began offering a post-baccalaureate Bachelor of Social Work.\nSchool of Education and Health.\nDean: Dr. Ellyn Lyle \nThe School of Education and Health (SEH) offers four Master of Education degrees (one of which is offered jointly with the Memorial University of Newfoundland) and a Bachelor of Education (BEd) degree along with two post-degree diplomas and one certificate. There is also a transfer Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree in nutrition with the University of Prince Edward Island, Mount Saint Vincent University and St. Francis Xavier University. Additionally, the SEH offers a Bachelor of Health Sciences in Public Health. It has previously offered a Bachelor of Emergency Management.\nSchool of Nursing.\nDean: Dr. Kimberley Lamarche\nThe School of Nursing offers three Bachelor of Science Nursing (BSCN) options, a three-year program for students directly from high school, a two-year program for students who have university experience, and a program for Licensed Practical Nurses to become Registered Nurses (typically completed in 24 months).\nShannon School of Business.\nDean: Dr. John Nadeau\nThe Shannon School of Business offers one Master of Business Administration with a focus on Community Economic Development (MBA CED) along with 9 Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) degree options. There is also a Bachelor of Hospitality and Tourism Management. Four post-baccalaureate diplomas are also offered.\nSchool of Science and Technology.\nDean: Dr. Stephanie MacQuarrie\nThe School of Science and Technology offers four Bachelor of Science (BSc) degree options and five Bachelor of Engineering Technology (BET) degree options. The School also offers a Bachelor of Arts and Science in the Environment. Students may also pursue six Bachelor of Engineering (BEng) transfer degree options with Dalhousie University. Jointly with the Canadian Coast Guard College, a Bachelor of Technology in Nautical Science is available.\nUnama'ki College.\nAssociate Vice-President: Stephen Augustine\nDean: Laurianne Sylvester\nIn 2010, Unama'ki College was founded as an offshoot of the school specializing in Mi'kmaq history, culture and education. As of 2013, it has some 250 aboriginal students. Its library holds 1,500 books on aboriginal issues and 7,000 documents.\nThe college includes the following facilities:\nThe Department of Indigenous Studies offers disciplines in Mi\u2019kmaq Studies and Integrative Science.\nScholarships and bursaries.\nCBU offers nine major entrance scholarships based on the student's average from high school. Students with a 90% average or greater are eligible for scholarships ranging in amount from $10,000 (Orpha Thayer-Scott) to $24,000 (Chancellor's) over a four-year period. Other entrance scholarships ranging from $500 to $2,000 a year are also available.\nStudents taking a minimum of 24 credits are eligible for in-course scholarships the following year depending on their academic performance. Unlike in-course bursaries, which are also available, in-course scholarships do not require an application.\nA new Work-Study Bursary Program is also available to provide students with financial need the opportunity for on-campus employment.\nThe Government of Canada sponsors an Aboriginal Bursaries Search Tool that lists over 680 scholarships, bursaries, and other incentives offered by governments, universities, and industry to support Aboriginal post-secondary participation. Cape Breton University scholarships for Aboriginal, First Nations and M\u00e9tis students include: Earth Tech/CBCL Award \u2013 Entrance Award; Verschuren Family Entrance Scholarship; Wood, Walker Foundation Aboriginal Awards Entrance Scholarship; Bank of Montreal Aboriginal Business Administration Student Scholarship.\nResearch.\nAssociate Vice-President, Academic &amp; Research: Dr. Tanya Brann-Barrett\nCBU is a small comprehensive university that performs over $3 million in externally funded research and employed over 65 students as researchers in 2011. The Office of Research and Graduate Studies publishes two annual research publication titled Research Matters, as well as a separate student Research Matters magazine. Research chairs at CBU include:\nAdditionally, Dr. Bruce Hatcher is the Director of the Bras D'Or Institute.\nProjects are funded by all federal granting councils (CFI, NSRIT, NSERC, SSHRC, CIHR, AIF projects).\nThe President's Award for Excellence in Research is an annual award which recognizes members of the CBU Faculty who demonstrate excellence in research and scholarship. From 2012, the winners have been:\nStudents' union.\nThe Cape Breton University Students' Union provides services such as the Emergency Bursary Fund, funding and management of societies, health and dental plans, Food Bank, Women's Centre, Pride and Ally Centre, Multicultural Hub, Capers Helping Capers, The Orange Initiative, Caper Convenience (store), and free legal service. The CBUSU's main focus is advocacy on behalf of its members, and it is also the largest employer of students on the CBU campus.\nStudent Representative Council.\nThe SRC acts as the board of directors for the Union. It is a body of students elected to represent the various demographics of CBU, including the different schools within it. They meet on a regular basis to vote on motions put before the SRC by representatives or CBU students.\nThe current Executive includes:\nClubs and societies.\nThe CBU Students' Union has had over 60 societies since 2003.\nNewspaper.\nThe \"Caper Times\" is a newspaper owned collectively by the students of Cape Breton University and published by the Publishing Board of the \"Caper Times\". The newspaper has been autonomous from the Cape Breton University Students' Union since March 1, 2013. It is a member of the Canadian University Press. The newspaper publishes as an electronic monthly newsletter, which is tailored specifically for Cape Breton University students and faculty.\nAthletics.\nCBU is represented in the Atlantic University Sport (AUS) association by the CBU Capers. The Capers' varsity program includes four teams: men's and women's soccer and basketball teams. All sports teams wear uniforms with the Caper logo and mascot along with the school colour (orange).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32093", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32093", "title": "UCCB", "text": "UCCB can refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32094", "revid": "35325894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32094", "title": "University of New Brunswick", "text": "Canadian public university New Brunswick, Canada\nThe University of New Brunswick (UNB) is a public research university with two primary campuses in Fredericton and Saint John, New Brunswick. It is the oldest English-language university in Canada, and among the oldest public universities in North America. With Canada's oldest engineering programme, UNB is constantly ranked by the Times Higher Education amongst the top 300 engineering schools in the world, or top 3% of over 7000 universities that offer engineering worldwide.\nUNB has two main campuses: the original campus in Fredericton (UNBF), established in 1785, and a smaller campus in Saint John (UNBSJ), which opened in 1964. The Saint John campus is home to New Brunswick's anglophone medical school, Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick, an affiliate of Dalhousie University. Additionally, there are two small satellite health sciences campuses in Moncton and Bathurst. UNB offers over 75 degrees in fourteen faculties at the undergraduate and graduate levels, with a total student enrolment of 9,725 between the two principal campuses during the 2021\u20132022 year. UNB was named the most entrepreneurial university in Canada at the 2014 Startup Canada Awards.\nUNB was founded by a group of seven Loyalists who left the United States after the American Revolution., and has educated numerous Canadian federal cabinet ministers, including Sir John Douglas Hazen, William Pugsley and Gerald Merrithew, many Premiers of New Brunswick such as Frank McKenna and Blaine Higgs, three puisne justices of the Supreme Court of Canada, Oswald Smith Crocket, James Wilfred Estey, G\u00e9rard La Forest, as well as prominent artists and writers. UNB had ties to the Confederation Poets movement; Bliss Carman and Sir Charles G.D. Roberts were alumni.\nHistory.\nFounding and charters.\nIn 1783, Loyalist settlers began to build upon the ruins of a former Acadian village called Ste-Anne-des-Pays-Bas. The new settlement was named Frederick's Town in honour of Prince Frederick, son of King George III and uncle of Queen Victoria.\nInitially modelled on the Anglican ideals of older, European institutions, the University of New Brunswick was founded in 1785 as the Academy of Liberal Arts and Sciences, following a petition to the Governor-in-Council on December 13, 1785. The petition requesting the establishment of the school, titled \"The Founders' Petition of 1785,\" was addressed to Governor Thomas Carleton and was signed by seven Loyalist men: William Paine, William Wanton, George Sproule, Zephaniah Kingsley, Sr., John Coffin, Ward Chipman, and Adino Paddock.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn response to the request, Carleton requested a drawn \"draft charter\" modelled on King's College and 6,000 acres of reserved land in Fredericton Parish for the proposed institution. By an 1800 provincial charter, signed by Provincial Secretary Jonathan Odell, the Academy of Liberal Arts and Sciences was transformed into the College of New Brunswick. The college was succeeded by King's College, which was granted by royal charter in December 1827. King's College operated under the control of the Church of England until 1859, when it was made non-sectarian by an act of the provincial legislature that transformed the college into the University of New Brunswick. In 1866, Mary Kingsley Tibbits became the first regularly admitted female student of UNB. By 1867, the University of New Brunswick had two faculties: Arts and Applied Science. It awarded the degrees of Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science, Master of Arts, and Doctor of Science. The latter was awarded only in the fields of civil engineering, electrical engineering, and forestry.\nUNB was one of only two schools in Canada in the late 1800s that offered a Forestry Engineering degree (the other being the University of Toronto). So when the federal government began creating Dominion Forests on federal land in Western Canada between 1899 and 1906, most of the first Forest Rangers were from UNB.\n20th/21st centuries.\nIn 1906, UNB established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors exercising exclusive control over financial policy and other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to provide institutional leadership. At this time, the university had 156 male students, 21 female students, and only eleven academic staff, who were all male.\nIn 1964, a second, smaller campus was established in Saint John, New Brunswick. The growth of the UNBSJ campus is particularly notable, for the campus began with only 96 students spread throughout various buildings in Saint John's central business district. In 1968, UNBSJ moved to its new home at Tucker Park.\nIn 1968, the university's governance structure was reorganized with the aim of giving faculty members control of academic affairs. The UNB Act of 1968 led to the formation of two governing bodies, both chaired by the president. The Board of Governors, whose role was to oversee and give guidance to president as \"chief executive officer\" was to have four faculty representatives, while the majority of the Senate was to be made up of faculty members elected by their peers.\nThe Association of University of New Brunswick Teachers (AUNBT) was established in 1954; in 1979, this association became the bargaining agent for all full-time academic staff, and in 2008, it achieved certification for contract academic staff.\nThroughout the 20th century, the University of New Brunswick held annual convocations during the month of October. One of the more notable convocations occurred on October 8, 1957 when United States Senator John F. Kennedy attended as a guest speaker and was the recipient of an honorary Doctor of Laws degree. His younger brother, Robert F. Kennedy, attended another convocation on October 12, 1967, where he delivered the main address and was granted the same degree as his brother.\nRelocation of the Faculty of Law.\nIn 1959, the Faculty of Law moved from Saint John to Fredericton following a report on the status of legal education in Canada by Professor Maxwell Cohen from McGill University, claiming that the Saint John Law School was only \"nominally a faculty of UNB\". This prompted Chancellor Lord Beaverbrook and UNB President Colin B. Mackay to permanently move the Law School despite the Dean's objections.\nCampuses.\nThe University of New Brunswick (UNB) is split into two primary campuses: the main campus, UNB Fredericton (UNBF), in Fredericton, as well as the smaller campus, UNB Saint John (UNBSJ), which is in the Millidgeville area of New Brunswick, next to the Saint John Regional Hospital.\nAs of the 2021\u20132022 academic year, UNB Fredericton (UNBF) had an enrolment of 7,580, while UNB Saint John had an enrolment of 2,145. Both campuses have undergone significant expansion over the years, and many university buildings have received funding from Lord Beaverbrook and other prominent industrialists and philanthropists. UNB's largest expansion coincided with the baby boom, when its Fredericton campus tripled in size.\nFredericton.\nThe UNB Fredericton campus is on a hill overlooking the Saint John River. The campus is well known for its colourful fall foliage, Georgian style red-brick buildings, and a very steep hill. UNB Fredericton has shared the \"College Hill\" with St. Thomas University (STU) since 1964, when the former St. Thomas College moved from Chatham, NB (now Miramichi). While the universities share some infrastructure, they remain separate institutions.\nNational Historic Sites.\nTwo buildings in Fredericton have been designated National Historic Sites of Canada: the 1827 Sir Howard Douglas Hall (Old Arts), and the 1851 William Brydone Jack Observatory.\nArchitecture.\nArchitect G. Ernest Fairweather designed several of the campus buildings, including the Old Civil Engineering Building (1900) and the Gymnasium (1906). In addition, several of the stained glass windows in the Convocation Hall were created by Robert McCausland Limited. UNBF's War Memorial Hall (usually referred to as Memorial Hall), originally built as a science building in 1924, honours the 35 UNB Alumni who died in World War I. UNBF's Brigadier Milton F. Gregg, V.C., Centre for the Study of War and Society (usually referred to as The Gregg Centre) was created in 2006. The Richard J. Currie Center, a five-storey 139,000-square-foot building, was constructed in 2013.\nSaint John.\nThe UNB Saint John campus (UNBSJ) is in Tucker Park in the Millidgeville neighbourhood, several kilometres north of the city's central business district, and has views of the Kennebecasis River and Grand Bay-Westfield. New Brunswick's largest health care facility, Saint John Regional Hospital, is adjacent to the UNBSJ campus.\nAside from UNB's own facilities, the Saint John campus houses Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick for Dalhousie University, as well as the Gerald S Merrithew Allied Health Education Centre for the New Brunswick Community College.\nDalhousie Medicine New Brunswick, which opened in the fall of 2010, is a medical school built with provincial funding that operates as a partnership between the Government of New Brunswick, the University of New Brunswick and Dalhousie University\u2019s Faculty of Medicine. It is the first anglophone medical school programme in New Brunswick, annually serving 40 students. The New Brunswick Community College's Gerald S Merrithew Allied Health Education Centre, which opened on September 1, 2011, is near the Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick building.\nHistory.\nUNB's presence in Saint John dates back to 1923 when the Saint John Law School, established in 1892, became part of UNB. In 1953, the law school moved to the Starr Residence, known today as Beaverbrook House, which is still operated by UNBSJ. Eventually, after nearly forty years of remaining in Saint John, it relocated to the main campus in Fredericton.\nStarting in 1951, UNB offered summer extension courses in Saint John High School and St. Vincent's Convent, which proved to be successful. This highlighted the existing demand for higher education in Saint John, which had been recognized by the city's Board of Trade as early as 1947. In 1959, there was a growing interest in establishing a college in Saint John, and a group called \"Saint John College Development Incorporated\" began advocating for a postsecondary institution in the city. However, the proposal faced skepticism due to UNB's financial challenges and the perceived surplus of degree-granting institutions in New Brunswick.\nDuring this discussion, the City of Saint John provided the site of a former 229-acre farm on Sandy Point Road. The location was deemed advantageous due to its views, services, and its position in a rapidly developing area of the city. In September 1964, Beaverbrook House reopened as a satellite campus of UNB, enrolling 100 students. Over time, UNB Saint John expanded its operations to various locations, including the Old Provincial Building, the New Brunswick Technology Institute, the Presbyterian Church Hall, the YMCA building, as well as various high schools. Faculty recruitment posed a challenge, with many commuting from Fredericton or hired from high schools.\nSimultaneously, plans for a new campus on the Tucker Park site progressed, with UNB's consulting architects, Larson and Larson, tasked with preparing a concept plan. The initial construction cost was $1,350,000, which was part of a $10 million fundraising campaign led by UNB. In the same year, G. Forbes Elliot took the role as UNB Saint John's first principal. In 1965, the City of Saint John transferred ownership of 87 acres of land for the new campus. Construction on the Tucker Park campus began in 1966, and the site officially opened in 1969, featuring Hazen Hall, Ganong Hall, and the Ward Chipman Library.\nThe campus expanded over the next two decades, constructing the G. Forbes Elliot Athletics Centre in 1975, the Canada Games Stadium in 1985, and the Thomas J. Condon Student Centre in 1986. Despite these developments, UNBSJ was considered a commuter campus until 1993, following the construction of the Sir James Dunn Residence. Additional buildings were constructed over subsequent years, such as the K.C. Irving Hall, the Modern Languages Centre (now home to Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick), the Dr. Colin B. Mackay Residence, and the Hans W. Klohn Commons.\nArchitecture.\nConstruction on the Hans W. Klohn Commons began on April 1, 2010, and the building officially opened on September 7, 2011. This building is one of the most environmentally friendly buildings in Atlantic Canada. The building features an electric elevator that produces power for the commons. The building is part of the Tucker Park enhancement project, which includes the refurbishment of the Canada Games Stadium, the Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick facility, and the New Brunswick Community College's Allied Health building. The Commons houses the library, Writing Centre, Math and Science Help Centre, an IT help desk, and the Commons Cafe.\nUNBSJ's third residence building, named the Barry and Flora Beckett Residence, opened in Winter 2021 and is a geothermally-heated building, offering 104 beds. The naming of the residence building honors the Becketts; two prominent figures in the campus' history. Dr. Barry Beckett was once a chemistry professor during UNB Saint John's earlier days as a campus in Uptown Saint John, while Flora Beckett taught mathematics and served as the director at the Math Help Centre. In light of the announcement regarding the Integrated Health Initiative (IHI), plans were made to reconstruct the Ward Chipman Library, which had been unused ever since being replaced by the Hans W. Klohn Commons, into the Health and Social Innovation Centre (HSIC). Although it was initially planned to be renovated, the former library was demolished in 2023 to be replaced by the HSIC.\nResearch and academics.\nUNB is the seat of 14 Canada Research Chairs and is home to more than 60 research centres and institutes. It conducts about 75 per cent of all university research in the province. UNB's annual research spending (2013\u201314) generated $32.2 million in added provincial income for the New Brunswick economy. Between 2004 and 2009, the university's research revenue increased by 77 per cent: the highest increase among Canadian comprehensive universities.\nUNB has developed technology used by Google, is a research partner with the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, is a global leader in powered prosthetic research and developing MRI technology, and is home to one of the motion analysis labs in North America as well as the world's first research centre in dermoskeletics.\nReputation.\nIn 2021, UNB was awarded 5 stars from the \"QS World University Rankings\", the second university in Atlantic Canada to receive this rating.\nIn \"Maclean's\" 2023 \"comprehensive university\" rankings, UNB ranked eighth out of 15 universities, tied with Toronto Metropolitan University.\nIn 2014, UNB was awarded the most entrepreneurial university in Canada by Startup Canada. The university has also supported in launching 23 new startup companies as of 2015.\nIn 2012, UNB's law school was ranked second nationally in elite firm hiring by \"Maclean's\". According to Canadian Lawyer Magazine, the law school ranks among the top five in Canada.\nIn 2008, the \"National Post\" and the \"Ottawa Citizen\" recognized UNB as being among the top three comprehensive research universities in Canada for the highest percentage growth of research income across a five-year period.\nFaculty of Engineering.\nThe University of New Brunswick is noted particularly for engineering, and its Faculty of Engineering, which opened in the late 1800s, was the first to offer engineering degrees in Canada. Engineering is one of the three major UNB faculties, with five departments offering seven accredited engineering programmes in Civil Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Geodesy &amp; Geomatics Engineering, Geological Engineering (jointly offered with the Faculty of Science), Mechanical Engineering, and Software Engineering (jointly offered with the Faculty of Computer Science). The faculty had 920 full-time equivalent students as of Winter 2021. The Times Higher Education\u2019s 2023 World University Rankings list by subject has placed UNB Engineering in the top 250 engineering programmes in the world.\nUNB Engineering is renowned for its multi-faceted programmes like Geodesy and Geomatics \u2013 one of the world's top-ranked departments and UNB's foremost research hub reputed as a leader in satellite positioning technology, high-accuracy gravity field determination, and 3D high-resolution digital mapping systems. The Department's researchers helped NASA map the Moon, designed technologies used by Google and USGS, developed satellite technology for precision mapping of polar regions and the Arctic Ocean, improved fundamental mathematics and physics methodology like spectral analysis, and helped nations solve strategic problems and safety issues across the globe.\nPoets' Corner.\nBecause so many of UNB's students, alumni, and professors have produced celebrated poetry, the city of Fredericton has earned the nickname \"Poets' Corner.\" Two of Canada's four Confederation Poets \u2013 Sir Charles G.D. Roberts and Bliss Carman \u2013 were educated at UNB, as was Francis Joseph Sherman, along with a number of notable 20th- and 21st-century Canadian writers. In 1947, the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada unveiled a \"Poet's Corner\" monument in honour of Carman, Roberts, and Sherman.\nInstitute of Biomedical Engineering.\nThe Institute of Biomedical Engineering (IBME) on the Fredericton campus is one of the research institutes in biomedical engineering in Canada. It was founded in 1965 as the Bio-Engineering Institute, making it one of the oldest research institutes to be solely dedicated to the field of biomedical engineering. The institute is also the region's prosthetic fitting centre where amputees are fitted with \"intelligent\" artificial limbs. The institute also carries out research in the field of myoelectric signal processing, biomedical instrumentation and human motion analysis. The IBME also developed the UNB Test of Prosthetic Function which is used by researchers all over the world. Although the institute does not offer degrees in biomedical engineering, students at UNB usually enrol in one of the other faculties of engineering such as electrical or mechanical and pursue their research in biomedical engineering at the IBME.\nCanadian Rivers Institute.\nThe Canadian Rivers Institute was founded in 2000 and is a site of river sciences research. The mandate of the CRI is to conduct both multi-disciplinary basic and applied research focusing on rivers from their headwaters to their estuaries, to promote the conservation, protection and sustainable use of water, and to educate professionals, graduate students and the public on water sciences. Members of the CRI conduct research on regional, national and international issues related to rivers and their land-water linkages.\nWith researchers from both UNB campuses, the CRI develops the aquatic science needed to understand, protect and sustain water resources. Since 2013, the CRI and its partners have been working with NB Power to research the potential environmental impacts of the future options being considered for the Mactaquac Generating Station. The Mactaquac Dam on the Saint John River will reach the end of its lifespan by 2030, and CRI has been evaluating key environmental challenges such as river health, fish passage and flow management. In 2015, CRI was given an additional $2.8 million from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) to conduct an aquatic ecosystem study on the Saint John River.\nIn 2021, Parks Canada announced their first research chair in aquatic restoration, carrying out Atlantic salmon recovery research with researchers from the Canadian Rivers Institute.\nMi'kmaq-Wolastoqey Centre (MWC).\nUNB created its BEd programme for First Nations students in 1977 in an effort to help First Nations communities take control of their own schools. In 1981, the Mi'kmaq-Maliseet Institute (MMI), the former name of the MWC, opened its doors with an expanded mandate to train professionals and improve First Nations access to First Nations education. The Institute provided a variety of services, including research, curriculum development, language education, policy development, children's literacy, and more. In addition, the Institute funded the Mi'kmaq-Maliseet Resource Collection, which contains materials that are immensely valuable to knowledge of First Nations culture, history, and perspective in the region.\nCanadian Research Institute for Social Policy.\nThe Canadian Research Institute for Social Policy was founded in 1996 as the Atlantic Centre for Policy Research, supported by the Canadian Institute For Advanced Research. The name change took effect in January 2000. The institute was designated as a Statistics Canada Research Data Centre in 2002. The institute brings interdisciplinary researchers together to focus on issues pertaining to social policy on a national and international level, specifically issues relevant to children and youth development. Projects included the New Brunswick Schools Early Literacy Initiative; Mapping Literacy as a Determinant of Health; Raising and Leveling the Bar: A Collaborative Research Initiative on Children's Learning, Behavioural, and Health Outcomes; and the Confident Learners Initiative.\nMedical Training Centre.\nThe University of New Brunswick's Medical Training Centre is the first anglophone school of medicine in New Brunswick. It is a joint medical programme, offered with Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine.\nPolytechnic controversy.\nIn the fall of 2007, a report commissioned by the provincial government recommended that UNBSJ and the New Brunswick Community College be reformed and consolidated into a new polytechnic post-secondary institute. The proposal immediately came under heavy criticism and led to several organized protests. Under heavy fire from the public, the Graham government eventually announced that it would set aside the possibility of UNB Saint John losing its status as a university and would refer the report to a working group for further study. The government would go on to announce in January that UNBSJ would retain its liberal arts programme and its association with UNB and the working group reported back to government in May, with its findings and government's response being made public in June.\nThe Strax affair.\nIn March 1969, UNB was censured by the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT) because of its suspension of Norman Strax, a physics professor who had led protests in September 1968 against the introduction of photo id cards. The censure was lifted after the university agreed to engage in arbitration with Strax. Among the \"tumultuous events\" of the 1968\u201369 academic year were the occupation by Strax's supporters of his office in Loring Bailey Hall and the prosecution and jailing of a student journalist over an article in the \"Brunswickan\".\nScholarships.\nUNB awards over five million dollars in scholarships each year. These include the Blake-Kirkpatrick, Beaverbrook, and President's scholarships. With $7.2 million available in undergraduate scholarships, one in two students entering UNB from high school received a scholarship as of 2015. UNB has a scholarship guarantee in which any admitted student with an average of 80% or higher will receive a guaranteed amount of five hundred dollars.\nAs a member of the Loran Scholars university consortium, UNB offers a matching tuition waiver as part of a $100,000 undergraduate scholarship to recognize incoming students who demonstrate \"exemplary character, service and leadership\". Five Loran Scholars have studied at UNB over the years. Additionally, it is part of the Schulich Leader Scholarships programme, awarding an $100,000 STEM scholarship to an incoming engineering student and an $80,000 scholarship to a science, technology, or mathematics student each year.\nStudent life.\nUNB has approximately 10,000 students from over 100 countries. The University has a total of 16 residences: 13 in the Fredericton campus, and three in the Saint John campus. Students have over 125 clubs and societies to choose from between both of these campuses. Students on both campuses have access to UNB's facilities, fitness classes and outdoor activities such as snowshoeing and kayaking. There are exchanges available in more than 35 countries around the world with over 89 university partners.\nAthletics.\nThe University of New Brunswick has two sports teams, one for each campus. UNB Fredericton's team is called the UNB Reds, and UNB Saint John's team is called the UNB Saint John Seawolves. The Reds varsity teams primarily participate in Atlantic University Sport (AUS) and U Sports. The Saint John Seawolves varsity teams primarily participate in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association (ACAA) and the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association. There are teams for cross country, curling, basketball, hockey, soccer, swimming, track and field, and volleyball. Out of these sports, there are additional teams for the Saint John Seawolves for basketball, soccer, and volleyball. Men's and women's track &amp; field and cross country were added as a varsity sport for 2010\u20132011; this is a joint Fredericton/Saint John Campus programme.\nIn the past, UNBF used different names for each individual sport's team; for instance, the men's swim team was the Beavers, and the hockey team was the Red Devils. The university club teams, which are supported financially by the Student Union as well as by individual members of the teams, do not use the Reds name and thus continue the tradition of using different nicknames for each sport.\nInsignia and other representations.\nCoat of arms.\nThe University of New Brunswick's official coat of arms was introduced in 1956 after being approved by the University of New Brunswick Senate. Previously, UNB's only insignia was the Great Seal, which the New Brunswick Legislative Assembly granted during the Act of the University of New Brunswick in 1859. In 1952, a subcommittee of the UNB Senate was tasked with considering designs and suggestions.\nThe coat of arms features two gold beavers in front of a crimson background, on either side of the Book of Learning, which features the University's motto \"Sapere Aude\". The bottom part of the shield contains a ship in front of a gold background, adapted from the New Brunswick coat of arms. This recognizes UNB's status as a provincial university.\nThe design was described by a proclamation from the College of Heralds as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Per chevron Gules and Or in chief and open Book proper inscribed with the words Sapere Aude in letters Sable supported by two Beavers sejant respectant Gold and in base a Lymphad said set pennon and flags flying and Oars in action also Sable.\"\nSongs.\nTraditional among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various times such as commencement, convocation, and athletic events are \"Carmina Universitatis Novi Brunsvici\", \"Alma Mater\" (1904), and \"UNB Anthem\", with words by A.G. Bailey and music by D.V. Start.\nNotable academic milestones.\nUNB Saint John was the first university in Canada to offer an e-business programme with its bachelor of business administration in electronic commerce. The university has since been ranked by \"Canadian Business Magazine\" as first in e-business.\nPeople.\nNotable alumni.\nAs of 2023, the University of New Brunswick reports over 95,000 living alumni, with 41,715 in New Brunswick.\nMedia.\nThe university presses, \"The Baron\" and \"The Brunswickan\", are members of Canadian University Press. Publishing since 1867, \"The Brunswickan\" is the oldest official student publication in Canada.\nUNB is also home to several notable magazines and journals, such as \"The Fiddlehead\" and \"Studies in Canadian Literature\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32095", "revid": "275342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32095", "title": "University of Sudbury", "text": "Bilingual and tri-cultural university in Sudbury, Ontario, Canada\nThe University of Sudbury () is a French-language and tri-cultural university in Sudbury, Ontario, Canada. It provides undergraduate programming in Religious Studies, Philosophy, Indigenous Studies, Journalism, and Folklore. It was a federated school of Laurentian University until May 1, 2021, when Laurentian terminated its relationships with all of its federated schools as part of the 2021 Laurentian University financial crisis; it was subsequently announced that the University of Sudbury will continue operations as an independent French-language university.\nThe university is a member of Association des coll\u00e8ges et universit\u00e9s de la francophonie canadienne (Association of Colleges and Universities of the Canadian Francophonie), a network of academic institutions of the Canadian Francophonie.\nFounded as a Roman Catholic institution, the university became officially secular in 2021.\nHistory.\nThe university was founded as the Coll\u00e8ge du Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur (Sacred Heart College) in 1913 by the Jesuits. Exclusively French from 1916, Sacred Heart College was the centre of education for young Franco-Ontarians for decades since it was the first, and for a long time, the only institution of higher learning in Northern Ontario. In 1957, it changed its name and became the University of Sudbury. In 1959, it became a bilingual university. In 1960, it formed the Catholic component of Laurentian federation.\nA plaque was erected by the Ontario Heritage Trust, an agency of the Ministry of Heritage, Sport, Tourism and Culture Industries, at Notre Dame &amp; Kathleen Streets, Sudbury:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sacred Heart College\nThe Society of Jesus opened a classical college at this site in 1913. The next year the province granted Sacred Heart College a charter giving it degree-granting powers. At first the college was bilingual, but after 1916 it taught exclusively in French. Sacred Heart College became a centre for the education and formation of young Franco-Ontarian men.\nIn 1957, it changed its name to the University of Sudbury, and became the Catholic component of Laurentian University, in 1960. The Jesuits continued to teach in the secondary school here until 1967. Sacred Heart College played a major role in the development of the Franco-Ontarian community of northeastern Ontario.\u2014\u200a\nIn 2017, the Ontario Heritage Trust also erected a permanent plaque at the current University of Sudbury location, to commemorate the creation and first raising of the Franco-Ontarian flag:\nThe Franco-Ontarian Flag\nThe Franco-Ontarian Flag was first raised at the University of Sudbury on September 25, 1975, at a time when Sudbury was experiencing unprecedented growth in Franco-Ontarian arts and culture. Conceived by Ga\u00e9tan Gervais, historian at Laurentian University, and student Michel Dupuis, the first flag was made by Jacline England, a student and staff member at the university. Refusing to take sole credit for the flag, its creators hoped that the Franco-Ontarian community would claim it as their own and a committee was formed to promote it. The flag was adopted as a unifying symbol during times of struggle and resistance, such as the Penetanguishene school crisis of 1979 and the SOS Montfort campaign in Ottawa in 1997. In 2001, the Ontario Legislature officially recognized the flag as the emblem of the Ontario French-speaking community. Since 2010, Franco-Ontarian Day has been celebrated annually on September 25. Today, the green and white flag with the French lily and the Ontario trillium endures as the most prominent symbol of the province\u2019s diverse francophone community and represents more than 400 years of the French presence in Ontario.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32096", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32096", "title": "University of Prince Edward Island", "text": "University in Prince Edward Island, Canada\nThe University of Prince Edward Island (UPEI) is a public university in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada, and the only university in the province. Founded in 1969, the enabling legislation is the \"University Act, R.S.P.E.I 2000.\"\nHistory.\nThe university traces its roots back to 1804, when Lt. Governor Edmund Fanning and the Legislative Council of Prince Edward Island called for the establishment of Kent College. By 1820, the first Kent College building, known as \"the National School\", or James Breading's School was erected. It was later succeeded by Central Academy, which received a Royal Charter in 1834.\nThe Colleges were renamed for the Prince of Wales in honour of the future King Edward VII in 1860. The University of Prince Edward Island also traces its roots back to its two earlier predecessor organizations, St. Dunstan's University and Prince of Wales College, founded in 1855 and 1860 respectively. The two institutions were merged in 1969 by the government of Alex Campbell as part of a campaign to integrate the Island's Roman Catholic and Protestant communities, which had previously maintained the two separate institutions of higher learning. Holland College was later created to fill the void left by the merger of Prince of Wales College into the university.\nThe University of Prince Edward Island is a non-denominational university established in 1969 by the amalgamation of Prince of Wales College (PWC) founded in 1834, and St. Dunstan's University (SDU) founded in 1855. The first student to enrol was Elizabeth Rollins Epperly, who would later become the university president. Its predecessor institutions ceased to operate although St. Dunstan's still retains its charter and the lands that were home to Prince of Wales became the campus for Holland College. UPEI is located on the former St. Dunstan's campus.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, UPEI received a $500,000 grant from the Public Health Agency of Canada's Immunization Partnership Fund to develop and implement the Island Vaccine Education Program, intended to increase uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among vulnerable families.\nLegacy.\nOn 8 May 2004 Canada Post issued 'University of Prince Edward Island, 1804-2004' as part of the Canadian Universities series. The stamp was based on a design by Denis L'Allier and on a photograph by Guy Lavigueur. The 49\u00a2 stamps are perforated 13.5 and were printed by Canadian Bank Note Company, Limited.\nCampus.\nUPEI's campus, located at the corner of Belvedere and University Avenues in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island's capital city, is built on 134 acres (54 hectares) of land. The Confederation Trail runs alongside its eastern boundary.\nOriginal SDU buildings in the central quadrangle have been renovated to retain integrity of their exterior aesthetic design while meeting modern standards. Main Building, built in 1854, and Dalton Hall, built between 1917 and 1919, are on the registry of Historic Places of Canada.\nThe War Memorial Hall (more generally known as Memorial Hall) is a landmark building on the campus of UPEI. Built as a men's residence building in 1946, Memorial Hall honours alumni who had enlisted and died in the First World War, and in the Second World War.\nOver the past three decades, UPEI has experienced significant growth with many new buildings integrated into the campus, including Central Utility Building (1973), Duffy Science Centre (1967), Blanchard Hall (1973), Bernardine Hall (1968), Robertson Library (1975), Atlantic Veterinary College (1986), Chi-Wan Young Sports Centre (1990), Wanda Wyatt Dining Hall (1990), Food Technology Centre, K.C. Irving Chemistry Centre (1997), W.A. Murphy Student Centre (2002), MacLauchlan Arena (2004), Bill and Denise Andrew Hall residence facility (2006), expansions to the Atlantic Veterinary College (2007 and 2009), Regis and Joan Duffy Research Centre (2007), a research and development laboratory which is home to the National Research Council of Canada, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, and other partners, and Don and Marion McDougall Hall (2008). The most recent addition is the Health Sciences Building, home to the School of Nursing and Applied Human Sciences programs.\nIn October 2004, the UPEI administration undertook an official campus plan to improve the aesthetics of modern buildings constructed since the amalgamation which do not enhance the original SDU design, and to take overall campus aesthetics into account for future developments on and adjacent to the campus.\nOrganization.\nThe current president and vice-chancellor is Dr. Wendy Rodgers, who began her appointment on June 1, 2024. The current chancellor is the Honourable Diane Griffin, who was installed on April 5, 2024.\nAcademics.\nUPEI's seven faculties (arts, business, education, nursing, science, sustainable design engineering and veterinary medicine) and two schools (Mathematical &amp; Computational Sciences and Climate Change &amp; Adaptation) offer a wide range of programs and degrees to undergraduate, graduate and doctoral students. Co-op programs have been established in Business Administration, Computer Science, Physics, and Dietetics. The University is presently developing a Faculty of Medicine, in association with the Memorial University of Newfoundland.\nMaster's and Doctoral degree programs were first introduced through the Atlantic Veterinary College and, beginning in 1999, a Master of Science degree was offered through the Faculty of Science. In that same year the first students were admitted to the university's new Master of Education program. As of 2010, in addition to the MEd graduate program, the Faculty of Education offered a PhD in Educational Studies. The university also now offers a Master of Arts in Island Studies. Recently the Faculty of Business Administration began offering an Executive Master of Business Administration degree. Since 1998, The Centre for Conflict Resolution Studies has been offering courses leading to a Certificate in Conflict Resolution Studies. The Master of Applied Health Services Research (MAHSR) program is coordinated by the Atlantic Research Training Centre (ARTC).\nThe Faculty of Education offers one-year (12 months) post-degree bachelor's degrees with specializations in international, adult, and indigenous education, French immersion and human resources development, a Master of Education (MEd) in leadership in learning, and a PhD in Educational Studies.\nThe Department of Applied Human Sciences has an accredited dietitian program. The university is accredited by a professional organization such as the Dietitians of Canada and the university's graduates may subsequently become registered dieticians.\nThe Faculty Development Office provides professional development courses applicable to many sectors and industries, including development programs for administrative assistants and new managers; collaboration, conflict, and communication training; and, financial management courses.\nRankings.\nIn \"Maclean's\" 2023 Guide to Canadian Universities, UPEI was ranked eighth in the publication's category for \"primarily undergraduate\" Canadian universities. In 2025 UPEI improved to seventh.\nResearch.\nUPEI manages over $17 million in annual research expenditures. The on-campus biosciences and health research facility is used by researchers from UPEI, National Research Council (Canada), and Agriculture and Agri-Foods Canada.\nUPEI houses the L.M. Montgomery Institute, founded in 1993, which promotes scholarly inquiry into the life, works, culture, and influence of the Canadian writer, L.M. Montgomery. The collection consists of novels, manuscripts, texts, letters, photographs, sound recordings and other Montgomery artifacts and ephemera.\nUPEI joined with Dalhousie University and Memorial University of Newfoundland to form the Ocean Frontier Institute, a collaborative research initiative aimed at harnessing the vast potential of the world's oceans.\nUArctic Membership.\nThe university is an active member of the University of the Arctic. UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.\nThe university participates in UArctic\u2019s mobility program north2north. The aim of that program is to enable students of member institutions to study in different parts of the North.\nStudent life.\nAthletics.\nThe UPEI Panthers have nine teams playing in the Atlantic University Sport (AUS) and the Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS), including men's and women's ice hockey, soccer, basketball, as well as women's field hockey and rugby union and co-ed swimming.\nThe UPEI campus provides its students with many athletics amenities typically found on university campuses. The CARI Complex is a public recreation facility located on the campus and includes two hockey rinks (the MacLauchlan Arena as well as a practice rink) as well as two 25-metre swimming pools (a shallow recreational wading pool, and an eight-lane competitive pool with diving boards). In 2009 UPEI inaugurated the UPEI Alumni Canada Games Place which was built in part to host the 2009 Canada Games. It consists of a \"class 2\" eight-lane 400-metre running track and rugby field that has spectator seating for 1,335.\nStudent Union.\nThe UPEI Student Union (UPEISU) is the students' union representing full-time undergraduate students at the university. It is funded by a student fee collected by the university, and provides advocacy, services, and amenities. The UPEISU Executive and UPEISU Council are elected through general elections of the UPEI full-time undergraduate student body. The Executive is made up a President, VP Academic, VP External, VP Student Life, and VP Finance. The UPEISU Council sits bi-weekly throughout the academic semester and includes representatives from faculty and special interest groups.\nThe amenities and services provided by the UPEISU include: Health and Dental Insurance, Charlottetown Transit System UPASS, Representation and Advocacy - including membership and lobbying in partnership with Canadian Alliance of Student Associations (CASA), Inspiring Innovation Fund, Student Academic Enrichment Fund, Off-Campus Housing Coordination, Volunteer Match Maker, Promotions and Advertising, UPEI Student Handbook, and the W.A. Murphy Student Centre (in collaboration with UPEI).\nThe businesses and operations of the UPEISU include: \nThe UPEI Student Union publishes the school newspaper called \"The Cadre\", which gained attention by becoming one of the first Canadian publications to print the controversial Muhammad cartoons from the \"Jyllands-Posten\".\nResidence.\nThe University of Prince Edward Island provides student accommodations in four different residence buildings on campus: Bill and Denise Andrew Hall, Blanchard Hall, Bernardine Hall, and a mixed-use Performing Arts Centre and Residence. Bill and Denise Andrew Hall has two-room suites with single bedrooms. In Blanchard Hall, each suite has two single bedrooms with a kitchenette and a living room. Bernardine Hall (known as \"Bernie\" to the students) offers suites with two double bedrooms and a shared bathroom. Although the hall is co-ed, one floor is female-only.\nOpened in 2023, the Performing Arts Centre and Residence features two towers of residence apartments and lounges with classroom space and a 400-seat auditorium on the main floor. \nUPEI/SDU/PWC notable people.\nList of presidents.\nIn 2015 each of the first five presidents were recognized as Founders of the University.\nBeing a long-standing university and college in the Maritime province of Prince Edward Island (called the Cradle of Confederation) UPEI/SDU/PWC have been in a position to provide education to a long list of people who have gone to notable achievements. The most well known graduate (of Prince of Wales College) is Lucy Maude Montgomery, author of \"Anne of Green Gables\" and other books. The most distinguished Saint Dunstan's graduate may be James Charles McGuigan, Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria del Popolo in Rome.\nHonorary degrees.\nFollowing is a partial list of Past Honorary Degree Recipients from UPEI:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32097", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32097", "title": "University of Utah", "text": "Public university in Salt Lake City, Utah, US\nThe University of Utah (the U, U of U, or simply Utah) is a public research university in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States. It was established in 1850 as the University of Deseret by the General Assembly of the provisional State of Deseret, making it Utah's oldest institution of higher education. The university received its current name in 1892, four years before Utah attained statehood, and moved to its current location in 1900. It is the flagship university of the Utah System of Higher Education.\nAs of fall 2024, there were 28,064 undergraduate students and 8,817 graduate students, for an enrollment total of 36,881, making it the second-largest public university in Utah. Graduate studies include the S.J. Quinney College of Law and the School of Medicine, Utah's first medical school. It is a member of the Association of American Universities (AAU) and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\".\nAccording to the National Science Foundation, the university received $723.7 million in research and development funding in fiscal year 2023, ranking it 47th in the nation. The university's health care system includes four hospitals, including the University of Utah Hospital and Huntsman Cancer Institute, along with twelve community clinics and specialty centers such as the Moran Eye Center. The university's athletic teams, the Utes, participate in NCAA Division I athletics (FBS for football) as a member of the Big 12 Conference.\nTwenty-two Rhodes Scholars, four Nobel Prize winners, three Turing Award winners, eight MacArthur Fellows, various Pulitzer Prize winners, two astronauts, Gates Cambridge Scholars, and Churchill Scholars have been affiliated with the university as students, researchers, or faculty members in its history.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nSoon after the Mormon pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake valley in 1847, Brigham Young began organizing a Board of Regents to establish a university. The university was established on February 28, 1850, as the \"University of Deseret\" by the General Assembly of the provisional State of Deseret, and Orson Spencer was appointed as the first chancellor of the university. Early classes were held in private homes, or wherever space could be found. The university closed in 1853 due to a lack of funds and lack of feeder schools.\nFollowing years of intermittent classes in the Salt Lake City Council House, the university began to be re-established in 1867 under the direction of David O. Calder, who was followed by John R. Park in 1869. The university moved out of the council house into the Union Academy building in 1876 and onto Union Square in 1884. In 1892, the school's name was changed to the University of Utah, and John R. Park began arranging to obtain land belonging to the U.S. Army's Fort Douglas on the east bench of the Salt Lake Valley, where the university moved permanently in 1900. Additional Fort Douglas land has been granted to the university over the years, and the fort was officially closed on October 26, 1991. Upon his death in 1900, Dr. John R. Park bequeathed his entire fortune to the university.\nThe university grew rapidly in the early 20th century but was involved in an academic freedom controversy in 1915 when Joseph T. Kingsbury recommended that five faculty members be dismissed after a graduation speaker made a speech critical of Utah governor William Spry. One third of the faculty resigned in protest of these dismissals. Some felt that the dismissals were a result of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' influence on the university, while others felt that they reflected a more general pattern of repressing religious and political expression that might be deemed offensive. The controversy was largely resolved when Kingsbury resigned in 1916, but university operations were again interrupted by World War I, and later The Great Depression and World War II. Student enrollment dropped to a low of 3,418 during the last year of World War II, but A. Ray Olpin made substantial additions to campus following the war, and enrollment reached 12,000 by the time he retired in 1964. Growth continued in the following decades as the university developed into a research center for fields such as computer science and medicine.\nDuring the 2002 Winter Olympics, the university hosted the Olympic Village, a housing complex for the Olympic and Paralympic athletes, as well as the opening and closing ceremonies. Multiple large improvements were made to the university prior to the events, including extensive renovations to the Rice\u2013Eccles Stadium, a light rail line leading to downtown Salt Lake City, a new student center known as the Heritage Center, an array of new student housing, and what is now a 180-room campus hotel and conference center.\nThe University of Utah Asia Campus opened as an international branch campus in the Incheon Global Campus in Songdo, Incheon, South Korea in 2014. Three other European and American universities are also participating. The Asia Campus was funded by the South Korean government.\nIn 2015, the university helped open the Ensign College of Public Health in Kpong, Ghana.\nIn 2019, the university was named a member of the Association of American Universities.\nCampus.\nThe campus covers , including the Health Sciences complex, Research Park, and Fort Douglas. It is located on the east bench of the Salt Lake Valley, close to the Wasatch Range and approximately 2 miles east of downtown Salt Lake City.\nMost courses take place on the west side of campus, known as lower campus due to its lower elevation. Presidents Circle is a loop of buildings named after past university presidents with a courtyard in the center. Major libraries on lower campus include the J. Willard Marriott Library and the S.J. Quinney Law Library. The primary student activity center is the A. Ray Olpin University Union, and campus fitness centers include the Health, Physical Education, and Recreation Complex (HPER) and the Eccles Student Life Center.\nLower campus is also home to most public venues, such as the Rice\u2013Eccles Stadium, the Jon M. Huntsman Center, and the Utah Museum of Fine Arts, a museum with rotating exhibitions and a permanent collection of American, European, African, and Asian art. Venues for performing arts include Kingsbury Hall, used for touring companies and concerts, Pioneer Memorial Theatre, used by the professional Pioneer Theatre Company, David P. Gardner Hall, used by the School of Music and for musical performances, and the Marriott Center for Dance. Red Butte Garden, with formal gardens and natural areas, as well as the new site of the Utah Museum of Natural History, is located on the far east side of campus.\nThe health sciences complex, at the northeast end of campus, includes the University of Utah Medical Center, Primary Children's Medical Center, the Huntsman Cancer Institute, the Moran Eye Center, and the Spencer S. Eccles Health Sciences Library. South of the health sciences complex, several university residence halls and apartments are clustered together near Fort Douglas and the Heritage Center, which serves as a student center and cafeteria for this area. In addition, there are 1,115 university apartments for students, staff, and faculty across three apartment complexes on campus. At the southeast end of campus is Research Park, which is home to research companies including ARUP Laboratories, Evans &amp; Sutherland, Sarcos, Biofire Diagnostics, and Myriad Genetics.\nCourses are also held at off-campus centers located in St. George and Sandy.\nIn July 2017, the Academic Senate bestowed the designation of tobacco-free campus on the university, but rules were not enforced until 2018. The rule prohibits students and faculty from \"smoking or using chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes and all other recreational nicotine-delivery products on any property owned, leased or controlled by the University of Utah.\"\nStudent residences.\nThe University of Utah provides student housing in a 34-building housing complex on campus. The complex consists of nine housing areas: Chapel Glen, Gateway Heights, Sage Point, Officer's Circle, Benchmark Plaza, Shoreline Ridge, the Donna Garff Marriott Honors Residential Scholars Community (MHC for short), the Lassonde Studios, and Kahlert Village. The MHC is a dormitory strictly for honors students and was completed in fall 2012. Built in 2016, the Lassonde Studios is part of the Lassonde Entrepreneur Institute and houses 400 students; the studios also feature a \"creative garage\" with 3D printers and spaces for startups. Kahlert Village, completed in August 2020, houses 990 first-year students.\nTransportation.\nA number of campus shuttles, running on biodiesel and used vegetable oil, circle the campus on six different routes. The Utah Transit Authority (UTA) runs several buses through the university area as well as the TRAX Red Line (light rail), which runs to South Jordan. Riders can travel downtown, to \"FrontRunner\" (commuter rail), to West Valley, to the Salt Lake City International Airport, or to Draper by transferring to the TRAX Green or Blue lines. Students and staff can use their university IDs to ride UTA buses, TRAX, and \"FrontRunner\".\nIn 2012, the university unveiled a new plan for a more conducive campus for bicyclists called the \"Bicycle Master Plan\" which aims to transform the campus into a safer and more accessible place for cycling and to promote bicycle ridership. The plan emphasizes both campus pathways and on-street facilities that connect the core campus area with surrounding neighborhoods. The Bicycle Master Plan gives guidelines for facilities and programs that are within the University's jurisdiction. It also provides recommendations for the University to work with external entities such as UDOT, UTA, and Salt Lake City to improve bicycling conditions in locations that are important to the campus environment, but which are not under the University's direct control.\nSustainability.\nSustainability efforts include a permanent sustainability office, a campus cogeneration plant, building upgrades and energy efficient building standards, behavior modification programs, purchasing local produce for campus dining, a farmers market, and student groups, as well as a branch of the Salt Lake City Bicycle Collective. Sustainability and transportation are also a large part of the university's campus master plan. The Sustainable Endowments Institute gave the university a \"B+\" in its College Sustainability Report Card 2011, with A's for climate change and energy, food and recycling, student involvement, and transportation.\nThe expanded recycling program launched on July 1, 2007. Since its launch, the program has continued to grow and refine its procedures to better accommodate a growing campus' needs. There are programs in place for paper, cardboard, aluminum, batteries, glass, printer cartridges, wooden pallets and plastics #1 and #2.\nRenewable energy.\nThe university is ranked 8th by the EPA for annual green power usage among universities, with 49% of its power coming from geothermal and solar sources.\nThe university houses 10 solar array systems, including a 330-kilowatt system on the rooftop of the Natural History Museum of Utah and a 262-kilowatt system at the HPER East building. The combined arrays annually produce 1,096,340 kilowatt hours, and are supported by a student fee sustainability program established in 2008.\nOn November 1, 2019, the university entered into a renewable energy partnership with Rocky Mountain Power and Cyrq Energy which allows the purchase of 20 megawatts of geothermal energy for 25 years. The contract offsets half of the electricity produced by the university and reduces the university's carbon emissions by 23%.\nOrganization.\nThe University of Utah is governed by a 10-member Board of Trustees, 8 of whom are appointed by the Governor of Utah with the consent of the Utah Senate. The President of the University of Utah Alumni Association serves as the 9th member, and the President of the Associated Students of the University of Utah (ASUU) serves as the 10th member. The 8 appointed members serve for four-year terms, four expiring on June 30 of each odd-numbered year. The two ex officio members serve for the terms of their respective offices.\nThe University of Utah and the other public colleges and universities of the Utah System of Higher Education are governed by the Utah Board of Higher Education (previously the Utah State Board of Regents) whose chief executive officer is the Commissioner of Higher Education.\nThe chief executive officer of the University of Utah is the president, who reports to the Board of Higher Education and, with the approval of the trustees, submits budgets, tuition adjustments, and academic program plans, appoints faculty, and develops policy initiatives.\nSubject to the board of trustees, the university faculty have authority to legislate on matters of educational policy via the Academic Senate. The senate is composed of 100 faculty members proportionally representing and elected by their respective colleges, two elected deans, and 18 students from the ASUU, one from each college and the ASUU president. The senate also includes the university president, Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs, Senior Vice President for Health Sciences, and all non-elected deans as ex officio members who may debate and present motions but do not vote. Much of the actual senate work is carried out by 12 senate-elected committees which work on the central academic issues of the institution. The committees report to the full senate, and the senate often acts on their proposals as well as on issues brought to its attention by the administration.\nAcademics and rankings.\nThe University of Utah is accredited through the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities since 1933. The university organizes its 150 academic departments and programs into 17 colleges and schools. The School for Cultural and Social Transformation is the university's newest college, with its first graduating class in 2018.\nThe university operates on a semester calendar with the rest of the Utah higher education system. Undergraduate tuition and fees for 2015\u20132016 were $8,240 for Utah residents (about 325% the cost of tuition and fees in 2000, $2,534 for 13 credit hours per semester, 2 semesters), and $26,180 for non-residents per 12-credit-hour semester.\nAdmissions and demographics.\nFor the Class of 2023 (enrolling fall 2019), Utah received 24,404 applications and accepted 15,159 (62%), with 4,249 enrolling. The middle 50% range of SAT scores for enrolling freshmen was 572.5-680 for evidence-based reading and writing, 570\u2013700 for math, and 1150\u20131370 for the composite. The middle 50% ACT score range was 22\u201328 for math, 21\u201331 for English, and 22\u201329 for the composite. The average high school grade point average (GPA) was 3.66.\nThe university uses a holistic admissions process and weighs ACT/SAT standardized test scores, GPA, grade trend, rigorous AP/IB/Honors classes taken in high school, academic achievements, along with other \"personal achievements and characteristics\".\nNotable programs.\nBallet.\nThe Department of Ballet offers the top ranked ballet and ballroom dance program in the United States and is one of the oldest and most reputable university ballet departments in the country. The Department was founded by William F. Christensen in 1951, who also founded the San Francisco Ballet and Ballet West companies.\nBiology.\nThe university has made unique contributions to the study of genetics due in part to long-term genealogy efforts of the LDS Church, which has allowed researchers to trace genetic disorders through several generations. The relative homogeneity of Utah's population also makes it an ideal laboratory for studies of population genetics. The university is home to the Genetic Science Learning Center, a resource which educates the public about genetics through its website.\nComputer Science.\nThe University of Utah was one of the original four nodes of ARPANET, the world's first packet-switched network and embryo of the current worldwide Internet. The School of Computing produced many of the early pioneers in computer science and graphics, including Turing Award winner Alan Kay, Pixar founder Ed Catmull, Atari founder Nolan Bushnell, and Adobe founder John Warnock. Notable innovations of computer science faculty and alumni include the first method for representing surface textures in graphical images, the Gouraud shading model, magnetic ink printing technology, the Johnson counter logic circuit, the oldest algebraic mathematics package still in use (REDUCE), the Phong reflection model, the Phong shading method, and the rendering equation. Through the movement of Utah graduates and faculty, research at the University spread outward to laboratories like Xerox Parc, JPL, and the New York Institute of Technology. Present graphics research is focused on biomedical applications for visualization, scientific computing, and image analysis at the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute.\nDentistry.\nIn March 2012, the university received unanimous approval from the board of trustees to create a new academic college, the School of Dentistry, which is the university's first new college in sixty years. The new school has received funding for a new structure and has started as a debt-free program. The new school enrolled its first students for the fall semester of 2013 and averages the same cost as the university's medical school tuition.\nGames.\nIn July of 2023 the university created the Division of Games as an academic department. Prior to this, it had a teaching program that initially supported an emphasis in Entertainment Arts &amp; Engineering (EAE) for students majoring in Film or Computer Science, later a Masters Degree in EAE (2010) followed by a BS in Games in 2017. The program has grown quickly over the years and has also consistently been ranked highly. In 2024, \"The Princeton Review\" ranked it first among public universities and its graduate program second, Animation Career Review ranked it fourth in 2025, and in 2026 the US News rankings listed it in the number two position for \"Best Undergraduate Game Design Programs\". The game program has also been cited as \"one of the key drivers behind the growth\" and success of the videogame industry in Utah. \nLaw.\nThe S.J. Quinney College of Law, founded in 1913, was the only law school in Utah until the 1970s. The law school was ranked the #28 best law school in the country in the 2024 U.S. News \"Best Law Schools\" rankings.\nMedicine.\nThe University of Utah (University of Utah Hospital) has the only accredited allopathic medical school in the State of Utah. The medical school has made several notable contributions to medicine, such as establishing the first Cerebrovascular Disease Unit west of the Mississippi River in 1970 and administering the world's first permanent artificial heart, the Jarvik-7, to Barney Clark in 1982.\nPharmacy.\nThe University of Utah College of Pharmacy is ranked 15th in the nation for NIH research grants as of 2023, and its PharmD program is ranked 14th in the nation. The department of Pharmacology and Toxicology within the School of Pharmacy is world-renowned for research in epilepsy treatment with their Anticonvulsant Drug Development (ADD) program.\nPolitical Science.\nThe university is host to the Neal A. Maxwell Lecture Series in Political Theory and Contemporary Politics, a forum for political theorists to share their newest theoretical work, and is home to the Hinckley Institute of Politics, which places more than 350 students every year in local, state, national, and global internships.\nTurkish Studies Program and Armenian genocide denial.\nThe university's Turkish Studies Program, funded by Turkish Coalition of America and headed by M. Hakan Yavuz, has been criticized for promoting Armenian genocide denial. Nevertheless, the university had established itself as a \"denialist beachhead\" prior to the creation of the Turkish Studies Program. The University of Utah Press has published several books denying the Armenian genocide, beginning with Guenter Lewy's \"The Armenian Massacres in Ottoman Turkey\". The book's publication by the University of Utah Press was arranged by Yavuz himself.\nProfessor Keith David Watenpaugh charges the program with \"promoting the falsification of history through its grants and political advocacy... the University of Utah has provided an institutional home to genocide denial.\" In 2020, regarding \"a student complaint and messages of concern from the Armenian community about the content of an article written by and assigned in a class taught by Hakan Yavuz,\" the university made a statement, according to which: \"The United States, the state of Utah and the University of Utah (as a state entity), recognize the historical events of 1915 as the Armenian genocide\".\nAthletics.\nThe university has nine men's and 11 women's varsity teams. Athletic teams include men's baseball, basketball, football, golf, hockey, lacrosse, skiing, swimming/diving, and tennis and women's basketball, cross country, gymnastics, skiing, soccer, softball, swimming/diving, tennis, track and field, and volleyball. The school's sports teams are called the Utes, though some teams have an additional nickname, such as \"Runnin' Utes\" for the men's basketball team. The university participates in the NCAA's Division I (FBS for football) as part of the Big 12 Conference. There is a fierce BYU\u2013Utah rivalry, and the Utah\u2013BYU football game, traditionally the season finale, has been called the \"Holy War\" by national broadcasting commentators. The university fight song is \"Utah Man\", commonly played at athletic games and other university events. In 1996, Swoop was introduced as the new mascot of the University of Utah. Because of relationships with the local Ute Indians, Utah adopted a new mascot. While still known as the Utes, Utah is now represented by the red-tailed hawk known for the use of his tail feathers in Ute headdresses, and which is said to reflect \"the soaring spirit of our state and school\".\nIn 2002, the university was one of 20 schools to make the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" College Sports Honor Roll. In 2005, Utah became the first school to produce No. 1 overall draft picks in both the NFL draft and NBA draft for the same year. Alex Smith was picked first overall by the San Francisco 49ers in the 2005 NFL draft, and Andrew Bogut was picked first overall by the Milwaukee Bucks in the 2005 NBA draft. The university has won fifteen NCAA Skiing Championships, most recently in 2023, as well as the 1977 AIAW National Women's Skiing Championship.\nMen's basketball.\nThe men's basketball team won the NCAA title in 1944 and the NIT crown in 1947. Arnie Ferrin, the only four-time All-American in Utah basketball history, played for both the 1944 and 1947 teams. He also went on to help the Minneapolis Lakers win NBA Championships in 1949 and 1951. Wat Misaka, the first person of Asian descent to play in the NBA, also played for Utah during this era.\nUtah basketball rose again to national prominence when head coach Rick Majerus took his team, including guard Andre Miller, combo forward Hanno M\u00f6tt\u00f6l\u00e4, and post player Michael Doleac, to the NCAA Final Four in 1998. After eliminating North Carolina to advance to the final round, Utah lost the championship game to Kentucky, 78\u201369.\nFootball.\nIn 2004\u20132005, the football team, coached by Urban Meyer and quarterbacked by Alex Smith, along with defensive great Eric Weddle, went 11\u20130 during the regular season and defeated Pittsburgh 35\u20137 in the 2005 Fiesta Bowl, becoming the first team from a conference without an automatic Bowl Championship Series (BCS) bid to go to a BCS bowl game. The team ended its perfect 12\u20130 season ranked 4th in AP polling.\n2008\u20132009 was another undefeated year for the football team, coached by Kyle Whittingham, as they finished the season 13\u20130 and defeated Alabama 31\u201317 in the 2009 Sugar Bowl. Utah finished the season 2nd in AP polling, their highest rank ever. At the end of the season, the Utes were the only unbeaten team in the country, with the nation's longest active streak of bowl victories (8).\nThe Utah Utes moved to the Pac-12 Conference for the start of the 2011\u20132012 football season. They were in the South Division with University of Colorado, University of Arizona, Arizona State University, UCLA and University of Southern California. Their first game in the Pac-12 was at USC on September 10, 2011, and resulted in a 23\u201314 Utah loss.\nGymnastics.\nThe women's gymnastics team, coached by Carly Dockendorf, has won ten national championships, including the 1981 AIAW championship, and placed 2nd nationally eight times. As of 2013, it has qualified for the NCAA championship every year since 1976, the only program to do so. The program has averaged over 11,000 fans per meet 1992\u20132010 and has been the NCAA gymnastics season attendance champions 16 of these 19 years. In 2010, there was an average of 14,213 fans per meet, the largest crowd being 15,030.\nMarching band.\nThe university marching band, known as the \"Pride of Utah\", perform at all home football games, as well as some away games and bowl games. They performed at the 2005 Fiesta Bowl, the 2009 Sugar Bowl, and the Inaugural Parade of President Barack Obama.\nThe band began as a military band in the 1940s. In 1948, university president A. Ray Olpin recruited Ron Gregory from Ohio State University to form a collegiate marching band. Support for the band dwindled in the 60s, and ASUU (the Associated Students of the University of Utah) discontinued its funding in 1969. The band was revived in 1976 after a fund raising effort under the direction of Gregg I. Hanson. As of 2011, the band was under the direction of Dr. Brian Sproul.\nStudent life.\nClose to 50% of freshmen live on campus, but most students choose to live elsewhere after their first year, with 13% of all undergraduates living on campus. The university is located in a large metropolitan area. Many students live in the neighborhoods immediately surrounding the university. An additional 1,115 family apartments are available to students, staff, and faculty. One of the university's primary four goals for long-term campus growth is to increase student engagement through the addition of on-campus housing, intramural fields, athletic centers, and a new student activity center.\nThe current student activity center, the A. Ray Olpin University Union, is a common gathering place for university-wide events such as Crimson Nights, roughly monthly student activity nights; PlazaFest, a fair for campus groups at the start of the school year; and the Grand Kerfuffle, a concert at the end of the school year. The building includes a cafeteria, computer lab, recreational facilities, and a ballroom for special events. The Union also houses the Lowell Bennion Community Service Center, CESA (Center for Ethnic Student Affairs) which provides an inclusive space for students and houses various advising programs of the Office of Equity and Diversity, the Union Programming Council which is in charge of promoting student life on campus through events like Crimson Nights, and ASUU (the Associated Students of the University of Utah), which is responsible for appropriating funds to student groups and organizations on campus. ASUU holds primary and general elections each year for student representatives, typically with 10\u201315% of the student population voting.\nBecause of the large number of LDS Church members at the university, there is an LDS Institute of Religion building near main campus, as well as several LDS student groups and 46 campus wards. Approximately 650 students are part of 6 sororities and 8 fraternities at the university, most of which have chapter houses on \"Greek Row\" just off campus.\nThe University of Utah has a dry campus, meaning that alcohol is banned on campus. In 2004, Utah became the first state with a law expressly permitting concealed weapons on public university campuses. The University of Utah tried to uphold its gun ban but the Utah Supreme Court rejected the ban in 2006.\nMedia.\nThe university has several public broadcasting affiliations, many of which utilize the Eccles Broadcast Center. These stations include PBS Utah (formerly branded as KUED channel\u00a07), a PBS member station and producer of local documentaries; KUEN channel\u00a09, an educational station for teachers and students from the Utah Education Network; KUER 90.1\u00a0FM, a public radio affiliate of National Public Radio, American Public Media, and Public Radio International; and K-UTE 1620.\n\"NewsBreak\" is the student-run television newscast on campus. During 2011, the program celebrated its 40th anniversary. Broadcasts air every Thursday night at 10\u00a0pm during the fall and spring semesters on KUEN.\n\"The Daily Utah Chronicle\", also referred to as the \"Chrony\", has been the university's independent, student-run paper since 1890. It publishes daily on school days during fall and spring semesters and weekly during summer semester. The paper typically runs between eight and twelve pages, with longer editions for weekend game guides. The paper converted to a broadsheet format in 2003 when the Newspaper Agency Corporation began printing it. The Society of Professional Journalists selected the newspaper as one of three finalists for best all-around daily student newspaper in the nation in both 2007 and 2008. Staff from the \"Chronicle\" feed into Utah journalism circles, some of them rising to considerable prominence, such as former editor Matt Canham, whose work with \"The Salt Lake Tribune\" earned him the Don Baker Investigative Reporting Award from the Utah Chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists.\nThe University of Utah Press, the oldest press in Utah and now part of the J. Willard Marriott Library, publishes books on topics including the outdoors, anthropology and archaeology, linguistics, creative nonfiction, Mesoamerica, Native American studies, and Utah, Mormon, and Western history. The Wallace Stegner Prize in American Environmental or Western History is presented annually by the press. Its Utah Series in Middle East Studies has been criticized for \"specializing\" in \"methodologically flawed accounts\" of the Armenian genocide that seek to reject the term genocide as being applicable to the event, and includes works by Guenter Lewy, Justin McCarthy, and Y\u00fccel G\u00fc\u00e7l\u00fc. The university is also home to a national literary journal, \"Quarterly West\".\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nNotable alumni include politicians Rocky Anderson, Bob Bennett, Marsha K. Caddle, Merrill Cook, E. Jake Garn, Jon Huntsman, Jr., Karen Morgan, Frank E. Moss, Joshua Rush, and Karl Rove; recent LDS Church presidents Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson, and Russell M. Nelson; historian and Pulitzer Prize for History laureate Laurel Thatcher Ulrich; journalist and 2017 Pulitzer Prize winner for local reporting Rachel Piper authors Orson Scott Card, Stephen Covey, Shannon Hale, Terry Tempest Williams, and Wallace Stegner; R Adams Cowley, William DeVries, and Robert Jarvik in medicine; historian Richard Foltz; educators Gordon Gee, Jonathan Westover, and Ann Weaver Hart; reporter Martha Raddatz; writer and canoeist Neal Moore, and speed reading innovator Evelyn Nielsen Wood.\nNotable science and engineering alumni include Jim Blinn; Mark W. Fuller, CEO of WET Design; Andrea Russell, Vice President of the International Society of Electrochemistry; Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics, Netscape Communications Corporation, myCFO, and Healtheon; Gretchen W. McClain, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator of Human Space Exploration and Chief Director of the International Space Station; Henri Gouraud; John C. Cook who played a crucial role in establishing the field of ground-penetrating radar; Ralph Hartley; rocket scientist Joseph Majdalani; Alan Kay; Simon Ramo; and John Warnock, co-founder of Adobe Systems.\nNotable entrepreneur and business leader alumni include Alan Ashton, co-founder of WordPerfect and Thanksgiving Point; Freestyle Ski\u00ebr Tom Wallisch; Nolan Bushnell, founder of Atari and Chuck E. Cheese; Ed Catmull, co-founder of Pixar; J. Willard Marriott, founder of Marriott International; Robert A. \"Bob\" McDonald, CEO of Procter &amp; Gamble; David Neeleman, founder of JetBlue; Telle Whitney, CEO and President of the Anita Borg Institute; and Nintendo of America's current president, Doug Bowser\nIn athletics, notable alumni include baseball player Chris Shelton; basketball players Andrew Bogut, Kyle Kuzma, Andre Miller, and Keith Van Horn; football players Paul Kruger, Star Lotulelei, Jamal Anderson, Kevin Dyson, Eric Weddle, Alex Smith, and Steve Smith Sr.; hall of fame karate grandmaster Dan Hausel; and football coach LaVell Edwards. Notable members of the athletics faculty include Sharrieff Shah, coach of the University of Utah football team and husband to Jen Shah, cast member of \"the Real Housewives of Salt Lake City\". Mykayla Skinner was a 2020 Olympic gymnast and vault silver medalist.\nNotable alumni also includes serial killer Ted Bundy, who briefly attended the College of Law before dropping out.\nDrag queen Denali Foxx graduated from the University of Utah.\nLee Isaac Chung, director of the Academy Award-winning film \"Minari\", completed his graduate studies at the university's film-making program.\nNotable faculty in science and engineering include David Evans and Ivan Sutherland, founders of Evans and Sutherland; Bui Tuong Phong, pioneer of computer graphics; Henry Eyring, known for studying chemical reaction rates; Scott A. Summers, founder of Centaurus Therapeutics; Stephen Jacobsen, founder of Sarcos; Jind\u0159ich Kope\u010dek and Sung Wan Kim, pioneers of polymeric drug delivery and gene delivery; Suhas Patil, founder of Cirrus Logic; Stanley Pons, who claimed to have discovered \"cold fusion\" in 1989; Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, later co-winner of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry; Thomas Stockham, founder of Soundstream; and David W. Grainger, Chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, winner of the \"Excellence in Pharmaceutics\" Award, and alumnus. In medicine, notable faculty include Mario Capecchi, the co-winner of the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine; Willem Johan Kolff; and Russell M. Nelson. Biologist Ralph Vary Chamberlin, founding dean of the Medical School, professor, and later historian of the University, was also an alumnus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32098", "revid": "51067463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32098", "title": "University of Victoria", "text": "University in Victoria, British Columbia\nThe University of Victoria (UVic) is a public research university located in the municipalities of Oak Bay and Saanich, British Columbia, Canada. Established in 1903 as Victoria College, the institution was initially an affiliated college of McGill University until 1915. From 1921 to 1963, it functioned as an affiliate of the University of British Columbia. In 1963, the institution was reorganized into an independent university.\nHistory.\nThe University of Victoria is the oldest post-secondary institution in British Columbia. First established in 1903 as Victoria College, an affiliated college of McGill University, it gained full autonomy and degree-granting status through a charter on July 1, 1963.\nBetween 1903 and 1915, Victoria College offered first- and second-year McGill courses in the arts and sciences. Administered locally by the Victoria School Board, the college was an adjunct to Victoria High School and shared its facilities. Both institutions were under the direction of a single Principal: E.B. Paul, 1903\u20131908; and S.J. Willis, 1908\u20131915.\nThe 1915 opening of the University of British Columbia, established by Act of Legislature in 1908, obliged the college to suspend operations in higher education in Victoria. In 1920, as a result of local demands, Victoria College began the second stage of its development, reborn in affiliation with the University of British Columbia. Though still administered by the Victoria School Board, the college was now completely separate from Victoria High School, moving in 1921 into Craigdarroch Castle. Over the next two decades, under Principals E.B. Paul and P.H. Elliott, Victoria College provided courses in first- and second-year arts and sciences. It was also during this period that future author Pierre Berton edited and served as principal cartoonist for the student newsletter, \"The Microscope\". Between 1921 and 1944, enrolment at Victoria College seldom exceeded 250. However, in 1945, 128 servicemen returning from World War II pushed enrolment up to 400, and 600 in 1946.\nThe final stage, between the years 1945 and 1963, saw the transition from two-year college to university, under Principals J.M. Ewing and W.H. Hickman. During this period, the college was governed by the Victoria College Council, representative of the parent University of British Columbia, the Greater Victoria School Board, and the provincial Department of Education. In 1946, the college was forced by postwar enrolment to move from Craigdarroch to the Lansdowne campus of the Provincial Normal School, the current location of Camosun College's Lansdowne Campus. The Normal School joined Victoria College in 1956 as its Faculty of Education. Late in this transitional period (through the cooperation of the Department of National Defence and the Hudson's Bay Company) the 284-acre (1.1 km2)\u2014now 385-acre (1.6 km2)\u2014campus at Gordon Head was acquired. In 1961 the college, still in affiliation with UBC, awarded its first bachelor's degrees.\nIn the early part of this century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law and medicine. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized coursework and the completion of a research thesis was introduced. The policy of university education initiated in the 1960s responded to population pressure and the belief that higher education was a key to social justice and economic productivity for individuals and for society.\nThe university gained its full autonomy in 1963 as the University of Victoria. The University Act of 1963 vested administrative authority in a chancellor elected by the convocation of the university, a board of governors, and a president appointed by the board; academic authority was given to the senate which was representative both of the faculties and of the convocation.\nThe university's Arms were registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on April 3, 2001. The historical traditions of the university are reflected in the coat of arms, its academic regalia, and its house flag. The BA hood is solid red, recalling the early affiliation with McGill, along with the martlets in the coat of arms. The BSc hood, of gold, and the BEd hood, of blue, show the colours of the University of British Columbia. Blue and gold have been retained as the official colours. The motto at the top of the Arms, in Hebrew characters, is \"Let there be Light\"; the motto at the bottom, in Latin, is \"A Multitude of the Wise is the Health of the World.\"\nDepartment of Political Science Chilly Climate Report.\nOn May 11, 1992, the Department of Political Science created the committee to Make the Department More Supportive to Women as a response to concerns regarding the experiences of graduate and undergraduate students. The committee was made up of five female undergraduate students and Dr. Somer Brodribb, an untenured professor working in the department. Later, this committee was unofficially called the \"Chilly Climate\" or Climate Committee within the department. \"Chilly Climate\" is a term used by the Project on the Status and Education of Women. \nA preliminary report published by the Climate Committee to the Department of Political Science on March 23, 1993, which looked at the experience of both faculty and students at the University of Victoria issued recommendations that, in their eyes, would make the department more hospitable to female students while also highlighting the experiences of female students which the committee found troubling. These recommendations included the establishment of a committee for addressing issues that were raised in the report, the creation of formal policies addressing race and gender discrimination, and workshops for faculty on race and gender issues in the classroom environment. Notably, the preliminary report also highlighted the importance of including classroom content from feminist perspectives and more texts authored by female scholars.\nIn response to this report, tenured professors of the political science department Robert Bedeski, Colin Bennett, Ron Cheffins, Warren Magusson, Terry Morley, Norman Ruff, Rob Walker, and Jeremy Wilson challenged what they perceived to be slander from Dr. Brodribb, who chaired the committee. They requested that Dr. Brodribb allow an investigation into the allegations of sexist behaviour in the Chilly Climate report. Dr. Bodribb refused, stating that this went against the agreement her committee made with the women interviewed and could expose them to further discrimination. If the evidence was not handed over the tenured professors requested a complete withdrawal of the statements made in the Chilly Climate report and an apology that would be distributed to all those who saw the report. They also mentioned seeking further action if Dr. Brodribb did neither of these things. To review documents related to the report, one can go to the University of Victoria Libraries Special Collections.\nA review committee was established by University of Victoria President David Strong, requesting advice from lawyers Beth Bilson and Thomas R. Berger to assist in evaluating the climate of the political science department. They published a report in August 1993, which included recommendations that Strong later endorsed.\nCampus and grounds.\nThe campus is situated 7km north of downtown Victoria and is spread over 403 acres. UVic also has an offsite study center at the Jeanne S. Simpson Field Studies Resource Center in Lake Cowichan. Despite its name, no part of the university's main campus is located in the City of Victoria proper, instead split between the municipalities of Saanich and Oak Bay. The campus is several hundred feet from the Pacific Ocean at Cadboro Bay. The six-hectare Queenswood campus was acquired from the Sisters of St. Ann and converted into a national laboratory. The Legacy Art Gallery on Yates Street and a proposed redevelopment on Broad Street make up the properties owned by the university in downtown Victoria.\nThe University of Victoria's campus was designed in part by American architectural firm Wurster, Bernardi &amp; Emmons, which had previously completed major buildings at Stanford University and UC Berkeley. The principles and concept of the original design are still being followed, with the academic portions of the campus located inside the Ring Road, forming a perfect circle in diameter.\nThe following is a list of prominent buildings on the University of Victoria campus:\nThe university offers on-campus housing for over 3,200 students. A variety of housing is available, including single and double dormitories, Cluster Housing (apartment-style housing with four people per unit), bachelor and one-bedroom apartments, and family housing. Four buildings in one of the oldest residential complexes at the university are named for Emily Carr, Arthur Currie, Margaret Newton, and David Thompson. Construction on the South Tower Complex was completed in January 2011. The largest residence building in terms of capacity is Cheko'nien House, which holds 398 beds. The campus has become increasingly cycling-friendly.\nMuch of the university estate and endowment lands have been preserved as a nature setting, notably Finnerty Gardens and Mystic Vale, a forested area and park. The large campus is home to deer, owls, ravens, squirrels and many other wild animals native to the area. A large population of domestic rabbits was previously a feature of the campus. In May 2010, the university began trapping and euthanizing the rabbits as they had been known to put athletes at risk in the playing fields and cause extensive damage to university grounds. Local veterinarians offered to perform neutering of the male rabbits. As of July 2011, the UVic campus is free of rabbits. 900 rabbits were saved and sent to shelters. The majority of rabbits moved to shelters died between 2011 and 2016, after which the remaining survivors (147 rabbits) were relocated to a private sanctuary in Alberta.\nLibraries and museum.\nUniversity of Victoria Libraries system is composed of two libraries: the William C. Mearns Centre for Learning - McPherson Library and the Diana M. Priestly Law Library. UVic Libraries has undergone significant growth in recent years thanks to the university's investment in library purchases and research. Amongst the highlights from Special Collections &amp; University Archives are:\nRenovations and construction have included new Special Collections &amp; University Archives classrooms, an innovative Learning Commons, the addition of Tek Booths, an expanded student lounge, and the Legacy Maltwood gallery space. The UVic Libraries collection includes over 4 million physical and electronic resources, almost 200,000 journals and 985 databases.\nThe University of Victoria Libraries has a unique collection of textbooks used in British Columbia\u2019s public schools since the province joined confederation in 1871. This historical textbooks collection includes books on a variety of school subjects including science, math, health, English and language arts, foreign languages, history, and social studies.\nThe University of Victoria\u2019s Legacy Art Galleries has two locations\u2013\u2013Legacy Downtown and Legacy Maltwood at UVic Libraries\u2013\u2013which host loan exhibitions and show the works of local artists, students, and faculty.\nThe University Art Collection, founded in 1953 by Dr. W.H. Hickman, Principal of Victoria College (1953\u20131963), consists of 6,000 works, mainly by contemporary artists practicing in British Columbia. The Maltwood Art Museum and Gallery, founded through the bequest of English sculptor and antiquarian Katharine Emma Maltwood (1878\u20131961) and her husband John Maltwood (d. 1967), reflects their varied taste which included Arts and Crafts, and English Gothic and Tudor periods. The collection of 12,000 works of fine, decorative and applied arts includes Asian ceramics, costumes, rugs, seventeenth-century English furniture, Canadian paintings and Katherine Maltwood's own sculptures.\nTransgender Archives.\nThe Transgender Archives are a part of the University of Victoria Libraries and are committed to preserving the histories of pioneering activists, community leaders, and researchers who have made contributions to the betterment of trans, non-binary, and Two-spirit people.\nOff-campus facilities.\nThe University of Victoria has acquired a portfolio of properties around Victoria, British Columbia, and across Vancouver Island. These include the Legacy Gallery in downtown Victoria, the University Club, the Inter-urban campus, a former Saanich-based lodge and retreat, the Swans Hotel and Restaurant complex, and the Queenswood Property. The large, partially forested Queenswood property has been proposed as a site of future expansion for the university.\nIn 2017, the University of Victoria announced plans to develop a downtown campus/accommodation centre in the historic area of Victoria, BC including accommodation for students and other facilities. The new downtown campus will be centered in buildings donated to the university and located around the historic Broad Street area, beside the old Bay Centre. The downtown development has been suggested as a possible future home for UVic's Peter B. Gustavson School of Business.\nThe UVic endowment (estimated at $374\u00a0million) and large private donations have allowed for the university's estate to continue growing and for facilities to be upgraded and expanded on an ongoing basis.\nAdministration.\nBelow is a list of undergraduate faculties, departments, and schools within the University of Victoria system.\nUVic also offers a number of interdisciplinary undergraduate programs, including Applied Ethics, Arts of Canada, European Studies, Film Studies, Human Dimensions of Climate Change, Indigenous Studies, Latin American Studies, Social Justice Studies, and Technology and Society.\nPeter B. Gustavson School of Business.\nThe Peter B. Gustavson School of Business, formerly the Faculty of Business, was renamed following a donation by local entrepreneur Peter B. Gustavson. The school, which is EQUIS and AACSB accredited, offers a wide range of programs, including BCom, MBA and other business degrees. The program starts with two years of general studies (with six required classes), followed by business-intensive 3rd and 4th years. Three co-op work terms are also required.\nEngineering and Computer Science.\nThe Faculty of Engineering and Computer Science admits approximately 400 students into first-year programs each year. Students can specialize in the following disciplines: Biomedical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Software Engineering.\nFine Arts.\nThe Faculty of Fine Arts splits into five different departments: Art History and Visual Studies, the School of Music, Theatre, Visual Arts and Writing. UVic's Department of Art History and Visual Studies has a long tradition of scholarship in the areas of Islamic art, South and Southeast Asian art, and Native arts of North America. It is one of few schools that has traditionally held two chairs of Islamic art, most recently filled by Anthony Welch and Marcus Milwright. Esi Edugyan, two-time winner of the Giller Prize, is a graduate of the creative writing program\nHumanities.\nThe Faculty of Humanities consists of ten departments (English, French, Gender Studies, Germanic &amp; Slavic Studies, Greek &amp; Roman Studies, Hispanic &amp; Italian Studies, History, Linguistics, Pacific &amp; Asian Studies, and Philosophy) and three Programs (Latin American Studies, Medieval Studies, and Religious Studies). The faculty offers certificates, minors, and majors leading to both BA and BSc degrees, as well as MA and PhD degrees. Languages, narratives, philosophies, histories\u2014the Faculty of Humanities brings these all together in a critical context of analysis, interpretation, research, and communication.\nLaw.\nThe University of Victoria is home to Canada's first and only Indigenous Law degree program along with dedicated research centers for Indigenous and Environmental law. The Faculty of Law was instrumental in the establishment of the Akitsiraq Law School by founding its first class in Iqaluit, Nunavat. Along with The University of British Columbia and Simon Fraser University, UVic jointly founded and co-operates TRIUMF, Canada's national laboratory for particle and nuclear physics, which houses the world's largest cyclotron. Altogether UVic operates nine academic faculties and schools including the Faculty of Law and Peter B. Gustavson School of Business. The University of Victoria Faculty of Law features a course at Hakia Beach, BC in association with the Tula Foundation.\nSchool of Earth &amp; Ocean Sciences.\nUVic hosts Ocean Networks Canada's deep-water seafloor research observatories VENUS and NEPTUNE, the Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions, and two Environment Canada labs: the Canadian Center for Climate Modelling and Analysis and the Water and Climate Impacts Research Centre. The Ocean Climate Building housed at the Queenswood location is dedicated solely to ocean and climate research. The Institute of Integrated Energy Systems is a leading center for research on sustainable energy solutions and alternative energy sources. \nThe university was a founding member of the Western Canadian Universities Marine Sciences Society. UVic maintains this field station on the west coast of Vancouver Island, which is jointly run by the University of British Columbia, Simon Fraser University, the University of Alberta and the University of Calgary.\nSchool of Public Administration.\nThe UVic School of Public Administration specializes in its M.P.A. and PhD. programs but also offers a selective admission minors program for political leaders and mid-career civil servants.\nContinuing Studies.\nContinuing education has been an integral part of the University of Victoria since its inception in 1963. Today, the Division of Continuing Studies provides adult and continuing education programming in co-operation with UVic faculties and community partners. The Division of Continuing Studies offers a comprehensive portfolio of programs in a range of academic disciplines, using diploma, certificate and other programming models to serve adult, part-time and internationally dispersed students.\nGraduate programs.\nUVic offers more than 160 graduate programs across the university's faculties and departments.\nUVic's Graduate programs range from individual interdisciplinary programs to graduate research programs. The university also offers students specialized degree options and doctoral options.\nAcademic profile.\nAdmissions.\nAdmission to the University of Victoria is based on a selective academic system and is highly competitive. Each year, the university receives far more applications than there are spaces available, making it one of the most applied to institutions in Canada. Applicants are required to submit applications with their grade points average (GPA) and personal statements in order to be considered for admission. The university may also accept qualified applicants studying under IB programs, AP programs or other international distinctions. Given its endowment, the University of Victoria is able to offer scholarships and financial aid to a large number of students.\nInternational exchanges.\nThe University of Victoria has partnered with a number of research institutions to provide UVic students with the opportunity to gain research experience abroad. International conferences and study abroad opportunities are encouraged for all students, with many students completing a gap year before commencing their studies. Both UVic undergraduate and graduate students may travel abroad with UVic's many partner universities.\nThe University of Victoria has partnered with institutions around the world, including Sciences Po, University of London, University of Washington, Hong Kong University, Utrecht University, and the National University of Singapore.\nReputation.\nThe University of Victoria has been ranked in a number of post-secondary rankings. In the 2022 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" rankings, the university ranked 301\u2013400 in the world and 13\u201317 in Canada. The 2025 \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked the university 349th in the world. The 2025 \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" ranked the university 301\u2013350 in the world, and 12\u201315 in Canada. In the 2022\u201323 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report Best Global University Ranking\", the university ranked 327th in the world, and 13th in Canada. The Canadian-based \"Maclean's\" magazine ranked the University of Victoria second in their 2023 Canadian comprehensive university category.\nAlong with academic and research-based rankings, the university has also been ranked by publications that evaluate the employment prospects of its graduates. In the \"Times Higher Education's\" 2022 global employability ranking, the university ranked 181st in the world, and eighth in Canada.\nResearch.\nIn 2018, Research Infosource named the University of Victoria the 19th best research university, with a sponsored research income of $114,922 million, and an average research income of $170,000 per faculty member in 2017.\nThe university's research performance has been noted in several bibliometric university rankings, which uses citation analysis to evaluate the impact a university has on academic publications. In 2019, the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities ranked the university 374th in the world, and 15th in Canada. The University Ranking by Academic Performance 2018\u201319 rankings placed the university 370th in the world, and 17th in Canada.\nResearch facilities operated by the University of Victoria include:\nThe university maintains a field station on the west coast of Vancouver Island to conduct marine research. The facility is jointly run by the University of British Columbia, Simon Fraser University, the University of Alberta and the University of Calgary. Undergraduates at the University of Victoria have full access to research and learning at this facility.\nIn 2011 the university, in collaboration with the provincial government purchased and modified a state of the art ocean vessel capable of launching 'deep sea submersibles' and conducting long-range marine biology research expeditions. The 'floating laboratory' is undergoing upgrades and expansions currently and was scheduled to be in service by late 2011.\nThe School of Earth &amp; Ocean Sciences is also home to the VENUS and NEPTUNE research institutes responsible for seismic, oceanic and climate change research.\nLocated in the Greater Victoria area the university's legal centre provides free legal assistance to the disadvantaged as well as dealing with important environmental cases in British Columbia. The UVic Law Center is the only full-time, term clinical program offered by a Canadian law school. The program reflects the faculty's emphasis on integrating legal theory, legal skills, and community service while providing students with unique education and research opportunities.\nLocated in the Greater Victoria area the Vancouver Island Technology Park is a state of the art, 35\u00a0acre commercial research facility. It is the largest university-owned technology centre in BC. The venture allows the university to work with leading technology and biomedical companies while providing students with unparalleled research opportunities. The facility focuses on fuel cell, new media, wireless, and life science/biotechnological research. The UVic Genome BC Proteomics Centre and a number of other research institutes are based out of the research park. The Capital Regional District is a major commercial hub for technology companies.\nCulture and student life.\nGreek life.\nSeveral fraternities, sororities, and secret societies exist on the University of Victoria, despite the fact that the Students' Society does not recognize fraternities, sororities, or societies on the basis that they, by definition, seek to exclude portions of the membership. This issue was once a topic of debate in student politics at the University of Victoria in 2010.\nMany years ago, University of Victoria students started a fraternity, two sororities and one non-exclusive, non-profit social-service club. Although the fraternities and sororities have no affiliation with the University of Victoria itself, they continue to thrive and have purchased nearby properties. The fraternities and sororities on campus are as follows:\nRadio station (CFUV).\nCFUV is a long-standing campus radio station focusing on the campus and the surrounding community. CFUV serves Greater Victoria at 101.9, and via cable on 104.3, Vancouver Island and many areas in the Lower Mainland and northwestern Washington state.\nResidence halls.\nThe University of Victoria maintains several residence halls on campus, which were originally based on the Oxbridge Collegiate model of constituent colleges which serve as a smaller, more personal home environment to the students of the wider university. The university no longer operates these halls as individual colleges, but rather as halls of residences (as well as dormitories and apartments) as part of the Residence Life and Education department. Today, all halls of residence are equipped with Common Rooms and high-speed internet for students.\nThe oldest of these residence halls is Craigdarroch, which features large stone-clad buildings and ivy-covered walkways and courtyards. The modernist Lansdowne Halls feature six buildings connected by a series of bridges, walkways, and tunnels, including the popular 'UVic Underground'. Gordon Head and Ring Road Hall feature rooms and amenities for students, organized around a series of large courtyards.\nIn the centre of the Residence Village is the Cadboro Commons and a number of restaurants operated by the university, where students may eat and study. A mixture of dorms, single rooms, apartments, cluster studios, and family housing are available but decided by a lottery system. First-year students are guaranteed accommodation in one of the Residence Halls on campus.\nStudent newspaper.\nUVic's oldest and most-recognized weekly student newspaper, founded in 1948, is \"The Martlet\". It is distributed all over campus and the Greater Victoria area. The paper is named after the legendary martlet bird, whose inability to land is often seen to symbolize the constant quest for knowledge, learning, and adventure. \"The Martlet\" is partly funded by student fees. \"The Martlet\" is the only independent campus newspaper at the University of Victoria, and therefore one of the only publications that has the time and resources to fully hold both the University of Victoria and the University of Victoria Students' Society (UVSS) accountable. \"The Martlet\" regularly reports on UVic Board of Governors and Senate meetings, as well as University of Victoria Students' Society Board meetings and elections.\nUniversity traditions, myths, and lore.\nOrder of Pi.\nThe Order of Pi is a charity fundraiser run by the Engineering &amp; Computer Science Students\u2019 Society every March. During the week around March 14th (Pi Day), UVIC students can nominate their friends or professors with silly charges, and then students will dress up in medieval robes and conduct a trial to pie the accused person in the face. The person accused can to get out of the pieing by donating at least $5 more, and then they get to choose someone else in the audience to be pied instead. This usually results in a bidding war where the audience keeps contributing money to see the person pied in the face.\nThe event was founded in 1993, and has been run every March for over 30 years. The money raised from the charity drive has gone to multiple foundations, including The Children\u2019s Health Foundation of Vancouver Island and The Mustard Seed Food Bank.\nCadborosaurus.\nCadborosaurus is a mythical sea serpent in the folklore of regions of the Pacific Coast of North America that is rumored by students to live in Cadboro Bay, adjacent to the University of Victoria. The Cadborosaurus, or 'Caddy' as he is colloquially named, has become a favourite for students.\nFinnerty Gardens.\nUVic maintains an extensive series of gardens on campus which serve as a place of respite and peace for students, staff, and members of the public who visit them. The Gardens include some of the largest collections of West-Coast plants and are cared for by the Friends of Finnerty Gardens, a charity which raises funds and helps support the garden's growth. The Finnerty Gardens include ponds, trails, flower gardens, and benches throughout. The University Multi-Faith Centre is nestled near the gardens.\nMartlet icon.\nThe martlet and its red colour adorn many parts of the University of Victoria, including the crest, coat of arms, and flag representing the university's previous affiliation to McGill University which also uses the martlet. The legendary martlet bird's inability to land is often seen to symbolize the constant quest for knowledge, learning, and adventure. The oldest student newspaper on campus, \"The Martlet\", is named after the bird.\nUniversity Club.\nThe University Club of Victoria is a private club located on the campus of University of Victoria. Faculty, Staff, and students are all members of the club and outside organization may also use the dining halls, meeting rooms, and other facilities. Alumni of the university often become members as well. The catering staff host dinners and awards celebrations frequently and the Holiday Roast Pig is a classic event on campus.\nThe University Club (formerly called the Faculty Club) opened on March 16, 1982. The building, located on campus, is surrounded by high trees in a quiet, wooded area.\nUniversity of Victoria Students Society (UVSS).\nThe University of Victoria Students' Society is the second-largest student society in British Columbia. It represents the UVic undergraduate student body, plans campus-wide events and operates the Student Union Building. The student society's leadership is elected annually by the undergraduate student body during campus-wide elections. As a multimillion-dollar organization, the UVSS is one of the larger student unions in Canada. The UVSS also negotiates with local government and healthcare providers for discounted student transit passes (U-Pass) and health insurance.\nIn 2014, the UVSS Student Union Building underwent a major overhaul and renovation. In 2015, the university expanded and doubled the capacity of the public transit hub on campus adjacent to the Student Union Building.\nGraduate Student Society.\nThe GSS offers services and academic support for UVic's 3,000 Graduate students. The society's services include the Grad House Restaurant, health and dental plan, funding for grad student events, and reduced-cost membership in the Victoria Car Share Co-operative.\nAthletics.\nThe Victoria Vikes (more commonly known as \"Vikes Nation\") represent the university in a number of competitive sports, including rowing, swimming, rugby, and basketball. The Vikes have especially long ties to competitive rowing having competed for several international titles. Sailing remains an important sport at the university and the UVic Sailing Club (UVSC) maintains training facilities and boats at the nearby Cadboro Bay.\nSignificant endowments, scholarships, and bursaries allow the university to recruit the best student-athletes, regardless of financial standing. UVic is a participating partner in the Canada West Universities Athletic Association (CWUAA) (the western division of ) and in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA). Basketball games were traditionally played in the 2,500-seat, McKinnon Gymnasium which was built in 1975.\nAn athletics facility was completed in 2015, which provides considerably more space and facilities for athletics. The $77\u00a0million Centre for Athletes, Recreation, and Special Abilities (CARSA), opened its doors on May 4, 2015.\nSports Hall of Fame.\nUVic Charter Inductees are:\n Championships&lt;br&gt;\nMen's basketball: 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1997&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's basketball: 1980, 1981, 1982, 1985, 1987, 1992, 1998, 2000, 2003&lt;br&gt;\nMen's cross-country: 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2015&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's cross-country: 1981, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's field hockey: 1985, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2001, 2003, 2008, 2018, 2019, 2021&lt;br&gt;\nMen's soccer: 1976, 1988, 1997, 2004, 2011&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's soccer: 2005\nCanadian University Championship Titles&lt;br&gt;\nMen's rugby: 1998, 1999, 2020&lt;br&gt;\nMen's rowing: 1997, 1998, 2000, 2001, 2009, 2010, 2021&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's rowing: 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2022&lt;br&gt;\nMen's golf: 2003, 2005, 2006\nCanadian Western Universities Championship Titles&lt;br&gt;\nWomen's field hockey: 2015\nSport clubs and societies.\nUVic has 25 sport clubs that are administered by Vikes Recreation and run by students.\nPeople.\nNotable faculty.\nSome of the university's noted faculty members, past and present, are:\nNotable alumni.\nThe university has over 88,000 alumni. As of 2020, 7 Guggenheim Fellows, 3 Killiam Prize winners, 14 members of the Order of Canada, 11 Rhodes Scholars and 43 Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada have been affiliated with the university. Listed below are some of UVic's noted alumni:\nAsteroid 150145 Uvic.\nThe asteroid 150145 Uvic was named in the university's honour on 1 June 2007. UVic was the first university in BC to have an asteroid named for it.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
