{"id": "40156", "revid": "50655467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40156", "title": "Khlysts", "text": "Russian Orthodox underground Spiritual Christian sect\nThe Khlysts or Khlysty (Russian: , , lit. \"whips\") were an underground Spiritual Christian sect which emerged in Russia in the 17th century.\nThe sect is traditionally said to have been founded in 1645 by Danilo Filippovich, although there is no written evidence to support this claim. The beliefs and practices of its members included ecstatic rituals, worship of charismatic leaders, and a rejection of the priesthood and holy books. They believed in direct communication with the Holy Spirit and practiced the ritual of \"radenie\u200a\" (\"rejoicing\"), which was characterized by dancing, speaking in tongues, and prophesying.\nThroughout their history, the Khlysts were pursued by accusations of sexual immorality and faced persecution from other religious groups and from the government. In the 18th century, doctrinal changes led to schisms, and by the 1970s, only a few isolated groups remained. The Khlysts had a significant influence on other Russian sectarian movements, such as the Skoptsy, Dukhobors and Molokans. Russian mystic Grigori Rasputin was associated with the Khlysts in popular rumor, but the consensus among historians is that he was not a member of the sect.\nName.\nThe members of the sect referred to themselves by various names, including \"God's People\" (\"liudi bozh'i\"), \"followers of Christ's faith\" (\"Khristovovery\"), or simply \"Christs\" (\"Khristy\"). The appellation \"Khlysty\" is a derogatory term applied by critics of the sect. The origin of the term is disputed. It is probably a corruption of the group's aforementioned self-designation of \"Khristy\", but may also allude to the sect's practice of ritual self-flagellation; the Russian word \"khlyst\" means a \"whip\" or \"thin rod\".\nIt is also possible that the word is related to the Greek word \"khiliaste\" (meaning \"chiliast\" or \"millennialist\").\nOrigins.\nAccording to its own oral tradition, the sect was founded in 1645 by Danilo Filippov (or Daniil Filippovich), a peasant of Kostroma and a runaway soldier. He was said to have become a \"living god\" after the Lord of Hosts descended upon him on Gorodino Hill, Vladimir Oblast. He delivered twelve commandments to his disciples, which forbade (among other things) sexual intercourse, drinking and swearing. He later named as his successor Ivan Suslov, a peasant of Murom. Suslov, transformed by Filippov into a \"new Christ\", acquired a following of twelve apostles, along with a woman who was given the title of \"Mother of God\". The tradition relates that Suslov was crucified twice by the Russian authorities, but rose from the dead each time.\nThere is no written evidence to support this story, or to confirm the existence of Filippov. The first historical references to the Khlysty are found in the writings of the Old Believers, a Christian community which resisted the 17th-century reforms of the Russian State Church. The Old Believers condemned the Khlysty as heretics, and warnings about them can be found in letters dating from around the 1670s. The Orthodox Church also attacked the Khlysty; Dimitry of Rostov wrote against them in \"An Investigation of the Schismatic Faith\" (c. 1709).\nSuslov died around 1716, at which time Prokofii Lupkin became the new \"Christ\". The oral tradition claims that Lupkin was the son of Filippov, but this is unlikely to be true.\nLupkin was a trader, and made use of his frequent journeys to places such as Uglich and Venev to organise secret assemblies for his followers. He encouraged his followers to worship in the manner of the Old Believers, such as by making the sign of the cross with two fingers instead of three, but he also instructed them to attend the State Church and take communion. Many Khlysty, including Lupkin's wife and son, even took monastic vows. Lupkin also made large donations to the Church, which helped to protect the sect from persecution.\nBeliefs and practices.\nThe Khlysty renounced priesthood, holy books and veneration of the saints (excluding the Theotokos). They believed in the possibility of direct communication with the Holy Spirit and of its embodiment in living people. Each of their leaders was a \"living god\", and each congregation (or \"ark\") had its own \"Christ\" and \"Mother of God\", appointed by the overall leader of the sect. Furthermore, they believed that the Holy Spirit could descend upon any one of them during the state of ecstasy which they attained during the ritual of \"radenie\" (\"rejoicing\").\nThis ritual, which formed the focus of their worship, took place on holy feast days. The congregation would gather during the evening at a prearranged location, such as a member's house. They would remove their outer clothing, and enter the sacred space dressed only in an undershirt. After a period of singing or chanting the Jesus Prayer (\"Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner\"), some of the worshippers would feel the Holy Spirit come upon them, and would begin dancing wildly, prophesying in unintelligible language. This would continue for half an hour or more, until the dancers collapsed with exhaustion. Finally, they would share a sacramental meal of nuts, bread, pastry and kvass.\nThe Khlysty practiced an extreme asceticism, in order to prepare themselves for the reception of the Holy Spirit into their bodies. They abstained from alcohol, and often fasted for days or weeks at a time. Although marriage was permitted for practical purposes, \"because the help of a wife was indispensable for a peasant\", it was a sin to engage in sexual intercourse, even with one's own wife. Connected with this mortification of the flesh was the practice of self-flagellation which often accompanied the \"radenie\" rite.\nRussian author Edvard Radzinsky has described a \"radenie\" ritual which he witnessed on the island of Chechen in 1964:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In white flaxen shirts worn over naked bodies they went down into the cellar of a peasant lodge. There in the dry cellar they lit candles. They started to sing something sacred in the half-light \u2013 as was later explained, a verse from the Easter canon: \"Seeing, we are gladdened, for Christ has risen.\" After that a little old man with joyful, light-coloured eyes \u2013 the local Christ \u2013 began to chant a \"Khlyst\" prayer in the flickering candlelight. And then with youthful energy he started to \"rejoice\", that is, to whirl wildly in place, crossing himself and continually whipping his body. The choir chanted prayers, their voices ever more savagely, ever more fervently and passionately praying, so that some of them were already screaming and sobbing. But at this point the old man stopped in his whirling and cried out wildly, \"Brothers! Brothers! I feel it, the Holy Spirit! God is within me!\" And he began to prophesy, shouting out incoherent sounds mixed into which were the words, \"Oh, Spirit!\" \"Oh, God!\" \"Oh, Spirit Lord!\" After that began the main communal rite of \"rejoicing\", or general whirling and dancing.\nRadzinsky says that they referred to the whirling dance as \"spiritual beer\", on account of its intoxicating effect. He reports that after the dance had continued for some time, the worshippers fell to the floor: \"And that was the end of it. But apparently only because I was present.\" Radzinsky claims that in some arks, the Khlysts would at this point engage in \"group sinning\" \u2013 a frenzied sexual orgy, which they believed would purify them from the lusts of the flesh. Similarly, C. L. Sulzberger, in his book \"The Fall of Eagles\", writes that the Khlysty's \"foremost idea was that salvation could be attained only by total repentance and that this became far more achievable for one who had truly transgressed. 'Sin in order that you may obtain forgiveness,' was the practical side of the Khlysty.\"\nOther scholars have dismissed these rumours. Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare, referencing a study by Karl Konrad Grass, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The Khlysty] have been accused of ending their \"radenia\" or religious dances with wholesale debauchery, the lights being first put out. Grass examines the evidence very carefully and impartially, and rejects the story as calumny. The only thing that gives it colour is that often, when the ecstasies are over, the exhausted votaries drop down on the floor and sleep till dawn, the men on one side of the apartment, the women on the other. Their doing so, instead of going home at once, is a necessity dictated either by the climate or by fear of the Russian police, whose suspicions would be roused if they trooped home at a late hour.\nHistorian Joseph T. Fuhrmann claims that \"splinter groups practiced 'holy intercourse,' but most khlysty were devout pentecostalists [\"sic?\"] who condemned such behaviour.\"\nPersecution.\nAccusations of sexual immorality pursued the sect from its earliest days, and provoked numerous government investigations.\nIn 1717, Lupkin and twenty other Khlysty were arrested in Uglich. They were held for five months, during which time they were interrogated and beaten. While some of his followers remained in custody, Lupkin managed to negotiate his own release, with the help of a 300-ruble bribe. Despite officially repenting, he continued to lead the movement until his death in 1732.\nFrom 1733 to 1739, a specially-formed government commission arrested hundreds of suspected Khlyst members, charging them with participation in sexual orgies and ritual infanticide. These accusations were repeatedly denied, but the commission nevertheless convicted over three hundred people. They handed out sentences of hard labour, beatings, and mutilation of the nostrils and the tongue, and sent many of the prisoners into exile in Siberia or Orenburg.\nHowever, the Khlysty were undeterred, and continued practising. Some of those who had been sent into exile began to spread the movement through Siberia. In 1745, therefore, a new commission was formed, this time using \"far crueler methods of interrogation\". This commission, although eliciting false confessions of sexual deviation and cannibalistic communion, and sending another 200 people into exile, likewise failed to stamp out the movement.\nLater history.\nAround 1750, some doctrinal changes took place within the sect, and they became known as the Postniki (\"Fasters\"). The leaders of the sect were now seen as \"personifications of Christ\", rather than only playing host to his spirit. It was no longer considered possible for ordinary members to receive the Holy Spirit during \"radenie\", although the ritual still held a central position in their worship.\nIn 1840, a new splinter sect broke away from the Postniki. Calling themselves Israelites, they shortly afterwards split again into Old Israel and New Israel. The beliefs of the latter group departed considerably from the traditional teachings of the Khlysts, and the sect still exists today in Uruguay.\nThese schisms weakened the movement, and their numbers began to decline. By the start of the twentieth century, estimates of the Khlysty's numbers ranged at around one hundred thousand. Prior to the outbreak of World War I, there were reported to be around 20,000 New Israelites, 15,000 Old Israelites and 3,000 Postniki in Russia. By the 1970s, there were only \"a few isolated groups\" remaining.\nInfluence.\nThe Khlysty are said to have been \"the root of all Russian sectarianism\", having spawned sects such as the Skoptsy, the Dukhobors and the Molokans.\nConnection to Rasputin.\nGrigori Rasputin was twice investigated (in 1903 and 1907) by the Tobolsk Theological Consistory, under charges of spreading Khlyst doctrine. Both investigations were closed without any evidence being found against him, but popular rumour continued to link Rasputin to the sect.\nC. L. Sulzberger, in 1977, claimed that Rasputin \"adopted the philosophy (if not proven membership)\" of the Khlysts.\nIn \"The Man Behind the Myth\", co-authored by Rasputin's daughter Maria, it is claimed that Rasputin attended several Khlyst gatherings in the years before his arrival in St. Petersberg, but ultimately became disillusioned with the sect. The factual accuracy of this book has been called into question, and according to Brian Moynahan, Maria's story is the only evidence that Rasputin had any Khlyst connections. The consensus of modern historians is that Rasputin was never a member of the sect.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "40157", "revid": "45916690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40157", "title": "Russian Orthodox Church", "text": "Autocephalous Eastern Orthodox church\nThe Russian Orthodox Church (ROC; ;), also officially known as the Moscow Patriarchate (), is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Christian church. It has 194 dioceses inside Russia. The primate of the ROC is the patriarch of Moscow and all Rus'.\nThe history of the ROC begins with the Christianization of Kievan Rus', which commenced in 988 with the baptism of Vladimir the Great and his subjects by the clergy of the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople. Starting in the 14th century, Moscow served as the primary residence of the Russian metropolitan. The ROC declared autocephaly in 1448 when it elected its own metropolitan. In 1589, the metropolitan was elevated to the position of patriarch with the consent of Constantinople. In the mid-17th century, a series of reforms led to a schism in the Russian Church, as the Old Believers opposed the changes.\nThe ROC currently claims exclusive jurisdiction over the Eastern Orthodox Christians, irrespective of their ethnic background, who reside in the former member republics of the Soviet Union, excluding Georgia. The ROC also created the autonomous Church of Japan and Chinese Orthodox Church. The ROC eparchies in Belarus and Latvia, since the fall of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, enjoy various degrees of self-government, albeit short of the status of formal ecclesiastical autonomy.\nThe ROC should also not be confused with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (or ROCOR, also known as the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad), headquartered in the United States. The ROCOR was instituted in the 1920s by Russian communities outside the Soviet Union, which had refused to recognise the authority of the Moscow Patriarchate that was \"de facto\" headed by Metropolitan Sergius Stragorodsky. The two churches reconciled on 17 May 2007; the ROCOR is now a self-governing part of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nHistory.\nApostle Andrew.\nOne of the foundational narratives associated with the history of Orthodoxy in Russia is found in the 12th-century \"Primary Chronicle\", which says that the Apostle Andrew visited Scythia and Greek colonies along the northern coast of the Black Sea before making his way to Chersonesus in Crimea. According to the legend, Andrew reached the future location of Kiev and foretold the foundation of a great Christian city with many churches. Then, \"he came to the [land of the] Slovenians where Novgorod now [stands]\" and observed the locals, before eventually arriving in Rome. Despite the lack of historical evidence supporting this narrative, modern church historians in Russia have often incorporated this tale into their studies.\nKievan Rus'.\nIn the 10th century, Christianity began to take root in Kievan Rus'. Towards the end of the reign of Igor, Christians are mentioned among the Varangians. In the text about the treaty with the Byzantine Empire in 944\u2013945, the chronicler also records the oath-taking ceremony that took place in Constantinople for Igor's envoys as well as the equivalent ceremony that took place in Kiev. Igor's wife Olga was baptized sometime in the mid-10th century; however, scholars have disputed the exact year and place of her conversion, with dates ranging from 946 to 960. Most scholars tend to agree that she was baptized in Constantinople, though some argue that her conversion took place in Kiev. Olga's son Sviatoslav opposed conversion, despite persuasion from his mother, and there is little information about Christianity in sources in the period between 969 and 988.\nTen years after seizing power, Grand Prince Vladimir was baptized in 988 and began Christianizing his people upon his return. That year was decreed by the Russian Orthodox Church in 1988 as the date of the Christianization of the country. According to the \"Chronicle\", Vladimir had previously sent envoys to investigate the different faiths. After receiving glowing reports about Constantinople, he captured Chersonesus in Crimea and demanded that the sister of Basil II be sent there. The marriage took place on the condition that Vladimir would be also baptized there. Vladimir had lent considerable military support to the Byzantine emperor and may have besieged the city due to it having sided with the rebellious Bardas Phokas. By the early 11th century, Christianity was established as the state religion. By the early 13th century, some 40 episcopal sees had been established, all of which ultimately answered to Constantinople.\nTransfer of the see to Moscow; \"de facto\" independence of the Russian Church.\nAfter Kiev lost its significance following the Mongol invasions, Metropolitan Maximus moved his seat to Vladimir in 1299. His successor, Peter, found himself caught in the conflict between the principalities of Tver and Moscow for supremacy in northwest Russia. Peter moved his residence to Moscow in 1325 and became a strong ally of the prince of Moscow. During Peter's tenure in Moscow, the foundation for the Dormition Cathedral was laid and Peter was buried there. By choosing to reside and be buried in Moscow, Peter had designated Moscow as the future center of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nPeter was succeeded by Theognostus, who, like his predecessor, pursued policies that supported the rise of the Moscow principality. During the first four years of his tenure, the Dormition Cathedral was completed and an additional four stone churches were constructed in Moscow. By the end of 1331, Theognostus was able to restore ecclesiastical control over Lithuania. Theognostus also proceeded with the canonization of Peter in 1339, which helped to increase Moscow's prestige. His successor Alexius lost ecclesiastical over Lithuania in 1355, but kept the traditional title.\nOn 5 July 1439, at the Council of Florence, the only Russian prelate present at the council signed the union, which, according to his companion, was only under duress. Metropolitan Isidore left Florence on 6 September 1439 and returned to Moscow on 19 March 1441. The chronicles say that three days after arriving in Moscow, Grand Prince Vasily II arrested Isidore and placed him under supervision in the Chudov Monastery. According to the chroniclers of the grand prince, \"the princes, the boyars and many others \u2014 and especially the Russian bishops \u2014 remained silent, slumbered and fell asleep\" until \"the divinely wise, Christ-loving sovereign, Grand Prince Vasily Vasilyevich shamed Isidor and called him not his pastor and teacher, but a wicked and baneful wolf\". Despite the chronicles calling him a heretical apostate, Isidore was recognized as the lawful metropolitan by Vasily\u00a0II until he left Moscow on 15 September 1441.\nFor the following seven years, the seat of the metropolitan remained vacant. Vasily\u00a0II defeated the rebellious Dmitry Shemyaka and returned to Moscow in February 1447. On 15 December 1448, a council of Russian bishops elected Jonah as metropolitan, without the consent of the patriarch of Constantinople, which marked the beginning of autocephaly of the Russian Church. Although not all Russian clergy supported Jonah, the move was subsequently justified in the Russian point of view following the fall of Constantinople in 1453, which was interpreted as divine punishment. While it is possible that the failure to obtain the blessing from Constantinople was not intentional, nevertheless, this marked the beginning of independence of the Russian Church.\nAutocephaly and schism.\nJonah's policy as metropolitan was to recover the areas lost to the Uniate church. He was able to include Lithuania and Kiev to his title, but not Galicia. Lithuania was separated from his jurisdiction in 1458, and the influence of Catholicism increased in those regions. As soon as Vasily\u00a0II heard about the ordination of Gregory as metropolitan of the newly established metropolis of Kiev, he sent a delegation to the king of Poland warning him not to accept Gregory; Jonah also attempted to persuade feudal princes and nobles who resided in Lithuania to continue to side with Orthodoxy, but this attempt failed.\nThe fall of Constantinople and the beginning of autocephaly of the Russian Church contributed to political consolidation in Russia and the development of a new identity based on awareness that Moscow was only metropolitanate in the Orthodox \"oikoumene\" that remained politically independent. The formulation of the idea of Moscow as the \"third Rome\" is primarily associated with the monk Philotheus of Pskov, who stated that \"Moscow \nalone shines over all the earth more radiantly than the sun\" because of its fidelity to the faith. The marriage of Ivan\u00a0III to Sophia Palaiologina, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor, and the defeat of the Tatars, helped to solidify this view.\nBy the turn of the 16th century, the consolidation of Orthodoxy in Russia continued as Archbishop Gennady of Novgorod created the first complete manuscript translation of the Bible into Church Slavonic in 1499, known as Gennady's Bible. At the same time, two movements within the Russian Church had emerged with differing ecclesial visions. Nilus of Sora (1433\u20131508) led the non-possessors, who opposed monastic landholding except for the purposes of charity in addition to strong involvement of the church in the affairs of the state, while Joseph of Volotsk (1439\u20131515) led a movement that supported strong church involvement in the state's affairs. By 1551, the Stoglav Synod addressed the lack of uniformity in existing ecclesial practices. Metropolitan Macarius also collected \"all holy books... available in the Russian land\" and completed the \"Grand Menaion\", which was influential in shaping the narrative tradition of Russian Orthodoxy. In 1589, during the reign of Feodor\u00a0I and under the direction of Boris Godunov, the metropolitan of Moscow, Job, was consecrated as the first Russian patriarch with the blessing of Jeremias II of Constantinople. In the decree establishing the patriarchate, the whole Russian tsardom is called a \"third Rome\".\nBy the mid-17th century, the religious practices of the Russian Orthodox Church were distinct from those of the Greek Orthodox Church. Patriarch Nikon reformed the church in order to bring most of its practices back into accommodation with the contemporary forms of Greek Orthodox worship. Nikon's efforts to correct the translations of texts and institute liturgical reforms were not accepted by all. Archpriest Avvakum accused the patriarch of \"defiling the faith\" and \"pouring wrathful fury upon the Russian land\". The result was a schism, with those who resisted the new practices being known as the Old Believers.\nIn the aftermath of the Treaty of Pereyaslav, the Ottomans, supposedly acting on behalf of the Russian regent Sophia Alekseyevna, pressured the patriarch of Constantinople into transferring the metropolis of Kiev from the jurisdiction of Constantinople to that of Moscow. The handover brought millions of faithful and half a dozen dioceses under the ultimate administrative care of the patriarch of Moscow, and later of the Holy Synod of Russia, leading to a significant Ukrainian presence in the Russian Church, which continued well into the 18th century. The exact terms and conditions of the handover of the metropolis remains a contested issue.\nSynodal period.\nFollowing the death of Patriarch Adrian in 1700, Peter\u00a0I of Russia (r.\u20091682\u00a0\u2013\u00a01725) decided against an election of a new patriarch, and drawing on the clergy that came from Ukraine, he appointed Stefan Yavorsky as \"locum tenens\". Peter believed that Russia's resources, including the church, could be used to establish a modern European state and he sought to strengthen the authority of the monarch. He was also inspired by church\u2013state relations in the West and therefore brought the institutional structure of the church in line with other ministries. Theophan Prokopovich wrote Peter's \"Spiritual Regulation\", which no longer legally recognized the separation of the church and the state.\nPeter replaced the patriarch with a council known as the Most Holy Synod in 1721, which consisted of appointed bishops, monks, and priests. The church was also overseen by an ober-procurator that would directly report to the emperor. Peter's reforms marked the beginning of the Synodal period of the Russian Church, which would last until 1917. In order to make monasticism more socially useful, Peter began the processes that would eventually lead to the large-scale secularization of monastic landholdings in 1764 under Catherine\u00a0II. 822 monasteries were closed between 1701 and 1805, and monastic communities became highly regulated, receiving funds from the state for support.\nThe late 18th century saw the rise of \"starchestvo\" under Paisiy Velichkovsky and his disciples at the Optina Monastery. This marked a beginning of a significant spiritual revival in the Russian Church after a lengthy period of modernization, personified by such figures as Demetrius of Rostov and Platon of Moscow. Aleksey Khomyakov, Ivan Kireevsky and other lay theologians with Slavophile leanings elaborated some key concepts of the renovated Orthodox doctrine, including that of \"sobornost\". The resurgence of Eastern Orthodoxy was reflected in Russian literature, an example is the figure of Starets Zosima in Fyodor Dostoyevsky's \"Brothers Karamazov\".\nIn the Russian Orthodox Church, the clergy, over time, formed a hereditary caste of priests. Marrying outside of these priestly families was strictly forbidden; indeed, some bishops did not even tolerate their clergy marrying outside of the priestly families of their diocese.\nFin-de-si\u00e8cle religious renaissance.\nIn 1909, a volume of essays appeared under the title \"Vekhi\" (\"Milestones\" or \"Landmarks\"), authored by a group of leading left-wing intellectuals, including Sergei Bulgakov, Peter Struve and former Marxists.\nIt is possible to see a similarly renewed vigor and variety in religious life and spirituality among the lower classes, especially after the upheavals of 1905. Among the peasantry, there was widespread interest in spiritual-ethical literature and non-conformist moral-spiritual movements, an upsurge in pilgrimage and other devotions to sacred spaces and objects (especially icons), persistent beliefs in the presence and power of the supernatural (apparitions, possession, walking-dead, demons, spirits, miracles and magic), the renewed vitality of local \"ecclesial communities\" actively shaping their own ritual and spiritual lives, sometimes in the absence of clergy, and defining their own sacred places and forms of piety. Also apparent was the proliferation of what the Orthodox establishment branded as \"sectarianism\", including both non-Eastern Orthodox Christian denominations, notably Baptists, and various forms of popular Orthodoxy and mysticism.\nRussian Revolution and Civil War.\nIn 1914, there were 55,173 Russian Orthodox churches and 29,593 chapels, 112,629 priests and deacons, 550 monasteries and 475 convents with a total of 95,259 monks and nuns in Russia.\nThe year 1917 was a major turning point in Russian history, and also the Russian Orthodox Church. In early March 1917 (O.S.), the Tsar was forced to abdicate, the Russian empire began to implode, and the government's direct control of the Church was all but over by August 1917. On 15 August (O.S.), in the Moscow Dormition Cathedral in the Kremlin, the Local (\"Pomestniy\") Council of the ROC, the first such convention since the late 17th century, opened. The council continued its sessions until September 1918 and adopted a number of important reforms, including the restoration of Patriarchate, a decision taken 3 days after the Bolsheviks overthrew the Provisional Government in Petrograd on 25 October (O.S.). On 5 November, Metropolitan Tikhon of Moscow was selected as the first Russian Patriarch after about 200 years of Synodal rule.\nIn early February 1918, the Bolshevik-controlled government of Soviet Russia enacted the Decree on separation of church from state and school from church that proclaimed separation of church and state in Russia, freedom to \"profess any religion or profess none\", deprived religious organisations of the right to own any property and legal status. Legal religious activity in the territories controlled by Bolsheviks was effectively reduced to services and sermons inside church buildings. The Decree and attempts by Bolshevik officials to requisition church property caused sharp resentment on the part of the ROC clergy and provoked violent clashes on some occasions: on 1 February (19 January O.S.), hours after the bloody confrontation in Petrograd's Alexander Nevsky Lavra between the Bolsheviks trying to take control of the monastery's premises and the believers, Patriarch Tikhon issued a proclamation that anathematised the perpetrators of such acts.\nThe church was caught in the crossfire of the Russian Civil War that began later in 1918, and church leadership, despite their attempts to be politically neutral (from the autumn of 1918), as well as the clergy generally were perceived by the Soviet authorities as a \"counter-revolutionary\" force and thus subject to suppression and eventual liquidation.\nIn the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.\nSoviet period.\nThe Soviet Union, formally created in December 1922, was the first state to have elimination of religion as an ideological objective espoused by the country's ruling political party, which held the doctrine of state atheism. Toward that end, the Communist regime confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated materialism and atheism in schools. Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by State interests, and most organized religions were never outlawed.\nOrthodox Christian clergy and active believers, among Christians from other denominations, were treated by the Soviet law-enforcement apparatus as anti-revolutionary elements and were habitually subjected to formal prosecutions on political charges, arrests, exiles, imprisonment in camps, and later could also be incarcerated in mental hospitals.\nHowever, the Soviet policy vis-a-vis organised religion vacillated over time between, on the one hand, a utopian determination to substitute secular rationalism for what they considered to be an outmoded \"superstitious\" worldview and, on the other, pragmatic acceptance of the tenaciousness of religious faith and institutions. In any case, religious beliefs and practices did persist, not only in the domestic and private spheres but also in the scattered public spaces allowed by a state that recognized its failure to eradicate religion and the political dangers of an unrelenting culture war.\nThe Russian Orthodox church was drastically weakened in May 1922, when the Renovated (Living) Church, a reformist movement backed by the Soviet secret police, broke away from Patriarch Tikhon (also see the Josephites and the Russian True Orthodox Church), a move that caused division among clergy and faithful that persisted until 1946.\nBetween 1917 and 1935, 130,000 Eastern Orthodox priests were arrested. Of these, 95,000 were put to death. Many thousands of victims of persecution became recognized in a special canon of saints known as the \"new martyrs and confessors of Russia\".\nWhen Patriarch Tikhon died in 1925, the Soviet authorities forbade patriarchal election. Patriarchal \"locum tenens\" (acting Patriarch) Metropolitan Sergius (Stragorodsky, 1887\u20131944), going against the opinion of a major part of the church's parishes, in 1927 issued a declaration accepting the Soviet authority over the church as legitimate, pledging the church's cooperation with the government and condemning political dissent within the church. By this declaration, Sergius granted himself authority that he, being a deputy of imprisoned Metropolitan Peter and acting against his will, had no right to assume according to the XXXIV Apostolic canon, which led to a split with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia abroad and the Russian True Orthodox Church (Russian Catacomb Church) within the Soviet Union, as they allegedly remained faithful to the Canons of the Apostles, declaring the part of the church led by Metropolitan Sergius schism, sometimes coined \"Sergianism\". Due to this canonical disagreement it is disputed which church has been the legitimate successor to the Russian Orthodox Church that had existed before 1925.\nIn 1927, Metropolitan Evlogy of Paris broke with the ROCOR (along with Metropolitan Platon (Rozhdestvensky) of New York, leader of the Russian Metropolia in America). In 1930, after taking part in a prayer service in London in supplication for Christians suffering under the Soviets, Evlogy was removed from office by Sergius and replaced. Most of Evlogy's parishes in Western Europe remained loyal to him; Evlogy then petitioned Ecumenical Patriarch Photius II to be received under his canonical care and was received in 1931, making a number of parishes of Russian Orthodox Christians outside Russia, especially in Western Europe an Exarchate of the Ecumenical Patriarchate as the Archdiocese of Russian Orthodox churches in Western Europe.\nWith aid from the Methodist Church, two Russian Orthodox seminaries were reopened in the 1920s as a result of their ecumenical commitments. Moreover, in the 1929 elections, the Orthodox Church attempted to formulate itself as a full-scale opposition group to the Communist Party, and attempted to run candidates of its own against the Communist candidates. Article 124 of the 1936 Soviet Constitution officially allowed for freedom of religion within the Soviet Union, and along with initial statements of it being a multi-candidate election, the Church again attempted to run its own religious candidates in the 1937 elections. However the support of multicandidate elections was retracted several months before the elections were held and in neither 1929 nor 1937 were any candidates of the Orthodox Church elected.\nAfter Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. In the early hours of 5 September 1943, Metropolitans Sergius (Stragorodsky), Alexius (Simansky) and Nicholas (Yarushevich) had a meeting with Stalin and received permission to convene a council on 8 September 1943, which elected Sergius Patriarch of Moscow and all the Rus'. This is considered by some as violation of the Apostolic canon, as no church hierarch could be consecrated by secular authorities. A new patriarch was elected, theological schools were opened, and thousands of churches began to function. The Moscow Theological Academy Seminary, which had been closed since 1918, was re-opened.\nIn December 2017, the Security Service of Ukraine lifted classified top secret status of documents revealing that the NKVD of the USSR and its units were engaged in the selection of candidates for participation in the 1945 Local Council from the representatives of the clergy and the laity. NKVD demanded \"to outline persons who have religious authority among the clergy and believers, and at the same time checked for civic or patriotic work\". In the letter sent in September 1944, it was emphasized: \"It is important to ensure that the number of nominated candidates is dominated by the agents of the NKBD, capable of holding the line that we need at the Council\".\nPersecution under Khrushchev.\nA new and widespread persecution of the Christians was subsequently instituted under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev. A second round of repression, harassment and church closures took place between 1959 and 1964 when Nikita Khrushchev was in office. The number of Orthodox churches fell from around 22,000 in 1959 to around 8,000 in 1965; priests, monks and faithful were killed or imprisoned and the number of functioning monasteries was reduced to less than twenty.\nSubsequent to Khrushchev's ousting, the Church and the government remained on unfriendly terms until 1988. In practice, the most important aspect of this conflict was that openly religious people could not join the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which meant that they could not hold any political office. However, among the general population, large numbers remained religious.\nSome Orthodox believers and even priests took part in the dissident movement and became prisoners of conscience. The Orthodox priests Gleb Yakunin, Sergiy Zheludkov and others spent years in Soviet prisons and exile for their efforts in defending freedom of worship. Among the prominent figures of that time were Dmitri Dudko and Aleksandr Men. Although he tried to keep away from practical work of the dissident movement intending to better fulfil his calling as a priest, there was a spiritual link between Men and many of the dissidents. For some of them he was a friend; for others, a godfather; for many (including Yakunin), a spiritual father.\nAccording to Metropolitan Vladimir, by 1988 the number of functioning churches in the Soviet Union had fallen to 6,893 and the number of functioning convents and monasteries to just 21. In 1987 in the Russian SFSR, between 40% and 50% of newborn babies (depending on the region) were baptized. Over 60% of all deceased received Christian funeral services.\nGlasnost and evidence of collaboration with the KGB.\nBeginning in the late 1980s, under Mikhail Gorbachev, the new political and social freedoms resulted in the return of many church buildings to the church, so they could be restored by local parishioners. A pivotal point in the history of the Russian Orthodox Church came in 1988, the millennial anniversary of the Christianization of Kievan Rus'. Throughout the summer of that year, major government-supported celebrations took place in Moscow and other cities; many older churches and some monasteries were reopened. An implicit ban on religious propaganda on state TV was finally lifted. For the first time in the history of the Soviet Union, people could watch live transmissions of church services on television.\nGleb Yakunin, a critic of the Moscow Patriarchate who was one of those who briefly gained access to the KGB's archives in the early 1990s, argued that the Moscow Patriarchate was \"practically a subsidiary, a sister company of the KGB\". Critics charge that the archives showed the extent of active participation of the top ROC hierarchs in the KGB efforts overseas. George Trofimoff, the highest-ranking US military officer ever indicted for, and convicted of, espionage by the United States and sentenced to life imprisonment on 27 September 2001, had been \"recruited into the service of the KGB\" by Igor Susemihl (a.k.a. Zuzemihl), a bishop in the Russian Orthodox Church (subsequently, a high-ranking hierarch\u2014the ROC Metropolitan Iriney of Vienna, who died in July 1999).\nKonstanin Kharchev, former chairman of the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs, explained: \"Not a single candidate for the office of bishop or any other high-ranking office, much less a member of the Holy Synod, went through without confirmation by the Central Committee of the CPSU and the KGB\". Professor Nathaniel Davis points out: \"If the bishops wished to defend their people and survive in office, they had to collaborate to some degree with the KGB, with the commissioners of the Council for Religious Affairs, and with other party and governmental authorities\". Patriarch Alexy II, acknowledged that compromises were made with the Soviet government by bishops of the Moscow Patriarchate, himself included, and he publicly repented for these compromises.\nPost-Soviet era.\nPatriarch Aleksey II (1990\u20132008).\nMetropolitan Alexy (Ridiger) of Leningrad, ascended the patriarchal throne in 1990 and presided over the partial return of Orthodox Christianity to Russian society after 70 years of repression, transforming the ROC to something resembling its pre-communist appearance; some 15,000 churches had been re-opened or built by the end of his tenure, and the process of recovery and rebuilding has continued under his successor Patriarch Kirill. According to official figures, in 2016 the Church had 174 dioceses, 361 bishops, and 34,764 parishes served by 39,800 clergy. There were 926 monasteries and 30 theological schools.\nThe Russian Church also sought to fill the ideological vacuum left by the collapse of Communism and even, in the opinion of some analysts, became \"a separate branch of power\".\nIn August 2000, the ROC adopted its Basis of the Social Concept and in July 2008, its Basic Teaching on Human Dignity, Freedom and Rights.\nUnder Patriarch Aleksey, there were difficulties in the relationship between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Vatican, especially since 2002, when Pope John Paul II created a Catholic diocesan structure for Russian territory. The leaders of the Russian Church saw this action as a throwback to prior attempts by the Vatican to proselytize the Russian Orthodox faithful to become Roman Catholic. This point of view was based upon the stance of the Russian Orthodox Church (and the Eastern Orthodox Church) that the Church of Rome is in schism, after breaking off from the Orthodox Church. The Roman Catholic Church, on the other hand, while acknowledging the primacy of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia, believed that the small Roman Catholic minority in Russia, in continuous existence since at least the 18th century, should be served by a fully developed church hierarchy with a presence and status in Russia, just as the Russian Orthodox Church is present in other countries (including constructing a cathedral in Rome, near the Vatican).\nThere occurred strident conflicts with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, most notably over the Orthodox Church in Estonia in the mid-1990s, which resulted in unilateral suspension of eucharistic relationship between the churches by the ROC. The tension lingered on and could be observed at the meeting in Ravenna in early October 2007 of participants in the Orthodox\u2013Catholic Dialogue: the representative of the Moscow Patriarchate, Bishop Hilarion Alfeyev, walked out of the meeting due to the presence of representatives from the Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church which is in the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. At the meeting, prior to the departure of the Russian delegation, there were also substantive disagreements about the wording of a proposed joint statement among the Orthodox representatives. After the departure of the Russian delegation, the remaining Orthodox delegates approved the form which had been advocated by the representatives of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. The Ecumenical See's representative in Ravenna said that Hilarion's position \"should be seen as an expression of authoritarianism whose goal is to exhibit the influence of the Moscow Church. But like last year in Belgrade, all Moscow achieved was to isolate itself once more since no other Orthodox Church followed its lead, remaining instead faithful to Constantinople.\"\nCanon Michael Bourdeaux, former president of the Keston Institute, said in January 2008 that \"the Moscow Patriarchate acts as though it heads a state church, while the few Orthodox clergy who oppose the church-state symbiosis face severe criticism, even loss of livelihood.\" Such a view is backed up by other observers of Russian political life. Clifford J. Levy of \"The New York Times\" wrote in April 2008: \"Just as the government has tightened control over political life, so, too, has it intruded in matters of faith. The Kremlin's surrogates in many areas have turned the Russian Orthodox Church into a de facto official religion, warding off other Christian denominations that seem to offer the most significant competition for worshipers. [...] This close alliance between the government and the Russian Orthodox Church has become a defining characteristic of Mr. Putin's tenure, a mutually reinforcing choreography that is usually described here as working 'in symphony'.\"\nThroughout Patriarch Alexy's reign, the massive program of costly restoration and reopening of devastated churches and monasteries (as well as the construction of new ones) was criticized for having eclipsed the church's principal mission of evangelizing.\nOn 5 December 2008, the day of Patriarch Alexy's death, the \"Financial Times\" said: \"While the church had been a force for liberal reform under the Soviet Union, it soon became a center of strength for conservatives and nationalists in the post-communist era. Alexei's death could well result in an even more conservative church.\"\nPatriarch Kirill (since 2009).\nOn 27 January 2009, the ROC Local Council elected Metropolitan Kirill of Smolensk Patriarch of Moscow and All Rus\u2032 by 508 votes out of a total of 700. He was enthroned on 1 February 2009.\nPatriarch Kirill implemented reforms in the administrative structure of the Moscow Patriarchate: on 27 July 2011 the Holy Synod established the Central Asian Metropolitan District, reorganizing the structure of the Church in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan. In addition, on 6 October 2011, at the request of the Patriarch, the Holy Synod introduced the metropoly (Russian: \u043c\u0438\u0442\u0440\u043e\u043f\u043e\u043b\u0438\u044f, mitropoliya), administrative structure bringing together neighboring eparchies.\nUnder Patriarch Kirill, the ROC continued to maintain close ties with the Kremlin enjoying the patronage of president Vladimir Putin, who has sought to mobilize Russian Orthodoxy both inside and outside Russia. Patriarch Kirill endorsed Putin's election in 2012, referring in February to Putin's tenure in the 2000s as \"God's miracle\". Nevertheless, Russian inside sources were quoted in the autumn 2017 as saying that Putin's relationship with Patriarch Kirill had been deteriorating since 2014 due to the fact that the presidential administration had been misled by the Moscow Patriarchate as to the extent of support for pro-Russian uprising in eastern Ukraine; also, due to Kirill's personal unpopularity he had come to be viewed as a political liability.\nSchism with Constantinople.\nIn 2018, the Moscow Patriarchate's traditional rivalry with the Patriarchate of Constantinople, coupled with Moscow's anger over the decision to grant autocephaly to the Ukrainian church by the Ecumenical Patriarch, led the ROC to boycott the Holy Great Council that had been prepared by all the Orthodox Churches for decades.\nThe Holy Synod of the ROC, at its session on 15 October 2018, severed full communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. The decision was taken in response to the move made by the Patriarchate of Constantinople a few days prior that effectively ended the Moscow Patriarchate's jurisdiction over Ukraine and promised autocephaly to Ukraine, the ROC's and the Kremlin's fierce opposition notwithstanding.\nWhile the Ecumenical Patriarchate finalised the establishment of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine on 5 January 2019, the ROC continued to claim that the only legitimate Orthodox jurisdiction in the country, was its branch. Under a law of Ukraine adopted at the end of 2018, the latter was required to change its official title so as to disclose its affiliation with the Russian Orthodox Church based in an \"aggressor state\". On 11 December 2019 the Supreme Court of Ukraine allowed the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate (UOC-MP) to retain its name.\nIn October 2019, the ROC unilaterally severed communion with the Church of Greece following the latter's recognition of the Ukrainian autocephaly. On 3 November, Patriarch Kirill failed to commemorate the Primate of the Church of Greece, Archbishop Ieronymos II of Athens, during a liturgy in Moscow. Additionally, the ROC leadership imposed pilgrimage bans for its faithful in respect of a number of dioceses in Greece, including that of Athens.\nOn 8 November 2019, the Russian Orthodox Church announced that Patriarch Kirill would stop commemorating the Patriarch of Alexandria and all Africa after the latter and his Church recognized the OCU that same day.\nOn 27 September 2021, the ROC established a religious day of remembrance for all Eastern Orthodox Christians which were persecuted by the Soviet regime. This day is the 30 October.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nMetropolitan Onufriy of Kyiv, primate of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) (UOC-MP) called the war \"a disaster\" stating that \"The Ukrainian and Russian peoples came out of the Dnieper Baptismal font, and the war between these peoples is a repetition of the sin of Cain, who killed his own brother out of envy. Such a war has no justification either from God or from people\". He also appealed directly to Putin, asking for an immediate end to the \"fratricidal war\". In April 2022, after the Russian invasion, many UOC-MP parishes signaled their intention to switch allegiance to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. The attitude and stance of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow to the war is one of the oft quoted reasons. The head of the Russian Orthodox Church in Lithuania, Metropolitan Innocent (Vasilyev), called Patriarch Kirill's \"political statements about the war\" his \"personal opinion\". On 7 March 2022, Aleksandrs Kudrja\u0161ovs, head of the Latvian Orthodox Church, condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nOn 27 February 2022, a group of 286 Russian Orthodox priests published an open letter calling for an end to the war and criticised the suppression of non-violent anti-war protests in Russia. On 6 March 2022, Russian Orthodox priest of Moscow Patriarchate's Kostroma Diocese was fined by Russian authorities for anti-war sermon and stressing the importance of the commandment \"Thou shalt not kill\". Some priests in the Russian Orthodox Church have publicly opposed the invasion, with some facing arrest under the Russian 2022 war censorship laws. In Kazakhstan, Russian Orthodox priest Iakov Vorontsov, who signed an open letter condemning the invasion of Ukraine, was forced to resign. Former Russian Orthodox priest Father Grigory Michnov-Vaytenko, head of the Russian Apostolic Church \u2014 a recognized religious organization founded by other dissident priests such as Father Gleb Yakunin \u2014 said that \"The [Russian Orthodox] church now works like the commissars did in the Soviet Union. And people of course see it. People don't like it. Especially after February [2022], a lot of people have left the church, both priests and people who were there for years.\"\nPatriarch Kirill has referred to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine as \"current events\" and has avoided using terms like \"war\" or \"invasion\", thereby complying with Russian censorship law. Kirill approves the invasion, and has blessed the Russian soldiers fighting there. As a consequence, several priests of the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine have stopped mentioning Kirill's name during the divine service. The Moscow patriarchate views Ukraine as a part of their \"canonical territory\". Kirill has said that the Russian army has chosen a very correct way.\nKirill sees gay pride parades as a part of the reason behind Russian warfare against Ukraine. He has said that the war is not physically, but rather metaphysically, important.\nFollowing the Bucha massacre, Kirill said that his faithful should be ready to \"protect our home\" under any circumstances.\nOn 6 March 2022 (Forgiveness Sunday holiday), during the liturgy in the Church of Christ the Savior, he justified Russia's attack on Ukraine, stating that it was necessary to side with \"Donbas\" (i.e. Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republic), where he said there is an ongoing 8-year \"genocide\" by Ukraine and where, Kirill said, Ukraine wants to enforce gay pride events upon local population. Despite the holiday being dedicated to the concept of forgiveness, Kirill said there can't be forgiveness without delivering \"justice\" first, otherwise it's a capitulation and weakness. The speech came under international scrutiny, as Kirill parroted President Putin's claim that Russia was fighting \"fascism\" in Ukraine. Throughout the speech, Kirill did not use the term \"Ukrainian\", but rather referred to both Russians and Ukrainians simply as \"Holy Russians\", also claiming Russian soldiers in Ukraine were \"laying down their lives for a friend\", the Gospel of John.\nOn 9 March 2022, after the liturgy, he declared that Russia has the right to use force against Ukraine to ensure Russia's security, that Ukrainians and Russians are one people, that Russia and Ukraine are one country, that the West incites Ukrainians to kill Russians to sow discord between Russians and Ukrainians and gives weapons to Ukrainians for this specific purpose, and therefore the West is an enemy of Russia and God.\nIn a letter to the World Council of Churches (WCC) sent in March 2022, Kirill justified the attack on Ukraine by NATO enlargement, the protection of Russian language, and the establishment of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. In this letter, he did not express condolences over deaths among Ukrainians.\nKirill participated in a Zoom video call with Pope Francis on 16 March 2022, of which Francis stated in an interview that Kirill \"read from a piece of paper he was holding in his hand all the reasons that justify the Russian invasion.\"\nRepresentatives of the Vatican have criticized Kirill for his lack of willingness to seek peace in Ukraine. On 3 April, the former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams said there was a strong case for expelling the Russian Orthodox Church from the WCC, saying, \"When a Church is actively supporting a war of aggression, failing to condemn nakedly obvious breaches of any kind of ethical conduct in wartime, then other Churches do have the right to raise the question ... I am still waiting for any senior member of the Orthodox hierarchy to say that the slaughter of the innocent is condemned unequivocally by all forms of Christianity.\"\nThe Russian Orthodox St Nicholas church in Amsterdam, Netherlands, has declared that it is no longer possible to function within the Moscow patriarchate because of the attitude that Kirill has taken to the Russian invasion, and instead requested to join the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. The Russian Orthodox Church in Lithuania has declared that they do not share the political views and perception of Kirill and therefore are seeking independence from Moscow.\nOn 10 April 2022, 200 priests from the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) released an open request to the primates of the other autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Churches, asking them to convene a Council of Primates of the Ancient Eastern Churches at the Pan-Orthodox level and try Kirill for the heresy of preaching the \"Doctrine of the Russian world\" and the moral crimes of \"blessing the war against Ukraine and fully supporting the aggressive nature of Russian troops on the territory of Ukraine.\" They noted that they \"can't continue to remain in any form of canonical subordination to the Moscow Patriarch,\" and requested that the Council of Primates \"bring Patriarch Kirill to justice and deprive him of the right to hold the patriarchal throne.\"\nWhen the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) removed itself from the Moscow Patriarchate on 27 May 2022, Kirill claimed that the \"spirits of malice\" wanted to separate the Russian and Ukrainian peoples but they will not succeed. The Ukrainian church released a declaration in which it stated \"it had adopted relevant additions and changes to the Statute on the Administration of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which testify to the complete autonomy and independence of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.\" The church did not publish its new constitution. Although in this Ukrainian Orthodox Church clergymen now claims that 'any provisions that at least somehow hinted at or indicated the connection with Moscow were excluded' the Russian Orthodox Church ignores this and continues to include UOC-MP clerics in its various commissions or working groups despite these individuals not agreeing to this nor even wanting to be included.\nCardinal Kurt Koch, president of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity, said that the patriarch's legitimization of the \"brutal and absurd war\" is \"a heresy.\"\nKirill supported the mobilization of citizens to go to the front in Ukraine, he urged citizens to fulfill their military duty and that if they gave their lives for their country they will be with God in his kingdom.\nNorth Macedonia and Bulgaria expelled senior members of the Russian Orthodox Church for acts contravening their national security in 2023, raising questions about the church using their position to spy and to spread Russian political propaganda. In 2023 Patriarch Bartholomew criticised the Russian church, which he says is teaching a \"theology of war\". \"This is the theology that the sister Church of Russia began to teach, trying to justify an unjust, unholy, unprovoked, diabolical war against a sovereign and independent country \u2013 Ukraine.\" In January 2024, the senior priest of the Church of the Life-Giving Trinity in Ostankino, Moscow, was removed from his post for calling for peace.\nDuring the World Russian People's Council headed and led by Kirill of late March 2024 a document was approved that stated that the Russian invasion of Ukraine was a \"Holy War\". The document stated that the war had the goal of \"protecting the world from the onslaught of globalism and the victory of the West, which has fallen into Satanism\". The document also stated that following the war \"the entire territory of modern Ukraine should enter the zone of Russia's exclusive influence\". This was to be done so \"the possibility of the existence of a Russophobic political regime hostile to Russia and its people on this territory, as well as a political regime controlled from an external center hostile to Russia, should be completely excluded\". The document also made reference to the \"triunity of the Russian people\" and it claimed that Belarusians and Ukrainians \"should be recognised only as sub-ethnic groups of the Russians\".\nOn August 20, 2024, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine banned the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine by adopting the Law of Ukraine \"On the Protection of the Constitutional Order in the Sphere of Activities of Religious Organizations\". Ukrainian religious organizations affiliated with the Russian Orthodox Church will be banned 9 months from the moment the State Service of Ukraine for Ethnopolicy and Freedom of Conscience issues the order, if this religious organization does not sever relations with the Russian Orthodox Church in accordance with Orthodox canon law. This prohibition did not extend to Eastern Orthodoxy in general, contrary to what some online claims asserted.\nStructure and organization.\nThe ROC constituent parts in other than the Russian Federation countries of its exclusive jurisdiction such as Ukraine, Belarus et al., are legally registered as separate legal entities in accordance with the relevant legislation of those independent states.\nEcclesiastiacally, the ROC is organized in a hierarchical structure. The lowest level of organization, which normally would be a single ROC building and its attendees, headed by a priest who acts as Father superior (, \"nastoyatel\"), constitute a parish (, \"prihod\"). All parishes in a geographical region belong to an eparchy (\u2014equivalent to a Western diocese). Eparchies are governed by bishops (, episcop or \u0430\u0440\u0445\u0438\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0439, archiereus). There are 261 Russian Orthodox eparchies worldwide (June 2012).\nFurther, some eparchies may be organized into exarchates (currently the Belarusian exarchate), and since 2003 into metropolitan districts (\u043c\u0438\u0442\u0440\u043e\u043f\u043e\u043b\u0438\u0447\u0438\u0439 \u043e\u043a\u0440\u0443\u0433), such as the ROC eparchies in Kazakhstan and the Central Asia (\u0421\u0440\u0435\u0434\u043d\u0435\u0430\u0437\u0438\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043c\u0438\u0442\u0440\u043e\u043f\u043e\u043b\u0438\u0447\u0438\u0439 \u043e\u043a\u0440\u0443\u0433).\nSince the early 1990s, the ROC eparchies in some newly independent states of the former USSR enjoy the status of self-governing Churches within the Moscow Patriarchate (which status, according to the ROC legal terminology, is distinct from the \"autonomous\" one): the Estonian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate, Latvian Orthodox Church, Moldovan Orthodox Church, Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) (UOC-MP), the last one being virtually fully independent in administrative matters. (Following Russia's 2014 Invasion of Ukraine, the UOC-MP\u2014which held nearly a third of the ROC(MP)'s churches\u2014began to fragment, particularly since 2019, with some separatist congregations leaving the ROC(MP) to join the newly independent Orthodox Church of Ukraine (OCU) despite strident objections from the Moscow Patriarchate and the Russian government.)\nSimilar status, since 2007, is enjoyed by the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (previously fully independent and deemed schismatic by the ROC). The Chinese Orthodox Church and the Japanese Orthodox Churches were granted full autonomy by the Moscow Patriarchate, but this autonomy is not universally recognized.\nSmaller eparchies are usually governed by a single bishop. Larger eparchies, exarchates, and self-governing Churches are governed by a Metropolitan archbishop and sometimes also have one or more bishops assigned to them.\nThe highest level of authority in the ROC is vested in the Local Council (\"Pomestny Sobor\"), which comprises all the bishops as well as representatives from the clergy and laypersons. Another organ of power is the Bishops' Council (\"\u0410\u0440\u0445\u0438\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0439\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0421\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0440\"). In the periods between the Councils the highest administrative powers are exercised by the Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church, which includes seven permanent members and is chaired by the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia, Primate of the Moscow Patriarchate.\nAlthough the Patriarch of Moscow enjoys extensive administrative powers, unlike the Pope, he has no direct canonical jurisdiction outside the Urban Diocese of Moscow, nor does he have single-handed authority over matters pertaining to faith as well as issues concerning the entire Orthodox Christian community such as the Catholic-Orthodox split.\nCanonical territory.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church claims the following sixteen countries as its canonical territory:\nHowever, these claims are not universally recognized; in particular, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine claims Ukraine as its canonical territory and is recognized as such by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. Similarly, the Romanian Orthodox Church claims Moldova as part of its own canonical territory and the Ecumenical Patriarchate claims Estonia as the autonomous Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church.\nOrthodox Church in America (OCA).\nThe OCA has its origins in a mission established by eight Russian Orthodox monks in Alaska, then part of Russian America, in 1794. This grew into a full diocese of the Russian Orthodox Church after the United States purchased Alaska from Russia in 1867. By the late 19th century, the Russian Orthodox Church had grown in other areas of the United States due to the arrival of immigrants from areas of Eastern and Central Europe, many of them formerly of the Eastern Catholic Churches (\"Greek Catholics\"), and from the Middle East. These immigrants, regardless of nationality or ethnic background, were united under a single North American diocese of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nDuring the Second World War, the Patriarchate of Moscow unsuccessfully attempted to regain control of the groups which were located abroad. After it resumed its communication with Moscow in the early 1960s, and after it was granted autocephaly in 1970, the Metropolia became known as the Orthodox Church in America. But its autocephalous status is not universally recognized. The Ecumenical Patriarch (who has jurisdiction over the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America) and some other jurisdictions have not officially accepted it. The Ecumenical Patriarch and the other jurisdictions remain in communion with the OCA. The Patriarchate of Moscow thereby renounced its former canonical claims in the United States and Canada; it also acknowledged the establishment of an autonomous church in Japan in 1970.\nRussian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR).\nRussia's Church was devastated by the repercussions of the Bolshevik Revolution. One of its effects was a flood of refugees from Russia to the United States, Canada, and Europe. The Revolution of 1918 severed large sections of the Russian church\u2014dioceses in America, Japan, and Manchuria, as well as refugees in Europe\u2014from regular contacts with the main church.\nOn 28 December 2006, it was officially announced that the Act of Canonical Communion would finally be signed between the ROC and ROCOR. The signing took place on 17 May 2007, followed immediately by a full restoration of communion with the Moscow Patriarchate, celebrated by a Divine Liturgy at the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow, at which the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia Alexius II and the First Hierarch of ROCOR concelebrated for the first time.\nUnder the Act, the ROCOR remains a self-governing entity within the Church of Russia. It is independent in its administrative, pastoral, and property matters. It continues to be governed by its Council of Bishops and its Synod, the council's permanent executive body. The First-Hierarch and bishops of the ROCOR are elected by its council and confirmed by the Patriarch of Moscow. ROCOR bishops participate in the Council of Bishops of the entire Russian Church.\nIn response to the signing of the act of canonical communion, Bishop Agathangel (Pashkovsky) of Odesa and parishes and clergy in opposition to the Act broke communion with ROCOR, and established ROCA(A). Some others opposed to the Act have joined themselves to other Greek Old Calendarist groups.\nCurrently both the OCA and ROCOR, since 2007, are in communion with the ROC.\nSelf-governing branches of the ROC.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church has four levels of self-government.\nThe autonomous churches which are part of the ROC are:\nAlthough the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) claims that 'any provisions that at least somehow hinted at or indicated the connection with Moscow were excluded' (following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine) the Russian Orthodox Church ignores this and continues to include UOC-MP clerics in various commissions or working groups despite these individuals not agreeing to this nor even wanting to be included.\nWorship and practices.\nCanonization.\nIn accordance with the practice of the Orthodox Church, a particular hero of faith can initially be canonized only at a local level within local churches and eparchies. Such rights belong to the ruling hierarch and it can only happen when the blessing of the patriarch is received. The task of believers of the local eparchy is to record descriptions of miracles, to create the hagiography of a saint, to paint an icon, as well as to compose a liturgical text of a service where the saint is canonized. All of this is sent to the Synodal Commission for canonization which decides whether to canonize the local hero of faith or not. Then the patriarch gives his blessing and the local hierarch performs the act of canonization at the local level. However, the liturgical texts in honor of a saint are not published in all Church books but only in local publications. In the same way, these saints are not yet canonized and venerated by the whole Church, only locally. When the glorification of a saint exceeds the limits of an eparchy, then the patriarch and Holy Synod decides about their canonization on the Church level. After receiving the Synod's support and the patriarch's blessing, the question of glorification of a particular saint on the scale of the entire Church is given for consideration to the Local Council of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nIn the period following the revolution, and during the communist persecutions up to 1970, no canonizations took place. In 1970, the Holy Synod decided to canonize a missionary to Japan, Nicholas Kasatkin (1836\u20131912). In 1977, St. Innocent of Moscow (1797\u20131879), the Metropolitan of Siberia, the Far East, the Aleutian Islands, Alaska, and Moscow was also canonized. In 1978 it was proclaimed that the Russian Orthodox Church had created a prayer order for Meletius of Kharkov, which practically signified his canonization because that was the only possible way to do it at that time. Similarly, the saints of other Orthodox Churches were added to the Church calendar: in 1962 St. John the Russian, in 1970 St. Herman of Alaska, in 1993 Silouan the Athonite, the elder of Mount Athos, already canonized in 1987 by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. In the 1980s the Russian Orthodox Church re-established the process for canonization; a practice that had ceased for half a century.\nIn 1989, the Holy Synod established the Synodal Commission for canonization. The 1990 Local Council of the Russian Orthodox Church gave an order for the Synodal Commission for Canonisation to prepare documents for canonization of new martyrs who had suffered from the 20th century Communist repressions. In 1991 it was decided that a local commission for canonization would be established in every eparchy which would gather the local documents and would send them to the Synodal Commission. Its task was to study the local archives, collect memories of believers, record all the miracles that are connected with addressing the martyrs. In 1992 the Church established 25 January as a day when it venerates the new 20th century martyrs of faith. The day was specifically chosen because on this day in 1918 the Metropolitan of Kiev Vladimir (Bogoyavlensky) was killed, thus becoming the first victim of communist terror among the hierarchs of the Church.\nDuring the 2000 Council of the Russian Orthodox Church, the greatest general canonization in the history of the Orthodox Church took place: not only regarding the number of saints but also as in this canonization, all unknown saints were mentioned. There were 1,765 canonized saints known by name and others unknown by name but \"known to God\".\nIcon painting.\nThe use and making of icons entered Kievan Rus' following its conversion to Orthodox Christianity in AD 988. As a general rule, these icons strictly followed models and formulas hallowed by Byzantine art, led from the capital in Constantinople. As time passed, the Russians widened the vocabulary of types and styles far beyond anything found elsewhere in the Orthodox world. Russian icons are typically paintings on wood, often small, though some in churches and monasteries may be much larger. Some Russian icons were made of copper. Many religious homes in Russia have icons hanging on the wall in the \"krasny ugol\", the \"red\" or \"beautiful\" corner. There is a rich history and elaborate religious symbolism associated with icons. In Russian churches, the nave is typically separated from the sanctuary by an iconostasis (Russian \"ikonostas\", \u0438\u043a\u043e\u043d\u043e\u0441\u0442\u0430\u0441), or icon-screen, a wall of icons with double doors in the centre. Russians sometimes speak of an icon as having been \"written\", because in the Russian language (like Greek, but unlike English) the same word (\"pisat\"', \u043f\u0438\u0441\u0430\u0442\u044c in Russian) means both to paint and to write. Icons are considered to be the Gospel in paint, and therefore careful attention is paid to ensure that the Gospel is faithfully and accurately conveyed. Icons considered miraculous were said to \"appear\". The \"appearance\" (Russian: \"yavlenie\", \u044f\u0432\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435) of an icon is its supposedly miraculous discovery. \"A true icon is one that has 'appeared', a gift from above, one opening the way to the Prototype and able to perform miracles\".\nEcumenism and interfaith relations.\nIn May 2011, Hilarion Alfeyev, the Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Christians share the same positions on \"such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage\" and desire \"vigorous grassroots engagement\" between the two Christian communions on such issues.\nThe Metropolitan also believes in the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity because the two religions have never fought religious wars in Russia. Alfeyev stated that the Russian Orthodox Church \"disagrees with atheist secularism in some areas very strongly\" and \"believes that it destroys something very essential about human life.\"\nToday, the Russian Orthodox Church has ecclesiastical missions in Jerusalem and some other countries around the world.\nMembership.\nThe ROC is often said to be the largest of all of the Eastern Orthodox churches in the world. Including all the autocephalous churches under its supervision, its adherents number more than 112 million worldwide\u2014about half of the 200 to 220 million estimated adherents of the Eastern Orthodox Church. Among Christian churches, the Russian Orthodox Church is only second to the Roman Catholic Church in terms of numbers of followers. Within Russia the results of a 2007 VTsIOM poll indicated that about 75% of the population considered itself Orthodox Christian. Up to 65% of ethnic Russians as well as Russian-speakers from Russia who are members of other ethnic groups (Ossetians, Chuvash, Caucasus Greeks, Kryashens etc.) and a similar percentage of Belarusians and Ukrainians identify themselves as \"Orthodox\". However, according to a poll published by the church related website Pravmir.com in December 2012, only 41% of the Russian population identified itself with the Russian Orthodox Church. Pravmir.com also published a 2012 poll by the respected Levada organization VTsIOM indicating that 74% of Russians considered themselves Orthodox. The 2017 Survey \"Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe\" made by the Pew Research Center showed that 71% of Russians declared themselves as Orthodox Christian, and in 2021, the Russian Public Opinion Research Center (VCIOM) estimated that 66% of Russians were Orthodox Christians. \nIn 2017, Pew Research published research indicating that only 6% of Russian Orthodox Church members attend services \"at least weekly.\" The same study also found that 15% of Russian Orthodox say religion is \"very important\" in their lives and 18% say that they pray daily; a much larger number, 87% of Russian Orthodox, say that they keep icons at home.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSince 1991\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "40158", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40158", "title": "Berchtesgaden", "text": "Municipality in Bavaria, Germany\nBerchtesgaden () is a municipality in the district Berchtesgadener Land, Bavaria, in southeastern Germany, near the border with Austria, south of Salzburg and southeast of Munich. It lies in the Berchtesgaden Alps. South of the town, the Berchtesgaden National Park stretches along three parallel valleys.\nThe Kehlstein mountain (), with its \"Kehlsteinhaus\" (Eagle's Nest), is located in the area.\nEtymology.\n\"Berchtesgaden\", Upper Bavaria (Achental), earlier \"Perchterscadmen\", \"Perhtersgadem\", \"Berchirchsgadem\", \"Berchtoldesgadem\"; the word underwent a Latin distortion of Old High German \"parach\", Romance \"bareca\" 'hay shed'. After the basic meaning was forgotten, a variant word of Old High German \"gadem\" 'room, one-room hut' was added, implying the same meaning: 'hay shed'. Cf. Old High German \"muosgadem\", 'spice room'.\nThere was a folk etymology that supported a derivation based on the legendary figure of \"Frau\" Perchta (Berchta), a woman (\"Holle\" &lt; \"Holda\" 'well disposed, dear') with good and bad changing features, who was venerated on \"Perchtertag\" (Epiphany) and was sworn to during the Perchta procession.\nHistory.\nThe first known record of the area, from 1102, mentions the area's rich salt deposits. Salt mining began in the area in 1517, and subsequently produced much of Berchtesgaden's wealth.\nThe town and its surroundings belonged to the Berchtesgaden Provostry, an independent state of the Holy Roman Empire (called \"F\u00fcrstpropstei Berchtesgaden\") and was ruled by the Prince-provost of the Augustinian monastery in the town. It remained independent until the \"Reichsdeputationshauptschluss\" in 1803. During the Napoleonic Wars, Berchtesgaden changed hands a few times, such as in 1805 under the Treaty of Pressburg, when the area was ceded to Austria.\nBerchtesgaden came under the rule of the Kingdom of Bavaria in 1810. It soon became popular with the Bavarian royal family, the House of Wittelsbach, who often visited K\u00f6nigssee and maintained a hunting residence in the former Augustinian monastery (still used today by Franz, Duke of Bavaria). Tourism began to evolve, and several artists came to the area, which reportedly gave rise to \"Malereck\" (\"painters' corner\") on the shore of the K\u00f6nigssee in nearby Sch\u00f6nau am K\u00f6nigssee. The most famous author who lived in Berchtesgaden was Ludwig Ganghofer.\nNazi era.\nAdolf Hitler began vacationing in the Berchtesgaden area in the 1920s. He purchased a home in the Obersalzberg above the town on the flank of the Hoher Goll and began extensive renovations on his \"Berghof\" in the following years. As other top Third Reich figures, such as Hermann G\u00f6ring, Joseph Goebbels, Martin Bormann, Heinrich Himmler, and Albert Speer, began to frequent the area, the Nazi Party began to purchase and requisition land in the Obersalzberg.\nTo serve as an outpost of the German \"Reichskanzlei\" (Imperial Chancellery), Berchtesgaden and its environs (\"Stanggass\") saw substantial expansion of offices, security, and support services, mainly on the Obersalzberg. Included in the town were a new railway station, with a reception area for Hitler and his guests, and an adjacent post office. The Berchtesgadener Hof Hotel, where famous visitors such as Neville Chamberlain and David Lloyd George stayed, was substantially upgraded.\nBerchtesgaden was where Adolf Hitler met Neville Chamberlain in 1938 before the Munich Agreement; see Berchtesgaden meeting.\nEven though a feared Alpine Fortress last stand of the Nazi regime in the Alps failed to materialize late in World War II, the Allies launched a devastating air raid on the Berchtesgaden area in the spring of 1945. The April 25 bombing of Obersalzberg did little damage to the town. On 4 May 1945, forward elements of the 7th Infantry Regiment of the 3rd Infantry Division arrived and received the town's surrender.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nAfter the war, Berchtesgaden became a military zone and most of its buildings were requisitioned by the U.S. Army. Hotel Platterhof was rebuilt and renamed the General Walker Hotel in 1952. It served as a U.S. Armed Forces Recreation Center through the Cold War and beyond. Remnants of homes of former Nazi leaders were demolished in the early postwar years, though traces of some remained. In 1995, fifty years after the end of World War II and five years after German reunification, the AFRC Berchtesgaden was turned over to Bavarian authorities to facilitate military spending reductions mandated within the Base Realignment and Closure program by the U.S. Congress and Pentagon during the administration of President Bill Clinton. The General Walker Hotel was demolished in 2000\u20132001.\nIn 1986, Berchtesgaden was a first-round candidate city to host the XVI Olympic Winter Games to be held in 1992. The vote eventually went to Albertville, France, in October of that year.\nBerchtesgaden today.\nThe Hotel T\u00fcrken, which was near the Nazi buildings and was often used by the SS and then by the \"Generalmajor\" of the Police, was badly damaged in 1945. It was rebuilt in 1950 and reopened as a hotel before Christmas. Visitors can still explore the historic underground hallways and tunnels that had been used by the Nazis.\nIn 1972, local government reform united the then-independent municipalities of Salzberg, Maria Gern, and Au (consisting of Oberau and Unterau) under the administration of the town of Berchtesgaden. Another suggested reform uniting all remaining five municipalities in the Berchtesgaden valley (Bischofswiesen, Ramsau, Marktschellenberg, and Sch\u00f6nau am K\u00f6nigssee) failed to gain enough popular support; it passed in Berchtesgaden but failed elsewhere.\nThe Berchtesgaden National Park was established in 1978 and has gradually become one of Berchtesgaden's largest draws. Mass tourism is confined to a few popular spots, leaving the rest to nature-seekers. Other tourist draws are the K\u00f6nigssee, the salt mine, the \"Kehlsteinhaus\", open seasonally as a restaurant, and the Dokumentationszentrum Obersalzberg museum about the area's history, operated by the Munich Institut f\u00fcr Zeitgeschichte since 1999.\nRecreational and competitive sports have grown in importance. The town's ski slope is popular. The K\u00f6nigssee bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton track has hosted ski-running and several international events and competitions. Berchtesgaden's most famous sports personality is Georg Hackl, a multiple Olympic medal winner. The city is home to the International Luge Federation (FIL).\nUnlike the northern part of Berchtesgadener Land and the Salzburg area, Berchtesgaden has virtually no manufacturing industry.\nBerchtesgaden Central Station is connected by the Salzburg\u2013Berchtesgaden railway to the Rosenheim\u2013Salzburg railway at Freilassing.\nThe Bavarian state government facilitated the erection of a hotel, which opened in 2005 and is operated by the InterContinental Hotels Group. Since May 2015, the hotel has been the Kempinski Berchtesgaden.\nGeography.\nBerchtesgaden's neighbouring towns are Bischofswiesen, Marktschellenberg, Ramsau, and Sch\u00f6nau am K\u00f6nigssee.\nThe municipality counts the following villages (\"Ortsteile\"): Am Etzerschl\u00f6\u00dfl, Anzenbach, Hintergern, Metzenleiten, Mitterbach, Oberau, Obergern, Obersalzberg, Resten, Unterau, Untersalzberg I, Untersalzberg II, and Vordergern.\nTransport.\nThe nearest airport to the town is Salzburg Airport, located to the north of Berchtesgaden.\nToy symphonies.\nIn the 1760s, several anonymous toy symphonies (including the famous Toy Symphony often attributed to Haydn or Leopold Mozart) were composed at Berchtesgaden, then a manufacturing centre for toy instruments. Some of the instruments used for these can be seen in the Museum Carolino Augusteum in Salzburg.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40163", "revid": "50707273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40163", "title": "Darmstadtium", "text": "element with atomic number 110 (Ds)\nDarmstadtium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Ds and atomic number 110. It is extremely radioactive: the most stable known isotope, darmstadtium-281, has a half-life of approximately 14 seconds. Darmstadtium was first created in November 1994 by the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany, after which it was named.\nIn the periodic table, it is a d-block transactinide element. It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in the group 10 elements, although no chemical experiments have yet been carried out to confirm that it behaves as the heavier homologue to platinum in group 10 as the eighth member of the 6d series of transition metals. Darmstadtium is calculated to have similar properties to its lighter homologues, nickel, palladium, and platinum.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nDarmstadtium was first discovered on November 9, 1994, at the Institute for Heavy Ion Research (Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung, GSI) in Darmstadt, Germany, by Peter Armbruster and Gottfried M\u00fcnzenberg, under the direction of Sigurd Hofmann. The team bombarded a lead-208 target with accelerated nuclei of nickel-62 in a heavy ion accelerator and detected a single atom of the isotope darmstadtium-269:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwo more atoms followed on November 12 and 17. (Yet another was originally reported to have been found on November 11, but it turned out to be based on data fabricated by Victor Ninov, and was later retracted.)\nIn the same series of experiments, the same team also carried out the reaction using heavier nickel-64 ions. During two runs, 9 atoms of 271Ds were convincingly detected by correlation with known daughter decay properties:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrior to this, there had been failed synthesis attempts in 1986\u201387 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna (then in the Soviet Union) and in 1990 at the GSI. A 1995 attempt at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory resulted in signs suggesting but not pointing conclusively at the discovery of a new isotope 267Ds formed in the bombardment of 209Bi with 59Co, and a similarly inconclusive 1994 attempt at the JINR showed signs of 273Ds being produced from 244Pu and 34S. Each team proposed its own name for element 110: the American team proposed \"hahnium\" after Otto Hahn in an attempt to resolve the controversy of naming element 105 (which they had long been suggesting this name for), the Russian team proposed \"becquerelium\" after Henri Becquerel, and the German team proposed \"darmstadtium\" after Darmstadt, the location of their institute. The IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party (JWP) recognised the GSI team as discoverers in their 2001 report, giving them the right to suggest a name for the element.\nNaming.\nUsing Mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements, darmstadtium should be known as \"eka-platinum\". In 1979, IUPAC published recommendations according to which the element was to be called \"ununnilium\" (with the corresponding symbol of \"Uun\"), a systematic element name as a placeholder, until the element was discovered (and the discovery then confirmed) and a permanent name was decided on. Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels, from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks, the recommendations were mostly ignored among scientists in the field, who called it \"element 110\", with the symbol of \"E110\", \"(110)\" or even simply \"110\".\nIn 1996, the Russian team proposed the name \"becquerelium\" after Henri Becquerel. The American team in 1997 proposed the name \"hahnium\" after Otto Hahn (previously this name had been used for element 105).\nThe name \"darmstadtium\" (Ds) was suggested by the GSI team in honor of the city of Darmstadt, where the element was discovered. The GSI team originally also considered naming the element \"wixhausium\", after the suburb of Darmstadt known as Wixhausen where the element was discovered, but eventually decided on \"darmstadtium\". \"Policium\" had also been proposed as a joke due to the emergency telephone number in Germany being 1\u20131\u20130. The new name \"darmstadtium\" was officially recommended by IUPAC on August 16, 2003.\nIsotopes.\nDarmstadtium has no stable or naturally occurring isotopes. Several radioactive isotopes have been synthesized in the laboratory, either by fusing two atoms or by observing the decay of heavier elements. Eleven different isotopes of darmstadtium have been reported with atomic masses 267, 269\u2013271, 273, 275\u2013277, and 279\u2013281, although darmstadtium-267 is unconfirmed. Three darmstadtium isotopes, darmstadtium-270, darmstadtium-271, and darmstadtium-281, have known metastable states, although that of darmstadtium-281 is unconfirmed. Most of these decay predominantly through alpha decay, but some undergo spontaneous fission.\nStability and half-lives.\nAll darmstadtium isotopes are extremely unstable and radioactive; in general, the heavier isotopes are more stable than the lighter. The most stable known darmstadtium isotope, 281Ds, is also the heaviest known darmstadtium isotope; it has a half-life of 14\u00a0seconds. The isotope 279Ds has a half-life of 0.18\u00a0seconds, while the unconfirmed 281mDs has a half-life of 0.9\u00a0seconds. The remaining isotopes and metastable states have half-lives between 1\u00a0microsecond and 70\u00a0milliseconds. Some unknown darmstadtium isotopes may have longer half-lives, however.\nTheoretical calculation in a quantum tunneling model reproduces the experimental alpha decay half-life data for the known darmstadtium isotopes. It also predicts that the undiscovered isotope 294Ds, which has a magic number of neutrons (184), would have an alpha decay half-life on the order of 311\u00a0years; exactly the same approach predicts a ~350-year alpha half-life for the non-magic 293Ds isotope, however.\nPredicted properties.\nOther than nuclear properties, no properties of darmstadtium or its compounds have been measured; this is due to its extremely limited and expensive production and the fact that darmstadtium (and its parents) decays very quickly. Properties of darmstadtium metal remain unknown and only predictions are available.\nChemical.\nDarmstadtium is the eighth member of the 6d series of transition metals, and should be much like the platinum group metals. Calculations on its ionization potentials and atomic and ionic radii are similar to that of its lighter homologue platinum, thus implying that darmstadtium's basic properties will resemble those of the other group 10 elements, nickel, palladium, and platinum.\nPrediction of the probable chemical properties of darmstadtium has not received much attention recently. Darmstadtium should be a very noble metal. The predicted standard reduction potential for the Ds2+/Ds couple is 1.7\u00a0V. Based on the most stable oxidation states of the lighter group 10 elements, the most stable oxidation states of darmstadtium are predicted to be the +6, +4, and +2 states; however, the neutral state is predicted to be the most stable in aqueous solutions. In comparison, only platinum is known to show the maximum oxidation state in the group, +6, while the most stable state is +2 for both nickel and palladium. It is further expected that the maximum oxidation states of elements from bohrium (element 107) to darmstadtium (element 110) may be stable in the gas phase but not in aqueous solution. Darmstadtium hexafluoride (DsF6) is predicted to have very similar properties to its lighter homologue platinum hexafluoride (PtF6), having very similar electronic structures and ionization potentials. It is also expected to have the same octahedral molecular geometry as PtF6. Other predicted darmstadtium compounds are darmstadtium carbide (DsC) and darmstadtium tetrachloride (DsCl4), both of which are expected to behave like their lighter homologues. Unlike platinum, which preferentially forms a cyanide complex in its +2 oxidation state, Pt(CN)2, darmstadtium is expected to preferentially remain in its neutral state and form Ds(CN)22- instead, forming a strong Ds\u2013C bond with some multiple bond character.\nPhysical and atomic.\nDarmstadtium is expected to be a solid under normal conditions and to crystallize in the body-centered cubic structure, unlike its lighter congeners which crystallize in the face-centered cubic structure, because it is expected to have different electron charge densities from them. It should be a very heavy metal with a density of around 26\u201327\u00a0g/cm3. In comparison, the densest known element that has had its density measured, osmium, has a density of only 22.61\u00a0g/cm3.\nThe outer electron configuration of darmstadtium is calculated to be 6d8\u00a07s2, which obeys the Aufbau principle and does not follow platinum's outer electron configuration of 5d9\u00a06s1. This is due to the relativistic stabilization of the 7s2 electron pair over the whole seventh period, so that none of the elements from 104 to 112 are expected to have electron configurations violating the Aufbau principle. The atomic radius of darmstadtium is expected to be around 132\u00a0pm.\nExperimental chemistry.\nUnambiguous determination of the chemical characteristics of darmstadtium has yet to have been established due to the short half-lives of darmstadtium isotopes and a limited number of likely volatile compounds that could be studied on a very small scale. One of the few darmstadtium compounds that are likely to be sufficiently volatile is darmstadtium hexafluoride (DsF6), as its lighter homologue platinum hexafluoride (PtF6) is volatile above 60\u00a0\u00b0C and therefore the analogous compound of darmstadtium might also be sufficiently volatile; a volatile octafluoride (DsF8) might also be possible. For chemical studies to be carried out on a transactinide, at least four atoms must be produced, the half-life of the isotope used must be at least 1\u00a0second, and the rate of production must be at least one atom per week. Even though the half-life of 281Ds, the most stable confirmed darmstadtium isotope, is 14\u00a0seconds, long enough to perform chemical studies, another obstacle is the need to increase the rate of production of darmstadtium isotopes and allow experiments to carry on for weeks or months so that statistically significant results can be obtained. Separation and detection must be carried out continuously to separate out the darmstadtium isotopes and have automated systems experiment on the gas-phase and solution chemistry of darmstadtium, as the yields for heavier elements are predicted to be smaller than those for lighter elements; some of the separation techniques used for bohrium and hassium could be reused. However, the experimental chemistry of darmstadtium has not received as much attention as that of the heavier elements from copernicium to livermorium.\nThe more neutron-rich darmstadtium isotopes are the most stable and are thus more promising for chemical studies. However, they can only be produced indirectly from the alpha decay of heavier elements, and indirect synthesis methods are not as favourable for chemical studies as direct synthesis methods. The more neutron-rich isotopes 276Ds and 277Ds might be produced directly in the reaction between thorium-232 and calcium-48, but the yield was expected to be low. Following several unsuccessful attempts, 276Ds was produced in this reaction in 2022 and observed to have a half-life less than a millisecond and a low yield, in agreement with predictions. Additionally, 277Ds was successfully synthesized using indirect methods (as a granddaughter of 285Fl) and found to have a short half-life of 3.5\u00a0ms, not long enough to perform chemical studies. The only known darmstadtium isotope with a half-life long enough for chemical research is 281Ds, which would have to be produced as the granddaughter of 289Fl.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40166", "revid": "9215586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40166", "title": "Broca's area", "text": "Speech production region in the dominant hemisphere of the hominid brain\nBroca's area, or the Broca area (, , ), is a region in the frontal lobe of the dominant hemisphere, usually the left, of the brain with functions linked to speech production.\nLanguage processing has been linked to Broca's area since Pierre Paul Broca reported impairments in two patients. They had lost the ability to speak after injury to the posterior inferior frontal gyrus (pars triangularis) (BA45) of the brain. Since then, the approximate region he identified has become known as Broca's area, and the deficit in language production as Broca's aphasia, also called expressive aphasia. Broca's area is now typically defined in terms of the pars opercularis and pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus, represented in Brodmann's cytoarchitectonic map as Brodmann area 44 and Brodmann area 45 of the dominant hemisphere.\nFunctional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has shown language processing to also involve the third part of the inferior frontal gyrus the pars orbitalis, as well as the ventral part of BA6 and these are now often included in a larger area called Broca's region.\nStudies of chronic aphasia have implicated an essential role of Broca's area in various speech and language functions. Further, fMRI studies have also identified activation patterns in Broca's area associated with various language tasks. However, slow destruction of Broca's area by brain tumors can leave speech relatively intact, suggesting its functions can shift to nearby areas in the brain.\nStructure.\nBroca's area is often identified by visual inspection of the topography of the brain either by macrostructural landmarks such as sulci or by the specification of coordinates in a particular reference space. The currently used Talairach and Tournoux atlas projects Brodmann's cytoarchitectonic map onto a template brain. Because Brodmann's parcelation was based on subjective visual inspection of cytoarchitectonic borders and also Brodmann analyzed only one hemisphere of one brain, the result is imprecise. Further, because of considerable variability across brains in terms of shape, size, and position relative to sulcal and gyral structure, a resulting localization precision is limited.\nNevertheless, Broca's area in the left hemisphere and its homologue in the right hemisphere are designations usually used to refer to the triangular part of inferior frontal gyrus (PTr) and the opercular part of inferior frontal gyrus (POp). The PTr and POp are defined by structural landmarks that only probabilistically divide the inferior frontal gyrus into anterior and posterior cytoarchitectonic areas of 45 and 44, respectively, by Brodmann's classification scheme.\nArea 45 receives more afferent connections from the prefrontal cortex, the superior temporal gyrus, and the superior temporal sulcus, compared to area 44, which tends to receive more afferent connections from motor, somatosensory, and inferior parietal regions.\nThe differences between area 45 and 44 in cytoarchitecture and in connectivity suggest that these areas might perform different functions. Indeed, recent neuroimaging studies have shown that the PTr and Pop, corresponding to areas 45 and 44, respectively, play different functional roles in the human with respect to language comprehension and action recognition/understanding.\nThe Broca's area is about 20% larger in women than in men.\nFunctions.\nLanguage comprehension.\nFor a long time, it was assumed that the role of Broca's area was more devoted to language production than language comprehension. However, there is evidence to demonstrate that Broca's area also plays a significant role in language comprehension. Patients with lesions in Broca's area who exhibit agrammatical speech production also show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences. Also, a number of neuroimaging studies have implicated an involvement of Broca's area, particularly of the pars opercularis of the left inferior frontal gyrus, during the processing of complex sentences. Further, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments have shown that highly ambiguous sentences result in a more activated inferior frontal gyrus. Therefore, the activity level in the inferior frontal gyrus and the level of lexical ambiguity are directly proportional to each other, because of the increased retrieval demands associated with highly ambiguous content.\nThere is also specialisation for particular aspects of comprehension within Broca's area. Work by Devlin et al. (2003) showed in a repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) study that there was an increase in reaction times when performing a semantic task under rTMS aimed at the pars triangularis (situated in the anterior part of Broca's area). The increase in reaction times is indicative that that particular area is responsible for processing that cognitive function. Disrupting these areas via TMS disrupts computations performed in the areas leading to an increase in time needed to perform the computations (reflected in reaction times). Later work by Nixon et al. (2004) showed that when the pars opercularis (situated in the posterior part of Broca's area) was stimulated under rTMS there was an increase in reaction times in a phonological task. Gough et al. (2005) performed an experiment combining elements of these previous works in which both phonological and semantic tasks were performed with rTMS stimulation directed at either the anterior or the posterior part of Broca's area. The results from this experiment conclusively distinguished anatomical specialisation within Broca's area for different components of language comprehension. Here the results showed that under rTMS stimulation: \nTo summarise, the work above shows anatomical specialisation in Broca's area for language comprehension, with the anterior part of Broca's area responsible for understanding the meaning of words (semantics) and the posterior part of Broca's area responsible for understanding how words sound (phonology).\nAction recognition and production.\nExperiments have indicated that Broca's area is involved in various cognitive and perceptual tasks. One important contribution of Brodmann's area 44 is also found in the motor-related processes. Observation of meaningful hand shadows resembling moving animals activates frontal language area, demonstrating that Broca's area indeed plays a role in interpreting action of others. An activation of BA 44 was also reported during execution of grasping and manipulation.\nSpeech-associated gestures.\nIt has been speculated that because speech-associated gestures could possibly reduce lexical or sentential ambiguity, comprehension should improve in the presence of speech-associated gestures. As a result of improved comprehension, the involvement of Broca's area should be reduced.\nMany neuroimaging studies have also shown activation of Broca's area when representing meaningful arm gestures. A recent study has shown evidence that word and gesture are related at the level of translation of particular gesture aspects such as its motor goal and intention. This finding helps explain why, when this area is defective, those who use sign language also have language deficits. This finding, that aspects of gestures are translated in words within Broca's area, also explains language development in terms of evolution. Indeed, many authors have proposed that speech evolved from a primitive communication that arose from gestures. (See below.)\nSpeaking without Broca's area.\nDamage to Broca's area is commonly associated with telegraphic speech made up of content vocabulary. For example, a person with Broca's aphasia may say something like, \"Drive, store. Mom.\" meaning to say, \"My mom drove me to the store today.\" Therefore, the content of the information is correct, but the grammar and fluidity of the sentence is missing.\nThe essential role of the Broca's area in speech production has been questioned since it can be destroyed while leaving language nearly intact. In one case of a computer engineer, a slow-growing glioma tumor was removed. The tumor and the surgery destroyed the left inferior and middle frontal gyrus, the head of the caudate nucleus, the anterior limb of the internal capsule, and the anterior insula. However, there were minimal language problems three months after removal and the individual returned to his professional work. These minor problems include the inability to create syntactically complex sentences including more than two subjects, multiple causal conjunctions, or reported speech. These were explained by researchers as due to working memory problems. They also attributed his lack of problems to extensive compensatory mechanisms enabled by neural plasticity in the nearby cerebral cortex and a shift of some functions to the homologous area in the right hemisphere.\nClinical significance.\nStuttering.\nA speech disorder known as stuttering is seen to be associated with underactivity in Broca's area.\nAphasia.\nAphasia is an acquired language disorder affecting all modalities such as writing, reading, speaking, and listening and results from brain damage. It is often a chronic condition that creates changes in all areas of one's life.\nExpressive aphasia vs. other aphasias.\nPatients with expressive aphasia, also known as Broca's aphasia, are individuals who know \"what they want to say, they just cannot get it out\". They are typically able to comprehend words, and sentences with a simple syntactic structure (see above), but are more or less unable to generate fluent speech. Other symptoms that may be present include problems with fluency, articulation, word-finding, word repetition, and producing and comprehending complex grammatical sentences, both orally and in writing.\nThis specific group of symptoms distinguishes those who have expressive aphasia from individuals with other types of aphasia. There are several distinct \"types\" of aphasia, and each type is characterized by a different set of language deficits. Although those who have expressive aphasia tend to retain good spoken language comprehension, other types of aphasia can render patients completely unable to understand any language at all, unable to understand any spoken language (auditory verbal agnosia), whereas still other types preserve language comprehension, but with deficits. People with expressive aphasia may struggle less with reading and writing (see alexia) than those with other types of aphasia. Although individuals with expressive aphasia tend to have a good ability to self-monitor their language output (they \"hear what they say\" and make corrections), other types of aphasics can seem entirely unaware of their language deficits.\nIn the classical sense, expressive aphasia is the result of injury to Broca's area; it is often the case that lesions in specific brain areas cause specific, dissociable symptoms, although case studies show there is not always a one-to-one mapping between lesion location and aphasic symptoms. The correlation between damage to certain specific brain areas (usually in the left hemisphere) and the development of specific types of aphasia makes it possible to deduce (albeit very roughly) the location of a suspected brain lesion based only on the presence (and severity) of a certain type of aphasia, though this is complicated by the possibility that a patient may have damage to a number of brain areas and may exhibit symptoms of more than one type of aphasia. The examination of lesion data in order to deduce which brain areas are essential in the normal functioning of certain aspects of cognition is called the deficit-lesion method; this method is especially important in the branch of neuroscience known as aphasiology. Cognitive science \u2013 to be specific, cognitive neuropsychology \u2013 are branches of neuroscience that also make extensive use of the deficit-lesion method.\nNewer implications related to lesions in Broca's area.\nSince studies carried out in the late 1970s it has been understood that the relationship between Broca's area and Broca's aphasia is not as consistent as once thought. Lesions to Broca's area alone do not result in Broca's aphasia, nor do Broca's aphasic patients necessarily have lesions in Broca's area. Lesions to Broca's area alone are known to produce a transient mutism that resolves within 3\u20136 weeks. This discovery suggests that Broca's area may be included in some aspect of verbalization or articulation; however, this does not address its part in sentence comprehension. Still, Broca's area frequently emerges in functional imaging studies of sentence processing. However, it also becomes activated in word-level tasks. This suggests that Broca's area is not dedicated to sentence processing alone, but supports a function common to both. In fact, Broca's area can show activation in such non-linguistic tasks as imagery of motion.\nConsidering the hypothesis that Broca's area may be most involved in articulation, its activation in all of these tasks may be due to subjects' covert articulation while formulating a response. Despite this caveat, a consensus seems to be forming that whatever role Broca's area may play, it may relate to known working memory functions of the frontal areas. (There is a wide distribution of Talairach coordinates reported in the functional imaging literature that are referred to as part of Broca's area.) The processing of a passive voice sentence, for example, may require working memory to assist in the temporary retention of information while other relevant parts of the sentence are being manipulated (i.e. to resolve the assignment of thematic roles to arguments). Miyake, Carpenter, and Just have proposed that sentence processing relies on such general verbal working memory mechanisms, while Caplan and Waters consider Broca's area to be involved in working memory specifically for syntactic processing. Friederici (2002) breaks Broca's area into its component regions and suggests that Brodmann's area 44 is involved in working memory for both phonological and syntactic structure. This area becomes active first for phonology and later for syntax as the time course for the comprehension process unfolds. Brodmann's area 45 and Brodmann's area 47 are viewed as being specifically involved in working memory for semantic features and thematic structure where processes of syntactic reanalysis and repair are required. These areas come online after Brodmann's area 44 has finished its processing role and are active when comprehension of complex sentences must rely on general memory resources. All of these theories indicate a move towards a view that syntactic comprehension problems arise from a computational rather than a conceptual deficit. Newer theories take a more dynamic view of how the brain integrates different linguistic and cognitive components and are examining the time course of these operations.\nNeurocognitive studies have already implicated frontal areas adjacent to Broca's area as important for working memory in non-linguistic as well as linguistic tasks. Cabeza and Nyberg's analysis of imaging studies of working memory supports the view that BA45/47 is recruited for selecting or comparing information, while BA9/46 might be more involved in the manipulation of information in working memory. Since large lesions are typically required to produce a Broca's aphasia, it is likely that these regions may also become compromised in some patients and may contribute to their comprehension deficits for complex morphosyntactic structures.\nBroca's area as a key center in the linking of phonemic sequences.\nBroca's area has been previously associated with a variety of processes, including phonological segmentation, syntactic processing, and unification, all of which involve segmenting and linking different types of linguistic information. Although repeating and reading single words does not engage semantic and syntactic processing, it does require an operation linking phonemic sequences with motor gestures. Findings indicate that this linkage is coordinated by Broca's area through reciprocal interactions with temporal and frontal cortices responsible for phonemic and articulatory representations, respectively, including interactions with the motor cortex before the actual act of speech. Based on these unique findings, it has been proposed that Broca's area is not the seat of articulation, but rather is a key node in manipulating and forwarding neural information across large-scale cortical networks responsible for key components of speech production.\nHistory.\nIn a study published in 2007, the preserved brains of both Leborgne and Lelong (patients of Broca) were reinspected using high-resolution volumetric MRI. The purpose of this study was to scan the brains in three dimensions and to identify the extent of both cortical and subcortical lesions in more detail. The study also sought to locate the exact site of the lesion in the frontal lobe in relation to what is now called Broca's area with the extent of subcortical involvement.\nBroca's patients.\nLouis Victor Leborgne (Tan).\nLeborgne was a patient of Broca's. At 30 years old, he was almost completely unable to produce any words or phrases. He was able to repetitively produce only the word (French word for \"time\"). After his death, a neurosyphilitic lesion was discovered on the surface of his left frontal lobe.\nLelong.\nLelong was another patient of Broca's. He also exhibited reduced productive speech. He could only say five words, 'yes', 'no', 'three', 'always', and 'lelo' (a mispronunciation of his own name). A lesion within the lateral frontal lobe was discovered during Lelong's autopsy. Broca's previous patient, Leborgne, had a lesion in the same area of his frontal lobe. These two cases led Broca to believe that speech was localized to this particular area.\nMRI findings.\nExamination of the brains of Broca's two historic patients with high-resolution MRI has produced several interesting findings. First, the MRI findings suggest that other areas besides Broca's area may also have contributed to the patients' reduced productive speech. This finding is significant because it has been found that, though lesions to Broca's area alone can possibly cause temporary speech disruption, they do not result in severe speech arrest. Therefore, there is a possibility that the aphasia denoted by Broca as an absence of productive speech also could have been influenced by the lesions in the other region. Another finding is that the region, which was once considered to be critical for speech by Broca, is not precisely the same region as what is now known as Broca's area. This study provides further evidence to support the claim that language and cognition are far more complicated than once thought and involve various networks of brain regions.\nEvolution of language.\nThe pursuit of a satisfying theory that addresses the origin of language in humans has led to the consideration of a number of evolutionary \"models\". These models attempt to show how modern language might have evolved, and a common feature of many of these theories is the idea that vocal communication was initially used to complement a far more dominant mode of communication through gesture. Human language might have evolved as the \"evolutionary refinement of an implicit communication system already present in lower primates, based on a set of hand/mouth goal-directed action representations.\"\n\"Hand/mouth goal-directed action representations\" is another way of saying \"gestural communication\", \"gestural language\", or \"communication through body language\". The recent finding that Broca's area is active when people are observing others engaged in meaningful action is evidence in support of this idea. It was hypothesized that a precursor to the modern Broca's area was involved in translating gestures into abstract ideas by interpreting the movements of others as meaningful action with an intelligent purpose. It is argued that over time the ability to predict the intended outcome and purpose of a set of movements eventually gave this area the capability to deal with truly abstract ideas, and therefore (eventually) became capable of associating sounds (words) with abstract meanings. The observation that frontal language areas are activated when people observe hand shadows is further evidence that human language may have evolved from existing neural substrates that evolved for the purpose of gesture recognition. The study, therefore, claims that Broca's area is the \"motor center for speech\", which assembles and decodes speech sounds in the same way it interprets body language and gestures. Consistent with this idea is that the neural substrate that regulated motor control in the common ancestor of apes and humans was most likely modified to enhance cognitive and linguistic ability. Studies of speakers of American Sign Language and English suggest that the human brain recruited systems that had evolved to perform more basic functions much earlier; these various brain circuits, according to the authors, were tapped to work together in creating language.\nAnother recent finding has shown significant areas of activation in subcortical and neocortical areas during the production of communicative manual gestures and vocal signals in chimpanzees. Further, the data indicating that chimpanzees intentionally produce manual gestures as well as vocal signals to communicate with humans suggests that the precursors to human language are present at both the behavioral and neuronanatomical levels. More recently, the neocortical distribution of activity-dependent gene expression in marmosets provided direct evidence that the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, which comprises Broca's area in humans and has been associated with auditory processing of species-specific vocalizations and orofacial control in macaques, is engaged during vocal output in a New World monkey. These findings putatively set the origin of vocalization-related neocortical circuits to at least 35 million years ago, when the Old and New World monkey lineages split.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40168", "revid": "12819249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40168", "title": "ATF (disambiguation)", "text": "The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives is a federal law enforcement organization within the US Department of Justice.\nATF may also refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "40169", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40169", "title": "Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms", "text": ""}
{"id": "40171", "revid": "44466778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40171", "title": "Lead(II) azide", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nLead(II) azide is an inorganic compound. More so than other azides, it is explosive. It is used in detonators to initiate secondary explosives. In a commercially usable form, it is a white to buff powder.\nPreparation and handling.\nLead(II) azide is prepared by the reaction of sodium azide and lead(II) nitrate in aqueous solution. Lead(II) acetate can also be used.\nThickeners such as dextrin or polyvinyl alcohol are often added to the solution to stabilize the precipitated product. In fact, it is normally shipped in a dextrinated solution that lowers its sensitivity.\nProduction history.\nLead azide in its pure form was first prepared by Theodor Curtius in 1891. Due to sensitivity and stability concerns, the dextrinated form of lead azide (MIL-L-3055) was developed in the 1920s and 1930s with large scale production by DuPont Co beginning in 1932. Detonator development during World War II resulted in the need for a form of lead azide with a more brisant output. RD-1333 lead azide (MIL-DTL-46225), a version of lead azide with sodium carboxymethyl cellulose as a precipitating agent, was developed to meet that need. The Vietnam War saw an accelerated need for lead azide and it was during this time that Special Purpose Lead Azide (MIL-L-14758) was developed; the US government also began stockpiling lead azide in large quantities. After the Vietnam War, the use of lead azide dramatically decreased. Due to the size of the US stockpile, the manufacture of lead azide in the US ceased completely by the early 1990s. In the 2000s, concerns about the age and stability of stockpiled lead azide led the US government to investigate methods to dispose of its stockpiled lead azide and obtain new manufacturers.\nExplosive characteristics.\nLead azide is highly sensitive and usually handled and stored under water in insulated rubber containers. It will explode after a fall of around 150\u00a0mm (6\u00a0in) or in the presence of a static discharge of 7 millijoules. Its detonation velocity is around .\nAmmonium acetate and sodium dichromate are used to destroy small quantities of lead azide.\nLead azide has immediate deflagration to detonation transition (DDT), meaning that even small amounts undergo full detonation (after being hit by flame or static electricity).\nLead azide reacts with copper, zinc, cadmium, or alloys containing these metals to form other azides. For example, copper azide is even more explosive and too sensitive to be used commercially.\nLead azide was a component of the six .22 (5.6 mm) caliber Devastator rounds fired from a R\u00f6hm RG-14 revolver by John Hinckley Jr. in his assassination attempt on U.S. President Ronald Reagan on March 30, 1981. The rounds consisted of lead azide centers with lacquer-sealed aluminum tips designed to explode upon impact. A strong probability exists that the bullet which struck White House press secretary James Brady in the head exploded. The remaining bullets that hit people, including the shot that hit President Reagan, did not explode.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40172", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40172", "title": "Botulinum toxin", "text": "Neurotoxin produced by Clostridium botulinum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBotulinum toxin, botulinum neurotoxin, or botox is a neurotoxic protein produced by the bacterium \"Clostridium botulinum\" and related species, and it is the deadliest known substance ever recorded in the chemical literature. It prevents the release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from axon endings at the neuromuscular junction, thus causing flaccid paralysis. The toxin causes the disease botulism. The toxin is also used commercially for medical and cosmetic purposes. Botulinum toxin is an acetylcholine release inhibitor and a neuromuscular blocking agent.\nThe seven main types of botulinum toxin are named types A to G (A, B, C1, C2, D, E, F and G). New types are occasionally found. Types A and B are capable of causing disease in humans, and are also used commercially and medically. Types C\u2013G are less common; types E and F can cause disease in humans, while the other types cause disease in other animals.\nIn 2025 the structure of the complete 14 subunit botulinum neurotoxin complex (L-PTC) was solved.\nIntoxication can occur naturally as a result of either wound or intestinal infection or by ingesting formed toxin in food. The estimated human median lethal dose of type A toxin is 1.3\u20132.1ng/kg intravenously or intramuscularly, 10\u201313ng/kg when inhaled, or 1\u03bcg/kg when taken by mouth.\nMedical uses.\nBotulinum toxin is used to treat a number of therapeutic indications, many of which are not part of the approved drug label.\nMuscle spasticity.\nBotulinum toxin is used to treat a number of disorders characterized by overactive muscle movement, including cerebral palsy, post-stroke spasticity, post-spinal cord injury spasticity, spasms of the head and neck, eyelid, vagina, limbs, jaw, and vocal cords. Similarly, botulinum toxin is used to relax the clenching of muscles, including those of the esophagus, jaw, lower urinary tract and bladder, or clenching of the anus which can exacerbate anal fissure. Botulinum toxin appears to be effective for refractory overactive bladder.\nOther muscle disorders.\nStrabismus, otherwise known as improper eye alignment, is caused by imbalances in the actions of muscles that rotate the eyes. This condition can sometimes be relieved by weakening a muscle that pulls too strongly, or pulls against one that has been weakened by disease or trauma. Muscles weakened by toxin injection recover from paralysis after several months, so injection might seem to need to be repeated, but muscles adapt to the lengths at which they are chronically held, so that if a paralyzed muscle is stretched by its antagonist, it grows longer, while the antagonist shortens, yielding a permanent effect.\nIn January 2014, botulinum toxin was approved by UK's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency for treatment of restricted ankle motion due to lower-limb spasticity associated with stroke in adults.\nIn July 2016, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved abobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport) for injection for the treatment of lower-limb spasticity in pediatric patients two years of age and older. AbobotulinumtoxinA is the first and only FDA-approved botulinum toxin for the treatment of pediatric lower limb spasticity. In the US, the FDA approves the text of the labels of prescription medicines and for which medical conditions the drug manufacturer may sell the drug. However, prescribers may freely prescribe them for any condition they wish, also known as off-label use. Botulinum toxins have been used off-label for several pediatric conditions, including infantile esotropia.\nExcessive sweating.\nBotulinum toxin (BTO) injections are a modern clinical trend to treat hyperhidrosis, of which palmar hyperhidrosis is a frequent symptom. For example, AbobotulinumtoxinA has been approved for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis, which cannot be managed by topical agents.\nMigraine.\nIn 2010, the FDA approved intramuscular botulinum toxin injections for prophylactic treatment of chronic migraine headache. However, the use of botulinum toxin injections for episodic migraine has not been approved by the FDA.\nCosmetic uses.\nIn cosmetic applications, botulinum toxin is considered relatively safe and effective for reduction of facial wrinkles, especially in the uppermost third of the face. Commercial forms are marketed under the brand names Botox Cosmetic/Vistabel from Allergan, Dysport/Azzalure from Galderma and Ipsen, Xeomin/Bocouture from Merz, Jeuveau/Nuceiva from Evolus, manufactured by Daewoong in South Korea. The effects of botulinum toxin injections for glabellar lines (\"11's lines\" between the eyes) typically last two to four months and in some cases, product-dependent, with some patients experiencing a longer duration of effect of up to six months or longer. Injection of botulinum toxin into the muscles under facial wrinkles causes relaxation of those muscles, resulting in the smoothing of the overlying skin. Smoothing of wrinkles is usually visible three to five days after injection, with maximum effect typically a week following injection. Muscles can be treated repeatedly to maintain the smoothed appearance.\nDaxibotulinumtoxinA (Daxxify) was approved for medical use in the United States in September 2022. It is indicated for the temporary improvement in the appearance of moderate to severe glabellar lines (wrinkles between the eyebrows). DaxibotulinumtoxinA is an acetylcholine release inhibitor and neuromuscular blocking agent. The FDA approved daxibotulinumtoxinA based on evidence from two clinical trials (Studies GL-1 and GL-2), of 609 adults with moderate to severe glabellar lines. The trials were conducted at 30 sites in the United States and Canada. Both trials enrolled participants 18 to 75 years old with moderate to severe glabellar lines. Participants received a single intramuscular injection of daxibotulinumtoxinA or placebo at five sites within the muscles between the eyebrows. The most common side effects of daxibotulinumtoxinA are headache, drooping eyelids, and weakness of facial muscles.\nLetibotulinumtoxinA (Letybo) was approved for medical use in the United States in February 2024. It is indicated to temporarily improve the appearance of moderate-to-severe glabellar lines. The FDA approved letibotulinumtoxinA based on evidence from three clinical trials (BLESS I [NCT02677298], BLESS II [NCT02677805], and BLESS III [NCT03985982]) of 1,271 participants with moderate to severe wrinkles between the eyebrows for efficacy and safety assessment. These trials were conducted at 31 sites in the United States and the European Union. All three trials enrolled participants 18 to 75 years old with moderate to severe glabellar lines (wrinkles between the eyebrows). Participants received a single intramuscular injection of letibotulinumtoxinA or placebo at five sites within the muscles between the eyebrows. The most common side effects of letibotulinumtoxinA are headache, drooping of eyelid and brow, and twitching of eyelid.\nOthers.\nBotulinum toxin is also used to treat disorders of hyperactive nerves including excessive sweating, neuropathic pain, and some allergy symptoms. In addition to these uses, botulinum toxin is being evaluated for use in treating chronic pain. Studies show that botulinum toxin may be injected into arthritic shoulder joints to reduce chronic pain and improve range of motion. The use of botulinum toxin A in children with cerebral palsy is safe in the upper and lower limb muscles.\nSide effects.\nWhile botulinum toxin is generally considered safe in a clinical setting, serious side effects from its use can occur. Most commonly, botulinum toxin can be injected into the wrong muscle group or with time spread from the injection site, causing temporary paralysis of unintended muscles. In at least three cases temporary diplopia was reported due to subcutenious injections for cosmetic purposes.\nSide effects from cosmetic use generally result from unintended paralysis of facial muscles. These include partial facial paralysis, muscle weakness, and trouble swallowing. Side effects are not limited to direct paralysis, however, and can also include headaches, flu-like symptoms, and allergic reactions. Just as cosmetic treatments only last a number of months, paralysis side effects can have the same durations. At least in some cases, these effects are reported to dissipate in the weeks after treatment. Bruising at the site of injection is not a side effect of the toxin, but rather of the mode of administration, and is reported as preventable if the clinician applies pressure to the injection site; when it occurs, it is reported in specific cases to last 7\u201311 days. When injecting the masseter muscle of the jaw, loss of muscle function can result in a loss or reduction of power to chew solid foods. With continued high doses, the muscles can atrophy or lose strength; research has shown that those muscles rebuild after a break from Botox.\nSide effects from therapeutic use can be much more varied depending on the location of injection and the dose of toxin injected. In general, side effects from therapeutic use can be more serious than those that arise during cosmetic use. These can arise from paralysis of critical muscle groups and can include arrhythmia, heart attack, and in some cases, seizures, respiratory arrest, and death. Additionally, side effects common in cosmetic use are also common in therapeutic use, including trouble swallowing, muscle weakness, allergic reactions, and flu-like syndromes.\nIn response to the occurrence of these side effects, in 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) notified the public of the potential dangers of the botulinum toxin as a therapeutic. Namely, the toxin can spread to areas distant from the site of injection and paralyze unintended muscle groups, especially when used for treating muscle spasticity in children treated for cerebral palsy. In 2009, the FDA announced that boxed warnings would be added to available botulinum toxin products, warning of their ability to spread from the injection site. However, the clinical use of botulinum toxin A in children with cerebral palsy has been proven to be safe with minimal side effects. Additionally, the FDA announced name changes to several botulinum toxin products, to emphasize that the products are not interchangeable and require different doses for proper use. Botox and Botox Cosmetic were given the generic name of onabotulinumtoxinA, Myobloc as rimabotulinumtoxinB, and Dysport retained its generic name of abobotulinumtoxinA. In conjunction with this, the FDA issued a communication to health care professionals reiterating the new drug names and the approved uses for each. A similar warning was issued by Health Canada in 2009, warning that botulinum toxin products can spread to other parts of the body.\nRole in disease.\nBotulinum toxin produced by \"Clostridium botulinum\" (an anaerobic, gram-positive bacterium) is the cause of botulism. Humans most commonly ingest the toxin from eating improperly canned foods in which \"C.\u00a0botulinum\" has grown. However, the toxin can also be introduced through an infected wound. In infants, the bacteria can sometimes grow in the intestines and produce botulinum toxin within the intestine and can cause a condition known as floppy baby syndrome. In all cases, the toxin can then spread, blocking nerves and muscle function. In severe cases, the toxin can block nerves controlling the respiratory system or heart, resulting in death.\nBotulism can be difficult to diagnose, as it may appear similar to diseases such as Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, myasthenia gravis, and stroke. Other tests, such as brain scan and spinal fluid examination, may help to rule out other causes. If the symptoms of botulism are diagnosed early, various treatments can be administered. In an effort to remove contaminated food that remains in the gut, enemas or induced vomiting may be used. For wound infections, infected material may be removed surgically. Botulinum antitoxin is available and may be used to prevent the worsening of symptoms, though it will not reverse existing nerve damage. In severe cases, mechanical respiration may be used to support people with respiratory failure. The nerve damage heals over time, generally over weeks to months. With proper treatment, the case fatality rate for botulinum poisoning can be greatly reduced.\nTwo preparations of botulinum antitoxins are available for treatment of botulism. Trivalent (serotypes A, B, E) botulinum antitoxin is derived from equine sources using whole antibodies. The second antitoxin is heptavalent botulinum antitoxin (serotypes A, B, C, D, E, F, G), which is derived from equine antibodies that have been altered to make them less immunogenic. This antitoxin is effective against all main strains of botulism.\nMechanism of action.\nBotulinum toxin exerts its effect by cleaving key proteins required for nerve activation. First, the toxin binds specifically to presynaptic surface of neurons that use the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Once bound to the nerve terminal, the neuron takes up the toxin into a vesicle by receptor-mediated endocytosis. As the vesicle moves farther into the cell, it acidifies, activating a portion of the toxin that triggers it to push across the vesicle membrane and into the cell cytoplasm. Botulinum neurotoxins recognize distinct classes of receptors simultaneously (gangliosides, synaptotagmin and SV2). Once inside the cytoplasm, the toxin cleaves SNARE proteins (proteins that mediate vesicle fusion, with their target membrane bound compartments) meaning that the acetylcholine vesicles cannot bind to the intracellular cell membrane, preventing the cell from releasing vesicles of neurotransmitter. This stops nerve signaling, leading to flaccid paralysis.\nThe toxin itself is released from the bacterium as a single chain, then becomes activated when cleaved by its own proteases. The active form consists of a two-chain protein composed of a 100-kDa heavy chain polypeptide joined via disulfide bond to a 50-kDa light chain polypeptide. The heavy chain contains domains with several functions; it has the domain responsible for binding specifically to presynaptic nerve terminals, as well as the domain responsible for mediating translocation of the light chain into the cell cytoplasm as the vacuole acidifies. The light chain is a M27-family zinc metalloprotease and is the active part of the toxin. It is translocated into the host cell cytoplasm where it cleaves the host protein SNAP-25, a member of the SNARE protein family, which is responsible for fusion. The cleaved SNAP-25 cannot mediate fusion of vesicles with the host cell membrane, thus preventing the release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from axon endings. This blockage is slowly reversed as the toxin loses activity and the SNARE proteins are slowly regenerated by the affected cell.\nThe seven toxin serotypes (A\u2013G) are traditionally separated by their antigenicity. They have different tertiary structures and sequence differences. While the different toxin types all target members of the SNARE family, different toxin types target different SNARE family members. The A, B, and E serotypes cause human botulism, with the activities of types A and B enduring longest \"in vivo\" (from several weeks to months). Existing toxin types can recombine to create \"hybrid\" (mosaic, chimeric) types. Examples include BoNT/CD, BoNT/DC, and BoNT/FA, with the first letter indicating the light chain type and the latter indicating the heavy chain type. BoNT/FA received considerable attention under the name \"BoNT/H\", as it was mistakenly thought it could not be neutralized by any existing antitoxin.\nBotulinum toxins are closely related to tetanus toxin. The two are collectively known as \"Clostridium\" neurotoxins and the light chain is classified by MEROPS as family M27. \"Clostridium\" neurotoxins belong in the wider family of AB toxins, which also includes Anthrax toxin and Diphtheria toxin. Nonclassical types include BoNT/X (https://), which is toxic in mice and possibly in humans; a BoNT/J (https://) found in cow \"Enterococcus\"; and a BoNT/Wo (https://) found in the rice-colonizing \"Weissella oryzae\".\nHistory.\nInitial descriptions and discovery.\nOne of the earliest recorded outbreaks of foodborne botulism occurred in 1793 in the village of Wildbad in what is now Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany. Thirteen people became sick and six died after eating pork stomach filled with blood sausage, a local delicacy. Additional cases of fatal food poisoning in W\u00fcrttemberg led the authorities to issue a public warning against consuming smoked blood sausages in 1802 and to collect case reports of \"sausage poisoning\". Between 1817 and 1822, the German physician Justinus Kerner published the first complete description of the symptoms of botulism, based on extensive clinical observations and animal experiments. He concluded that the toxin develops in bad sausages under anaerobic conditions, is a biological substance, acts on the nervous system, and is lethal even in small amounts. Kerner hypothesized that this \"sausage toxin\" could be used to treat a variety of diseases caused by an overactive nervous system, making him the first to suggest that it could be used therapeutically. In 1870, the German physician M\u00fcller coined the term \"botulism\" to describe the disease caused by sausage poisoning, from the Latin word , meaning 'sausage'.\nIn 1895, \u00c9mile van Ermengem, a Belgian microbiologist, discovered what is now known as \"Clostridium botulinum\" and confirmed that a toxin produced by the bacteria causes botulism. On 14 December 1895, there was a large outbreak of botulism in the Belgian village of Ellezelles that occurred at a funeral where people ate pickled and smoked ham; three of them died. By examining the contaminated ham and performing autopsies on the people who died after eating it, van Ermengem isolated an anaerobic microorganism that he called \"Bacillus botulinus\". He also performed experiments on animals with ham extracts, isolated bacterial cultures, and toxins extracts from the bacteria. From these he concluded that the bacteria themselves do not cause foodborne botulism, but rather produce a toxin that causes the disease when ingested. As a result of Kerner's and van Ermengem's research, it was thought that only contaminated meat or fish could cause botulism. This idea was refuted in 1904 when a botulism outbreak occurred in Darmstadt, Germany, because of canned white beans. In 1910, the German microbiologist J. Leuchs published a paper showing that different strains of \"Bacillus botulinus\" caused the outbreaks in Ellezelles and Darmstad and that the toxins were serologically distinct. In 1917, \"Bacillus botulinus\" was renamed \"Clostridium botulinum\", as it was decided that the term \"Bacillus\" should refer to a group of aerobic microorganisms, while \"Clostridium\" would be used only to describe a group of anaerobic microorganisms. In 1919, Georgina Burke used toxin-antitoxin reactions to identify two strains of \"Clostridium botulinum\", which she designated A and B.\nFood canning.\nOver the next three decades, 1895\u20131925, as food canning was approaching a billion-dollar-a-year industry, botulism was becoming a public health hazard. Karl Friedrich Meyer, a Swiss-American veterinary scientist, created a center at the Hooper Foundation in San Francisco, where he developed techniques for growing the organism and extracting the toxin, and conversely, for preventing organism growth and toxin production, and inactivating the toxin by heating. The California canning industry was thereby preserved.\nWorld War II.\nWith the outbreak of World War II, weaponization of botulinum toxin was investigated at Fort Detrick in Maryland. Carl Lamanna and James Duff developed the concentration and crystallization techniques that Edward J. Schantz used to create the first clinical product. When the Army's Chemical Corps was disbanded, Schantz moved to the Food Research Institute in Wisconsin, where he manufactured toxin for experimental use and provided it to the academic community.\nThe mechanism of botulinum toxin action \u2013 blocking the release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from nerve endings \u2013 was elucidated in the mid-20th century, and remains an important research topic. Nearly all toxin treatments are based on this effect in various body tissues.\nStrabismus.\nOphthalmologists specializing in eye muscle disorders (strabismus) had developed the method of EMG-guided injection (using the electromyogram, the electrical signal from an activated muscle, to guide injection) of local anesthetics as a diagnostic technique for evaluating an individual muscle's contribution to an eye movement. Because strabismus surgery frequently needed repeating, a search was undertaken for non-surgical, injection treatments using various anesthetics, alcohols, enzymes, enzyme blockers, and snake neurotoxins. Finally, inspired by Daniel B. Drachman's work with chicks at Johns Hopkins, Alan B. Scott and colleagues injected botulinum toxin into monkey extraocular muscles. The result was remarkable; a few picograms induced paralysis that was confined to the target muscle, long in duration, and without side effects.\nAfter working out techniques for freeze-drying, buffering with albumin, and assuring sterility, potency, and safety, Scott applied to the FDA for investigational drug use, and began manufacturing botulinum type A neurotoxin in his San Francisco lab. He injected the first strabismus patients in 1977, reported its clinical utility in 1980, and had soon trained hundreds of ophthalmologists in EMG-guided injection of the drug he named Oculinum (\"eye aligner\").\nIn 1986, Oculinum Inc, Scott's micromanufacturer and distributor of botulinum toxin, was unable to obtain product liability insurance, and could no longer supply the drug. As supplies became exhausted, people who had come to rely on periodic injections became desperate. For four months, as liability issues were resolved, American blepharospasm patients traveled to Canadian eye centers for their injections.\nBased on data from thousands of people collected by 240 investigators, Oculinum Inc (which was soon acquired by Allergan) received FDA approval in 1989 to market Oculinum for clinical use in the United States to treat adult strabismus (crossed eyes) and blepharospasm (uncontrollable blinking). Allergan then began using the trademark Botox. This original approval was granted under the 1983 US Orphan Drug Act.\nCosmetics.\nThe effect of botulinum toxin type-A on reducing and eliminating forehead wrinkles was first described and published by Richard Clark, MD, a plastic surgeon from Sacramento, California. In 1987 Clark was challenged with eliminating the disfigurement caused by only the right side of the forehead muscles functioning after the left side of the forehead was paralyzed during a facelift procedure. This patient had desired to look better from her facelift, but was experiencing bizarre unilateral right forehead eyebrow elevation while the left eyebrow drooped, and she constantly demonstrated deep expressive right forehead wrinkles while the left side was perfectly smooth due to the paralysis. Clark was aware that botulinum toxin was safely being used to treat babies with strabismus and he requested and was granted FDA approval to experiment with botulinum toxin to paralyze the moving and wrinkling normal functioning right forehead muscles to make both sides of the forehead appear the same. This study and case report of the cosmetic use of botulinum toxin to treat a cosmetic complication of a cosmetic surgery was the first report on the specific treatment of wrinkles and was published in the journal \"Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery\" in 1989. Editors of the journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons have clearly stated \"the first described use of the toxin in aesthetic circumstances was by Clark and Berris in 1989.\"\nJ. D. and J. A. Carruthers also studied and reported in 1992 the use of botulinum toxin type-A as a cosmetic treatment.[78] They conducted a study of participants whose only concern was their glabellar forehead wrinkle or furrow. Study participants were otherwise normal. Sixteen of seventeen participants available for follow-up demonstrated a cosmetic improvement. This study was reported at a meeting in 1991. The study for the treatment of glabellar frown lines was published in 1992. This result was subsequently confirmed by other groups (Brin, and the Columbia University group under Monte Keen). The FDA announced regulatory approval of botulinum toxin type A (Botox Cosmetic) to temporarily improve the appearance of moderate-to-severe frown lines between the eyebrows (glabellar lines) in 2002 after extensive clinical trials. Well before this, the cosmetic use of botulinum toxin type A became widespread. The results of Botox Cosmetic can last up to four months and may vary with each patient. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved an alternative product-safety testing method in response to increasing public concern that LD50 testing was required for each batch sold in the market.\nBotulinum toxin type-A has also been used in the treatment of gummy smiles; the material is injected into the hyperactive muscles of upper lip, which causes a reduction in the upward movement of lip thus resulting in a smile with a less exposure of gingiva. Botox is usually injected in the three lip elevator muscles that converge on the lateral side of the ala of the nose; the levator labii superioris (LLS), the levator labii superioris alaeque nasi muscle (LLSAN), and the zygomaticus minor (ZMi).\nChronic pain.\nWilliam J. Binder reported in 2000 that people who had cosmetic injections around the face reported relief from chronic headaches. This was initially thought to be an indirect effect of reduced muscle tension; however, the toxin is now known to inhibit the release of peripheral nociceptive neurotransmitters, thereby suppressing the central pain processing systems responsible for migraine headaches.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomics.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], botulinum toxin injections are the most common cosmetic operation, with 7.4 million procedures in the United States, according to the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.\nThe global market for botulinum toxin products, driven by their cosmetic applications, was forecast to reach $2.9 billion by 2018. The facial aesthetics market, of which they are a component, was forecast to reach $4.7 billion ($2 billion in the US) in the same timeframe.\nUS market.\nIn 2020, 4,401,536 botulinum toxin Type A procedures were administered. In 2019 the botulinum toxin market made US$3.19 billion.\nBotox cost.\nBotox cost is generally determined by the number of units administered (avg. $10\u201330 per unit) or by the area ($200\u20131000) and depends on the physician's expertise, clinic location, number of units, and treatment complexity.\nInsurance.\nIn the US, Botox for medical purposes is usually covered by insurance if deemed medically necessary by a doctor and covers a plethora of medical problems including overactive bladder (OAB), urinary incontinence due to neurologic conditions, headaches and migraines, TMJ, spasticity in adults, cervical dystonia in adults, severe axillary hyperhidrosis (or other areas of the body), blepharospasm, upper or lower limb spasticity.\nCosmetic.\nBotox's potential to reduce facial wrinkles was discovered in the 1990s, leading to its FDA approval for cosmetic use in 2002. Standard areas for aesthetics Botox injections include areas on the face or neck that can form fine lines and wrinkles due to every day muscle contractions and/or facial expressions such as smiling, frowning, squinting, and raising eyebrows. These areas include the glabellar region between the eyebrows, horizontal lines on the forehead, crow's feet around the eyes, and even circular bands that form around the neck secondary to platysmal hyperactivity.\nHyperhidrosis.\nBotox for excessive sweating is FDA approved.\nBioterrorism.\nBotulinum toxin has been recognized as a potential agent for use in bioterrorism. It can be absorbed through the eyes, mucous membranes, respiratory tract, and non-intact skin.\nThe effects of botulinum toxin are different from those of nerve agents involved insofar in that botulism symptoms develop relatively slowly (over several days), while nerve agent effects are generally much more rapid. Evidence suggests that nerve exposure (simulated by injection of atropine and pralidoxime) will increase mortality by enhancing botulinum toxin's mechanism of toxicity.\nWith regard to detection, protocols using NBC detection equipment (such as M-8 paper or the ICAM) will not indicate a \"positive\" when samples containing botulinum toxin are tested. To confirm a diagnosis of botulinum toxin poisoning, therapeutically or to provide evidence in death investigations, botulinum toxin may be quantitated by immunoassay of human biological fluids; serum levels of 12\u201324 mouse LD50 units per milliliter have been detected in poisoned people.\nDuring the early 1980s, German and French newspapers reported that the police had raided a Baader-Meinhof gang safe house in Paris and had found a makeshift laboratory that contained flasks full of \"Clostridium botulinum\", which makes botulinum toxin. Their reports were later found to be incorrect; no such lab was ever found.\nBrand names.\nCommercial forms are marketed under the brand names Botox (onabotulinumtoxinA), Dysport/Azzalure (abobotulinumtoxinA), Letybo (letibotulinumtoxinA), Myobloc (rimabotulinumtoxinB), Xeomin/Bocouture (incobotulinumtoxinA), and Jeuveau (prabotulinumtoxinA).\nBotulinum toxin A is sold under the brand names Jeuveau, Botox, and Xeomin. Botulinum toxin B is sold under the brand name Myobloc.\nIn the United States, botulinum toxin products are manufactured by a variety of companies, for both therapeutic and cosmetic use. A US supplier reported in its company materials in 2011 that it could \"supply the world's requirements for 25 indications approved by Government agencies around the world\" with less than one gram of raw botulinum toxin. Myobloc or Neurobloc, a botulinum toxin type B product, is produced by Solstice Neurosciences, a subsidiary of US WorldMeds. AbobotulinumtoxinA), a therapeutic formulation of the type A toxin manufactured by Galderma in the United Kingdom, is licensed for the treatment of focal dystonias and certain cosmetic uses in the US and other countries. LetibotulinumtoxinA (Letybo) was approved for medical use in the United States in February 2024.\nBesides the three primary US manufacturers, numerous other botulinum toxin producers are known. Xeomin, manufactured in Germany by Merz, is also available for both therapeutic and cosmetic use in the US. Lanzhou Institute of Biological Products in China manufactures a botulinum toxin type-A product; as of 2014, it was the only botulinum toxin type-A approved in China. Botulinum toxin type-A is also sold as Lantox and Prosigne on the global market. Neuronox, a botulinum toxin type-A product, was introduced by Medy-Tox of South Korea in 2009.\nToxin production.\nBotulism toxins are produced by bacteria of the genus \"Clostridium,\" namely \"C.\u00a0botulinum\", \"C.\u00a0butyricum\", \"C.\u00a0baratii\" and \"C.\u00a0argentinense,\" which are widely distributed, including in soil and dust. Also, the bacteria can be found inside homes on floors, carpet, and countertops even after cleaning. Complicating the problem is that the taxonomy for \"C.\u00a0botulinum\" remains chaotic. The toxin has likely been horizontally transferred across lineages, contributing to the multi-species pattern seen today.\nFood-borne botulism results, indirectly, from ingestion of food contaminated with \"Clostridium\" spores, where exposure to an anaerobic environment allows the spores to germinate, after which the bacteria can multiply and produce toxin. Critically, ingestion of toxin rather than spores or vegetative bacteria causes botulism. Botulism is nevertheless known to be transmitted through canned foods not cooked correctly before canning or after can opening, so is preventable. Infant botulism arising from consumption of honey or any other food that can carry these spores can be prevented by eliminating these foods from diets of children less than 12 months old.\nOrganism and toxin susceptibilities.\nProper refrigeration at temperatures below slows the growth of \"C.\u00a0botulinum\". The organism is also susceptible to high salt, high oxygen, and low pH levels. The toxin itself is rapidly destroyed by heat, such as in thorough cooking. The spores that produce the toxin are heat-tolerant and will survive boiling water for an extended period of time.\nThe botulinum toxin is denatured and thus deactivated at temperatures greater than for five minutes. As a zinc metalloprotease (see below), the toxin's activity is also susceptible, post-exposure, to inhibition by protease inhibitors, e.g., zinc-coordinating hydroxamates.\nResearch.\nBlepharospasm and strabismus.\nUniversity-based ophthalmologists in the US and Canada further refined the use of botulinum toxin as a therapeutic agent. By 1985, a scientific protocol of injection sites and dosage had been empirically determined for treatment of blepharospasm and strabismus. Side effects in treatment of this condition were deemed to be rare, mild and treatable. The beneficial effects of the injection lasted only four to six months. Thus, blepharospasm patients required re-injection two or three times a year.\nIn 1986, Scott's micromanufacturer and distributor of Botox was no longer able to supply the drug because of an inability to obtain product liability insurance. People became desperate, as supplies of Botox were gradually consumed, forcing him to abandon people who would have been due for their next injection. For a period of four months, American blepharospasm patients had to arrange to have their injections performed by participating doctors at Canadian eye centers until the liability issues could be resolved.\nIn December 1989, Botox was approved by the US FDA for the treatment of strabismus, blepharospasm, and hemifacial spasm in people over 12 years old.\nIn the case of treatment of infantile esotropia in people younger than 12 years of age, several studies have yielded differing results.\nUpper motor neuron syndrome.\nBotulinum toxin type-A is now a common treatment for muscles affected by the upper motor neuron syndrome (UMNS), such as cerebral palsy, for muscles with an impaired ability to effectively lengthen. Muscles affected by UMNS frequently are limited by weakness, loss of reciprocal inhibition, decreased movement control, and hypertonicity (including spasticity). In January 2014, botulinum toxin was approved by UK's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) for the treatment of ankle disability due to lower limb spasticity associated with stroke in adults. Joint motion may be restricted by severe muscle imbalance related to the syndrome, when some muscles are markedly hypertonic, and lack effective active lengthening. Injecting an overactive muscle to decrease its level of contraction can allow improved reciprocal motion, so improved ability to move and exercise.\nSialorrhea.\nSialorrhea is a condition where oral secretions are unable to be eliminated, causing pooling of saliva in the mouth. This condition can be caused by various neurological syndromes such as Bell's palsy, intellectual disability, and cerebral palsy. Injection of botulinum toxin type-A into salivary glands is useful in reducing the secretions.\nCervical dystonia.\nBotulinum toxin type-A is used to treat cervical dystonia, but it can become ineffective after a time. Botulinum toxin type B received FDA approval for treatment of cervical dystonia in December 2000. Brand names for botulinum toxin type-B include Myobloc in the United States and Neurobloc in the European Union.\nChronic migraine.\nOnabotulinumtoxin A (trade name: Botox) received FDA approval for treatment of chronic migraines on 15 October 2010. The toxin is injected into the head and neck to treat these chronic headaches. Approval followed evidence presented to the agency from two studies funded by Allergan showing a very slight improvement in incidence of chronic migraines for those with migraines undergoing the Botox treatment.\nSince then, several randomized control trials have shown botulinum toxin type A to improve headache symptoms and quality of life when used prophylactically for participants with chronic migraine who exhibit headache characteristics consistent with: pressure perceived from outside source, shorter total duration of chronic migraines (&lt;30 years), \"detoxification\" of participants with coexisting chronic daily headache due to medication overuse, and no current history of other preventive headache medications.\nDepression.\nA few small trials have found benefits in people with depression. A 2021 meta-analysis supports the usefulness of botox in unipolar depression, but finds significant heterogenity among the findings. The main hypothesis for its action is based on the facial feedback hypothesis. Another hypothesis involves a connection between the facial muscle and specific brain regions in animals, but additional evidence is required to support or disprove this theory.\nPremature ejaculation.\nThe drug for the treatment of premature ejaculation has been under development since August 2013, and is in Phase II trials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40173", "revid": "50053599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40173", "title": "8th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 800 BC to 701 BC\nThe 8th century BC started the first day of 800 BC and ended the last day of 701 BC. The 8th century BC was a period of great change for several historically significant civilizations. In Egypt, the 23rd and 24th dynasties lead to rule from Kingdom of Kush in the 25th Dynasty. The Neo-Assyrian Empire reaches the peak of its power, conquering the Kingdom of Israel as well as nearby countries.\nGreece colonizes other regions of the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea. Rome is founded in 753 BC, and the Etruscan civilization expands in Italy. The 8th century BC is conventionally taken as the beginning of Classical Antiquity, with the first Olympiad set at 776 BC, and the epics of Homer dated to between 750 and 650 BC.\nIron Age India enters the later Vedic period. Vedic ritual is annotated in many priestly schools in Brahmana commentaries, and the earliest Upanishads mark the beginning of Vedanta philosophy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40174", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40174", "title": "9th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 900 BC to 801 BC\nThe 9th century BC started the first day of 900 BC and ended the last day of 801 BC. It was a period of great change for several civilizations. In Africa, Carthage is founded by the Phoenicians. In Egypt, a severe flood covers the floor of Luxor temple, and years later, a civil war starts.\nIt is the beginning of the Iron Age in Central Europe, with the spread of the Proto-Celtic Hallstatt culture, and the Proto-Celtic language.\nThe major Olmec site of San Lorenzo Tenochtitl\u00e1n in Mesoamerica declined in importance, after having been active since 15th century BC.\nSovereign states.\nSee: List of sovereign states in the 9th century BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40176", "revid": "47262356", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40176", "title": "Joseph Priestley", "text": "English chemist and polymath (1733\u20131804)\nJoseph Priestley (; 24 March 1733 \u2013 6 February 1804) was an English chemist, Unitarian, natural philosopher, separatist theologian, grammarian, multi-subject educator and classical liberal political theorist. He published over 150 works, and conducted experiments in several areas of science.\nPriestley is credited with his independent discovery of oxygen by the thermal decomposition of mercuric oxide, having isolated it in 1774. During his lifetime, Priestley's considerable scientific reputation rested on his invention of carbonated water, his writings on electricity, and his discovery of several \"airs\" (gases), the most famous being what Priestley dubbed \"dephlogisticated air\" (oxygen). Priestley's determination to defend phlogiston theory and to reject what would become the chemical revolution eventually left him isolated within the scientific community.\nPriestley's science was integral to his theology, and he consistently tried to fuse Enlightenment rationalism with Christian theism. In his metaphysical texts, Priestley attempted to combine theism, materialism, and determinism, a project that has been called \"audacious and original\". He believed that a proper understanding of the natural world would promote human progress and eventually bring about the Christian millennium. Priestley, who strongly believed in the free and open exchange of ideas, advocated toleration and equal rights for religious Dissenters, which also led him to help found Unitarianism in England. The controversial nature of Priestley's publications, combined with his outspoken support of the American Revolution and later the French Revolution, aroused public and governmental contempt; eventually forcing him to flee in 1791, first to London and then to the United States, after a mob burned down his Birmingham home and church. He spent his last ten years in Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.\nA scholar and teacher throughout his life, Priestley made significant contributions to pedagogy, including the publication of a seminal work on English grammar and books on history; he prepared some of the most influential early timelines. The educational writings were among Priestley's most popular works. Arguably his metaphysical works, however, had the most lasting influence, as now considered primary sources for utilitarianism by philosophers such as Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Herbert Spencer.\nEarly life and education (1733\u20131755).\nPriestley was born in Birstall (near Batley) in the West Riding of Yorkshire, to an established English Dissenting family who did not conform to the Church of England. He was the oldest of six children born to Mary Swift and Jonas Priestley, a finisher of cloth. Priestley was sent to live with his grandfather around the age of one. He returned home five years later, after his mother died. When his father remarried in 1741, Priestley went to live with his aunt and uncle, the wealthy and childless Sarah (d. 1764) and John Keighley at the Old Hall, Heckmondwike, from Fieldhead.\nPriestley was a precocious child\u2014at the age of four, he could flawlessly recite all 107 questions and answers of the Westminster Shorter Catechism\u2014and his aunt sought the best education for him, intending him to enter ministry. During his youth, Priestley attended local schools, where he learned Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.\nAround 1749, Priestley became seriously ill and believed he was dying. Raised as a devout Calvinist, he believed a conversion experience was necessary for salvation, but doubted he had had one. This emotional distress eventually led him to question his theological upbringing, causing him to reject election and to accept universal salvation. As a result, the elders of his home church, the Independent Upper Chapel of Heckmondwike, near Leeds, refused him admission as a full member.\nPriestley's illness left him with a permanent stutter and he gave up any thoughts of entering the ministry at that time. In preparation for joining a relative in trade in Lisbon, he studied French, Italian, and German in addition to Aramaic, and Arabic. He was tutored by the Reverend George Haggerstone, who first introduced him to higher mathematics, natural philosophy, logic, and metaphysics through the works of Isaac Watts, Willem 's Gravesande, and John Locke.\nDaventry Academy.\nPriestley eventually decided to return to his theological studies and, in 1752, matriculated at Daventry, a Dissenting academy in Northamptonshire, England. Because he was already widely read, Priestley was allowed to omit the first two years of coursework. He continued his intense study; this, together with the liberal atmosphere of the school, shifted his theology further leftward and he became a Rational Dissenter. Abhorring dogma and religious mysticism, Rational Dissenters emphasised rational analysis of the natural world and the Bible.\nPriestley later wrote that the book that influenced him the most, save the Bible, was David Hartley's \"Observations on Man\" (1749). Hartley's psychological, philosophical, and theological treatise postulated a material theory of mind. Hartley aimed to construct a Christian philosophy in which both religious and moral \"facts\" could be scientifically proven, a goal that would occupy Priestley for his entire life. In his third year at Daventry, Priestley committed himself to the ministry, which he described as \"the noblest of all professions\".\nNeedham Market and Nantwich (1755\u20131761).\nRobert Schofield, Priestley's major modern biographer, describes his first \"call\" in 1755 to the Dissenting parish in Needham Market, Suffolk, as a \"mistake\" for both Priestley and the congregation. Priestley yearned for urban life and theological debate, whereas Needham Market was a small, rural town with a congregation wedded to tradition. Attendance and donations dropped sharply when they discovered the extent of his heterodoxy. Although Priestley's aunt had promised her support if he became a minister, she refused any further assistance when she realised he was no longer a Calvinist. To earn extra money, Priestley proposed opening a school, but local families informed him that they would refuse to send their children. He also presented a series of scientific lectures titled \"Use of the Globes\" that was more successful.\nPriestley's Daventry friends helped him obtain another position and in 1758 he moved to Nantwich, Cheshire, living at Sweetbriar Hall in the town's Hospital Street; his time there was happier. The congregation cared less about Priestley's heterodoxy and he successfully established a school. Unlike many schoolmasters of the time, Priestley taught his students natural philosophy and even bought scientific instruments for them. Appalled at the quality of the available English grammar books, Priestley wrote his own: \"The Rudiments of English Grammar\" (1761). His innovations in the description of English grammar, particularly his efforts to dissociate it from Latin grammar, led 20th-century scholars to describe him as \"one of the great grammarians of his time\". After the publication of \"Rudiments\" and the success of Priestley's school, Warrington Academy offered him a teaching position in 1761.\nWarrington Academy (1761\u20131767).\nIn 1761, Priestley moved to Warrington in Cheshire and assumed the post of tutor of modern languages and rhetoric at the town's Dissenting academy, although he would have preferred to teach mathematics and natural philosophy. He fitted in well at Warrington, and made friends quickly. These included the doctor and writer John Aikin, his sister the children's author Anna Laetitia Aikin, and the potter and businessman Josiah Wedgwood. Wedgwood met Priestley in 1762, after a fall from his horse. Wedgwood and Priestley met rarely, but exchanged letters, advice on chemistry, and laboratory equipment. Wedgwood eventually created a medallion of Priestley in cream-on-blue jasperware.\nOn 23 June 1762, Priestley married Mary Wilkinson of Wrexham. Of his marriage, Priestley wrote:\nThis proved a very suitable and happy connexion, my wife being a woman of an excellent understanding, much improved by reading, of great fortitude and strength of mind, and of a temper in the highest degree affectionate and generous; feeling strongly for others, and little for herself. Also, greatly excelling in every thing relating to household affairs, she entirely relieved me of all concern of that kind, which allowed me to give all my time to the prosecution of my studies, and the other duties of my station.\nOn 17 April 1763 they had a daughter, whom they named Sarah after Priestley's aunt.\nBeyond his work on \"airs,\" Priestley is also credited with inventing carbonated water (soda water) in 1767, after devising a method to infuse water with carbon dioxide gas.\nEducator and historian.\nAll of the books Priestley published while at Warrington emphasised the study of history; Priestley considered it essential for worldly success as well as religious growth. He wrote histories of science and Christianity in an effort to reveal the progress of humanity and, paradoxically, the loss of a pure, \"primitive Christianity\".\nIn his \"Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life\" (1765), \"Lectures on History and General Policy\" (1788), and other works, Priestley argued that the education of the young should anticipate their future practical needs. This principle of utility guided his unconventional curricular choices for Warrington's aspiring middle-class students. He recommended modern languages instead of classical languages and modern rather than ancient history. Priestley's lectures on history were particularly revolutionary; he narrated a providentialist and naturalist account of history, arguing that the study of history furthered the comprehension of God's natural laws. Furthermore, his millennial perspective was closely tied to his optimism regarding scientific progress and the improvement of humanity. He believed that each age would improve upon the previous and that the study of history allowed people to perceive and to advance this progress. Since the study of history was a moral imperative for Priestley, he also promoted the education of middle-class women, which was unusual at the time. Some scholars of education have described Priestley as the most important English writer on education between the 17th-century John Locke and the 19th-century Herbert Spencer. \"Lectures on History\" was well received and was employed by many educational institutions, such as New College at Hackney, Brown, Princeton, Yale, and Cambridge. Priestley designed two \"Charts\" to serve as visual study aids for his \"Lectures\". These charts are in fact timelines; they have been described as the most influential timelines published in the 18th century. Both were popular for decades, and the trustees of Warrington were so impressed with Priestley's lectures and charts that they arranged for the University of Edinburgh to grant him a Doctor of Law degree in 1764. During this period Priestley also regularly delivered lectures on rhetoric that were later published in 1777 as \"A Course of Lectures on Oratory and Criticism\".\nHistory of electricity.\nThe intellectually stimulating atmosphere of Warrington, often called the \"Athens of the North\" (of England) during the 18th century, encouraged Priestley's growing interest in natural philosophy. He gave lectures on anatomy and performed experiments regarding temperature with another tutor at Warrington, his friend John Seddon. Despite Priestley's busy teaching schedule, he decided to write a history of electricity. Friends introduced him to the major experimenters in the field in Britain\u2014John Canton, William Watson, Timothy Lane, and the visiting Benjamin Franklin who encouraged Priestley to perform the experiments he wanted to include in his history. Priestley also consulted with Franklin during the latter's kite experiments. In the process of replicating others' experiments, Priestley became intrigued by unanswered questions and was prompted to undertake experiments of his own design. (Impressed with his \"Charts\" and the manuscript of his history of electricity, Canton, Franklin, Watson, and Richard Price nominated Priestley for a fellowship in the Royal Society; he was accepted in 1766.)\nIn 1767, the 700-page \"The History and Present State of Electricity\" was published to positive reviews. The first half of the text is a history of the study of electricity to 1766; the second and more influential half is a description of contemporary theories about electricity and suggestions for future research. The volume also contains extensive comments on Priestley's views that scientific inquiries be presented with all reasoning in one's discovery path, including false leads and mistakes. He contrasted his narrative approach with Newton's analytical proof-like approach which did not facilitate future researchers to continue the inquiry. Priestley reported some of his own discoveries in the second section, such as the conductivity of charcoal and other substances and the continuum between conductors and non-conductors. This discovery overturned what he described as \"one of the earliest and universally received maxims of electricity\", that only water and metals could conduct electricity. This and other experiments on the electrical properties of materials and on the electrical effects of chemical transformations demonstrated Priestley's early and ongoing interest in the relationship between chemical substances and electricity. Based on experiments with charged spheres, Priestley was among the first to propose that electrical force followed an inverse-square law, similar to Newton's law of universal gravitation. He did not generalise or elaborate on this, and the general law was enunciated by French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb in the 1780s.\nPriestley's strength as a natural philosopher was qualitative rather than quantitative and his observation of \"a current of real air\" between two electrified points would later interest Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell as they investigated electromagnetism. Priestley's text became the standard history of electricity for over a century; Alessandro Volta (who later invented the battery), William Herschel (who discovered infrared radiation), and Henry Cavendish (who discovered hydrogen) all relied upon it. Priestley wrote a popular version of the \"History of Electricity\" for the general public titled \"A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity\" (1768). He marketed the book with his brother Timothy, but unsuccessfully.\nLeeds (1767\u20131773).\nPerhaps prompted by Mary Priestley's ill health, or financial problems, or a desire to prove himself to the community that had rejected him in his childhood, Priestley moved with his family from Warrington to Leeds in 1767, and he became Mill Hill Chapel's minister. Two sons were born to the Priestleys in Leeds: Joseph, Junior, on 24 July 1768 and William three years later. Theophilus Lindsey, a rector at Catterick, Yorkshire, became one of Priestley's few friends in Leeds, of whom he wrote: \"I never chose to publish any thing of moment relating to theology, without consulting him.\" Although Priestley had extended family living around Leeds, they do not appear to have communicated. Schofield conjectures that they considered him a heretic. Each year, Priestley travelled to London to consult with his close friend and publisher, Joseph Johnson, and to attend meetings of the Royal Society.\nMinister of Mill Hill Chapel.\nWhen Priestley became its minister, Mill Hill Chapel was one of the oldest and most respected Dissenting congregations in England; however, during the early 18th century the congregation had fractured along doctrinal lines and was losing members to the charismatic Methodist movement. Priestley believed that he could strengthen the bonds of the congregation by educating the young people there.\nIn his three-volume \"Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion\" (1772\u201374), Priestley outlined his theories of religious instruction. More importantly, he laid out his belief in Socinianism. The doctrines he explicated would become the standards for Unitarians in Britain. This work marked a change in Priestley's theological thinking that is critical to understanding his later writings\u2014it paved the way for his materialism and necessitarianism (the latter being the belief that a divine being acts in accordance with necessary metaphysical laws).\nPriestley's major argument in the \"Institutes\" was that the only revealed religious truths that could be accepted were those that matched one's experience of the natural world. Since his views of religion were tied deeply to his understanding of nature, the text's theism rested on the argument from design. The \"Institutes\" shocked and appalled many readers, primarily because it challenged basic Christian orthodoxies, such as the divinity of Christ and the miracle of the Virgin Birth. Methodists in Leeds penned a hymn asking God to \"the Unitarian fiend expel / And chase his doctrine back to Hell.\" Priestley wanted to return Christianity to its \"primitive\" or \"pure\" form by eliminating the \"corruptions\" which had accumulated over the centuries. The fourth part of the \"Institutes\", \"An History of the Corruptions of Christianity\", became so long that he was forced to issue it separately in 1782. Priestley believed that the \"Corruptions\" was \"the most valuable\" work he ever published. In demanding that his readers apply the logic of the emerging sciences and comparative history to the Bible and Christianity, he alienated religious and scientific readers alike\u2014scientific readers did not appreciate seeing science used in the defence of religion and religious readers dismissed the application of science to religion.\nReligious controversialist.\nPriestley engaged in numerous political and religious pamphlet wars. According to Schofield, \"he entered each controversy with a cheerful conviction that he was right, while most of his opponents were convinced, from the outset, that he was willfully and maliciously wrong. He was able, then, to contrast his sweet reasonableness to their personal rancor\", but as Schofield points out Priestley rarely altered his opinion as a result of these debates. While at Leeds he wrote controversial pamphlets on the Lord's Supper and on Calvinist doctrine; thousands of copies were published, making them some of Priestley's most widely read works.\nPriestley founded the \"Theological Repository\" in 1768, a journal committed to the open and rational inquiry of theological questions. Although he promised to print any contribution, only like-minded authors submitted articles. He was, therefore, obliged to provide much of the journal's content himself. This material also became the basis for many of his later theological and metaphysical works. After only a few years, due to a lack of funds, he was forced to cease publishing the journal. However, he did revive it briefly in 1784 with similar results.\nDefender of Dissenters and political philosopher.\nMany of Priestley's political writings supported the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts, which restricted the rights of Dissenters. They could not hold political office, serve in the armed forces, or attend Oxford and Cambridge unless they subscribed to the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England. Dissenters repeatedly petitioned Parliament to repeal the Acts, arguing that they were being treated as second-class citizens.\nPriestley's friends, particularly other Rational Dissenters, urged him to publish a work on the injustices experienced by Dissenters; the result was his \"Essay on the First Principles of Government\" (1768). An early work of modern liberal political theory and Priestley's most thorough treatment of the subject, it\u2014unusually for the time\u2014distinguished political rights from civil rights with precision and argued for expansive civil rights. Priestley identified separate private and public spheres, contending that the government should have control only over the public sphere. Education and religion, in particular, he maintained, were matters of private conscience and should not be administered by the state. Priestley's later radicalism emerged from his belief that the British government was infringing upon these individual freedoms.\nPriestley also defended the rights of Dissenters against the attacks of William Blackstone, an eminent legal theorist, whose \"Commentaries on the Laws of England\" (1765\u201369) had become the standard legal guide. Blackstone's book stated that dissent from the Church of England was a crime and that Dissenters could not be loyal subjects. Furious, Priestley lashed out with his \"Remarks on Dr. Blackstone's Commentaries\" (1769), correcting Blackstone's interpretation of the law, his grammar (a highly politicised subject at the time), and history. Blackstone, chastened, altered subsequent editions of his \"Commentaries\": he rephrased the offending passages and removed the sections claiming that Dissenters could not be loyal subjects, but he retained his description of Dissent as a crime.\nNatural philosopher: electricity, \"Optics\", and carbonated water.\nAlthough Priestley claimed that natural philosophy was only a hobby, he took it seriously. In his \"History of Electricity\", he described the scientist as promoting the \"security and happiness of mankind\". Priestley's science was eminently practical and he rarely concerned himself with theoretical questions; his model was his close friend, Benjamin Franklin. When he moved to Leeds, Priestley continued his electrical and chemical experiments (the latter aided by a steady supply of carbon dioxide from a neighbouring brewery). Between 1767 and 1770, he presented five papers to the Royal Society from these initial experiments; the first four papers explored coronal discharges and other phenomena related to electrical discharge, while the fifth reported on the conductivity of charcoals from different sources. His subsequent experimental work focused on chemistry and pneumatics.\nPriestley published the first volume of his projected history of experimental philosophy, \"The History and Present State of Discoveries Relating to Vision, Light and Colours\" (referred to as his \"Optics\"), in 1772. He paid careful attention to the history of optics and presented excellent explanations of early optics experiments, but his mathematical deficiencies caused him to dismiss several important contemporary theories. He followed the (corpuscular) particle theory of light, influenced by the works of Reverend John Rowning and others. Furthermore, he did not include any of the practical sections that had made his \"History of Electricity\" so useful to practising natural philosophers. Unlike his \"History of Electricity\", it was not popular and had only one edition, although it was the only English book on the topic for 150 years. The hastily written text sold poorly; the cost of researching, writing, and publishing the \"Optics\" convinced Priestley to abandon his history of experimental philosophy.\nPriestley was considered for the position of astronomer on James Cook's second voyage to the South Seas, but was not chosen. Still, he contributed in a small way to the voyage: he provided the crew with a method for making carbonated water, which he erroneously speculated might be a cure for scurvy. He then published a pamphlet with \"Directions for Impregnating Water with Fixed Air\" (1772). Priestley did not exploit the commercial potential of carbonated water, but others such as J. J. Schweppe made fortunes from it. For his discovery of carbonated water Priestley has been labelled \"the father of the soft drink\", with the beverage company Schweppes regarding him as \"the father of our industry\". In 1773, the Royal Society recognised Priestley's achievements in natural philosophy by awarding him the Copley Medal.\nPriestley's friends wanted to find him a more financially secure position. In 1772, prompted by Richard Price and Benjamin Franklin, Lord Shelburne wrote to Priestley asking him to direct the education of his children and to act as his general assistant. Although Priestley was reluctant to sacrifice his ministry, he accepted the position, resigning from Mill Hill Chapel on 20 December 1772, and preaching his last sermon on 16 May 1773.\nCalne (1773\u20131780).\nIn 1773, the Priestleys moved to Calne in Wiltshire, southwestern England, and a year later Lord Shelburne and Priestley took a tour of Europe. According to Priestley's close friend Theophilus Lindsey, Priestley was \"much improved by this view of mankind at large\". Upon their return, Priestley easily fulfilled his duties as librarian and tutor. The workload was intentionally light, allowing him time to pursue his scientific investigations and theological interests. Priestley also became a political adviser to Shelburne, gathering information on parliamentary issues and serving as a liaison between Shelburne and the Dissenting and American interests. When the Priestleys' third son was born on 24 May 1777, they named him Henry at the lord's request.\nMaterialist philosopher.\nPriestley wrote his most important philosophical works during his years with Lord Shelburne. In a series of major metaphysical texts published between 1774 and 1780\u2014\"An Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind\" (1774), \"Hartley's Theory of the Human Mind on the Principle of the Association of Ideas\" (1775), \"Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit\" (1777), \"The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated\" (1777), and \"Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever\" (1780)\u2014he argues for a philosophy that incorporates four concepts: determinism, materialism, causation, and necessitarianism. By studying the natural world, he argued, people would learn how to become more compassionate, happy, and prosperous.\nPriestley strongly suggested that there is no mind-body duality, and put forth a materialist philosophy in these works; that is, one founded on the principle that everything in the universe is made of matter that we can perceive. He also contended that discussing the soul is impossible because it is made of a divine substance, and humanity cannot perceive the divine. Despite his separation of the divine from the mortal, this position shocked and angered many of his readers, who believed that such a duality was necessary for the soul to exist.\nResponding to Baron d'Holbach's \"Syst\u00e8me de la Nature\" (1770) and David Hume's \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\" (1779) as well as the works of the French \"philosophers\", Priestley maintained that materialism and determinism could be reconciled with a belief in God. He criticised those whose faith was shaped by books and fashion, drawing an analogy between the scepticism of educated men and the credulity of the masses.\nMaintaining that humans had no free will, Priestley argued that what he called \"philosophical necessity\" (akin to absolute determinism) is consonant with Christianity, a position based on his understanding of the natural world. Like the rest of nature, man's mind is subject to the laws of causation, Priestley contended, but because a benevolent God created these laws, the world and the people in it will eventually be perfected. Evil is therefore only an imperfect understanding of the world.\nAlthough Priestley's philosophical work has been characterised as \"audacious and original\", it partakes of older philosophical traditions on the problems of free will, determinism, and materialism. For example, the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza argued for absolute determinism and absolute materialism. Like Spinoza and Priestley,\nLeibniz argued that human will was completely determined by natural laws;\nunlike them, Leibniz argued for a \"parallel universe\" of immaterial objects (such as human souls) so arranged by God that its outcomes agree exactly with those of the material universe.\nLeibniz\nand Priestley\nshare an optimism that God has chosen the chain of events benevolently; however, Priestley believed that the events were leading to a glorious millennial conclusion, whereas for Leibniz the entire chain of events was optimal in and of itself, as compared with other conceivable chains of events.\nViews on animals.\nPriestley rejected Ren\u00e9 Descartes's animal machine doctrine, opposing the notion that animals are mere automata without sensation or consciousness. Drawing on the associationist psychology of David Hartley, he held that mental functions arise from material processes and argued for strong continuity between human and animal minds. Priestley maintained that animals possess the same faculties as humans \"in kind, though not in degree\", attributing differences in behaviour to variations in brain structure rather than to the absence of soul or reason.\nIn \"Disquisitions Relating to Matter and Spirit\" (1777), Priestley criticised both Descartes and Ralph Cudworth for attributing too little to animal cognition. He rejected Cudworth's concept of an immaterial \"plastic nature\" guiding animal behaviour, instead insisting that the minds of both humans and animals operate entirely through physical laws. Priestley also speculated that animals might participate in a future life, particularly in light of their capacity for suffering, asserting that divine justice must ultimately apply to all creatures capable of suffering.\nFounder of British Unitarianism.\nWhen Priestley's friend Theophilus Lindsey decided to found a new Christian denomination that would not restrict its members' beliefs, Priestley and others hurried to his aid. On 17 April 1774, Lindsey held the first Unitarian service in Britain, at the newly formed Essex Street Chapel in London; he had even designed his own liturgy, of which many were critical. Priestley defended his friend in the pamphlet \"Letter to a Layman, on the Subject of the Rev. Mr. Lindsey's Proposal for a Reformed English Church\" (1774), claiming that only the form of worship had been altered, not its substance, and attacking those who followed religion as a fashion. Priestley attended Lindsey's church regularly in the 1770s and occasionally preached there. He continued to support institutionalised Unitarianism for the rest of his life, writing several \"Defenses\" of Unitarianism and encouraging the foundation of new Unitarian chapels throughout Britain and the United States.\nExperiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air.\nPriestley's years in Calne were the only ones in his life dominated by scientific investigations; they were also the most scientifically fruitful. His experiments were almost entirely confined to \"airs\", and out of this work emerged his most important scientific texts: the six volumes of \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air\" (1774\u201386). These experiments helped repudiate the last vestiges of the theory of four elements, which Priestley attempted to replace with his own variation of phlogiston theory. According to that 18th-century theory, the combustion or oxidation of a substance corresponded to the release of a material substance, \"phlogiston\".\nPriestley's work on \"airs\" is not easily classified. As historian of science Simon Schaffer writes, it \"has been seen as a branch of physics, or chemistry, or natural philosophy, or some highly idiosyncratic version of Priestley's own invention\". Furthermore, the volumes were both a scientific and a political enterprise for Priestley, in which he argues that science could destroy \"undue and usurped authority\" and that government has \"reason to tremble even at an air pump or an electrical machine\".\nVolume I of \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air\" outlined several discoveries: \"nitrous air\" (nitric oxide, NO); \"vapor of spirit of salt\", later called \"acid air\" or \"marine acid air\" (anhydrous hydrochloric acid, HCl); \"alkaline air\" (ammonia, NH3); \"diminished\" or \"dephlogisticated nitrous air\" (nitrous oxide, N2O); and, most famously, \"dephlogisticated air\" (oxygen, O2) as well as experimental findings that showed plants revitalised enclosed volumes of air, a discovery that would eventually lead to the discovery of photosynthesis by Jan Ingenhousz. Priestley also developed a \"nitrous air test\" to determine the \"goodness of air\". Using a pneumatic trough, he would mix nitrous air with a test sample, over water or mercury, and measure the decrease in volume\u2014the principle of eudiometry. After a small history of the study of airs, he explained his own experiments in an open and sincere style. As an early biographer writes, \"whatever he knows or thinks he tells: doubts, perplexities, blunders are set down with the most refreshing candour.\" Priestley also described his cheap and easy-to-assemble experimental apparatus; his colleagues therefore believed that they could easily reproduce his experiments. Faced with inconsistent experimental results, Priestley employed phlogiston theory. This led him to conclude that there were only three types of \"air\": \"fixed\", \"alkaline\", and \"acid\". Priestley dismissed the of his day. Instead, he focused on gases and \"changes in their sensible properties\", as had natural philosophers before him. He isolated carbon monoxide (CO), but apparently did not realise that it was a separate \"air\".\nDiscovery of oxygen.\nIn August 1774 he isolated an \"air\" that appeared to be completely new, but he did not have an opportunity to pursue the matter because he was about to tour Europe with Shelburne. While in Paris, Priestley replicated the experiment for others, including French chemist Antoine Lavoisier. After returning to Britain in January 1775, he continued his experiments and discovered \"vitriolic acid air\" (sulphur dioxide, SO2).\nIn March he wrote to several people regarding the new \"air\" that he had discovered in August. One of these letters was read aloud to the Royal Society, and a paper outlining the discovery, titled \"An Account of further Discoveries in Air\", was published in the Society's journal \"Philosophical Transactions\". Priestley called the new substance \"dephlogisticated air\", which he made in the famous experiment by focusing the sun's rays on a sample of mercuric oxide. He first tested it on mice, who surprised him by surviving quite a while entrapped with the air, and then on himself, writing that it was \"five or six times better than common air for the purpose of respiration, inflammation, and, I believe, every other use of common atmospherical air\". He had discovered oxygen gas (O2).\nPriestley assembled his oxygen paper and several others into a second volume of \"Experiments and Observations on Air\", published in 1776. He did not emphasise his discovery of \"dephlogisticated air\" (leaving it to Part III of the volume) but instead argued in the preface how important such discoveries were to rational religion. His paper narrated the discovery chronologically, relating the long delays between experiments and his initial puzzlements; thus, it is difficult to determine when exactly Priestley \"discovered\" oxygen. Such dating is significant as both Lavoisier and Swedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele have strong claims to the discovery of oxygen as well, Scheele having been the first to isolate the gas (although he published after Priestley) and Lavoisier having been the first to describe it as purified \"air itself entire without alteration\" (that is, the first to explain oxygen without phlogiston theory).\nIn his paper \"Observations on Respiration and the Use of the Blood\", Priestley was the first to suggest a connection between blood and air, although he did so using phlogiston theory. In typical Priestley fashion, he prefaced the paper with a history of the study of respiration. A year later, clearly influenced by Priestley, Lavoisier was also discussing respiration at the Acad\u00e9mie des sciences. Lavoisier's work began the long train of discovery that produced papers on oxygen respiration and culminated in the overthrow of phlogiston theory and the establishment of modern chemistry.\nAround 1779 Priestley and Shelburne \u2013 soon to be the 1st Marquess of Landsdowne \u2013 had a rupture, the precise reasons for which remain unclear. Shelburne blamed Priestley's health, while Priestley claimed Shelburne had no further use for him. Some contemporaries speculated that Priestley's outspokenness had hurt Shelburne's political career. Schofield argues that the most likely reason was Shelburne's recent marriage to Louisa Fitzpatrick\u2014apparently, she did not like the Priestleys. Although Priestley considered moving to America, he eventually accepted Birmingham New Meeting's offer to be their minister.\nBoth Priestley and Shelburne's families upheld their Unitarian faith for generations. In December 2013, it was reported that Sir Christopher Bullock\u2014a descendant of Shelburne's brother, Thomas Fitzmaurice (MP)\u2014had married his wife, Lady Bullock, n\u00e9e Barbara May Lupton, at London's Unitarian Essex Church in 1917. Barbara Lupton was the second cousin of Olive Middleton, n\u00e9e Lupton, the great-grandmother of Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge. In 1914, Olive and Noel Middleton had married at Leeds' Mill Hill Chapel, which Priestley, as its minister, had once guided towards Unitarianism.\nBirmingham (1780\u20131791).\nIn 1780 the Priestleys moved to Birmingham and spent a happy decade surrounded by old friends, until they were forced to flee in 1791 by religiously motivated mob violence in what became known as the Priestley Riots. Priestley accepted the ministerial position at New Meeting on the condition that he be required to preach and teach only on Sundays, so that he would have time for his writing and scientific experiments. As in Leeds, Priestley established classes for the youth of his parish and by 1781, he was teaching 150 students. Because Priestley's New Meeting salary was only 100 guineas, friends and patrons donated money and goods to help continue his investigations. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1782.\nChemical Revolution.\nMany of the friends that Priestley made in Birmingham were members of the Lunar Society, a group of manufacturers, inventors, and natural philosophers who assembled monthly to discuss their work. The core of the group included men such as the manufacturer Matthew Boulton, the chemist and geologist James Keir, the inventor and engineer James Watt, and the botanist, chemist, and geologist William Withering. Priestley was asked to join this unique society and contributed much to the work of its members. As a result of this stimulating intellectual environment, he published several important scientific papers, including \"Experiments relating to Phlogiston, and the seeming Conversion of Water into Air\" (1783). The first part attempts to refute Lavoisier's challenges to his work on oxygen; the second part describes how steam is \"converted\" into air. After several variations of the experiment, with different substances as fuel and several different collecting apparatuses (which produced different results), he concluded that air could travel through more substances than previously surmised, a conclusion \"contrary to all the known principles of hydrostatics\". This discovery, along with his earlier work on what would later be recognised as gaseous diffusion, would eventually lead John Dalton and Thomas Graham to formulate the kinetic theory of gases.\nIn 1777, Antoine Lavoisier had written \"M\u00e9moire sur la combustion en g\u00e9n\u00e9ral\", the first of what proved to be a series of attacks on phlogiston theory; it was against these attacks that Priestley responded in 1783. While Priestley accepted parts of Lavoisier's theory, he was unprepared to assent to the major revolutions Lavoisier proposed: the overthrow of phlogiston, a chemistry based conceptually on elements and compounds, and a new chemical nomenclature. Priestley's original experiments on \"dephlogisticated air\" (oxygen), combustion, and water provided Lavoisier with the data he needed to construct much of his system; yet Priestley never accepted Lavoisier's new theories and continued to defend phlogiston theory for the rest of his life. Lavoisier's system was based largely on the \"quantitative\" concept that mass is neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions (i.e., the conservation of mass). By contrast, Priestley preferred to observe \"qualitative\" changes in heat, colour, and particularly volume. His experiments tested \"airs\" for \"their solubility in water, their power of supporting or extinguishing flame, whether they were respirable, how they behaved with acid and alkaline air, and with nitric oxide and inflammable air, and lastly how they were affected by the electric spark.\"\nBy 1789, when Lavoisier published his \"Trait\u00e9 \u00c9l\u00e9mentaire de Chimie\" and founded the \"Annales de Chimie\", the new chemistry had come into its own. Priestley published several more scientific papers in Birmingham, the majority attempting to refute Lavoisier. Priestley and other Lunar Society members argued that the new French system was too expensive, too difficult to test, and unnecessarily complex. Priestley in particular rejected its \"establishment\" aura. In the end, Lavoisier's view prevailed: his new chemistry introduced many of the principles on which modern chemistry is founded.\nPriestley's refusal to accept Lavoisier's \"new chemistry\"\u2014such as the conservation of mass\u2014and his determination to adhere to a less satisfactory theory has perplexed many scholars. Schofield explains it thus: \"Priestley was never a chemist; in a modern, and even a Lavoisierian, sense, he was never a scientist. He was a natural philosopher, concerned with the economy of nature and obsessed with an idea of unity, in theology and in nature.\" Historian of science John McEvoy largely agrees, writing that Priestley's view of nature as coextensive with God and thus infinite, which encouraged him to focus on facts over hypotheses and theories, prompted him to reject Lavoisier's system. McEvoy argues that \"Priestley's isolated and lonely opposition to the oxygen theory was a measure of his passionate concern for the principles of intellectual freedom, epistemic equality and critical inquiry.\" Priestley himself claimed in the last volume of \"Experiments and Observations\" that his most valuable works were his theological ones because they were \"superior [in] dignity and importance\".\nDefender of English Dissenters and French revolutionaries.\nAlthough Priestley spent much of this time defending phlogiston theory from the \"new chemists\", most of what he published in Birmingham was theological. For example, in 1782, he published the fourth volume of his \"Institutes\", \"An History of the Corruptions of Christianity\", describing how he thought the teachings of the early Christian church had been \"corrupted\" or distorted. Schofield describes the work as \"derivative, disorganized, wordy, and repetitive, detailed, exhaustive, and devastatingly argued\". The text addresses issues ranging from the divinity of Christ to the proper form for the Lord's Supper. In 1786, Priestley published its provocatively titled sequel, \"An History of Early Opinions concerning Jesus Christ, compiled from Original Writers, proving that the Christian Church was at first Unitarian\". Thomas Jefferson later wrote of the profound effect that these two books had on him: \"I have read his Corruptions of Christianity, and Early Opinions of Jesus, over and over again; and I rest on them\u00a0... as the basis of my own faith. These writings have never been answered.\" \nAlthough a few readers such as Jefferson and other Rational Dissenters approved of the work, many others reviewed it harshly because of its extreme theological positions, particularly its rejection of the Trinity. In 1785, while Priestley was engaged in a pamphlet war over \"Corruptions\", he also published \"The Importance and Extent of Free Enquiry\", claiming that the Reformation had not really reformed the church. In words that would boil over into a national debate, he challenged his readers to enact change:\nLet us not, therefore, be discouraged, though, for the present, we should see no great number of churches professedly unitarian\u00a0... We are, as it were, laying gunpowder, grain by grain, under the old building of error and superstition, which a single spark may hereafter inflame, so as to produce an instantaneous explosion; in consequence of which that edifice, the erection of which has been the work of ages, may be overturned in a moment, and so effectually as that the same foundation can never be built upon again\u00a0...\nAlthough discouraged by friends from using such inflammatory language, Priestley refused to back down from his opinions in print and he included it, forever branding himself as \"Gunpowder Joe\". After the publication of this seeming call for revolution in the midst of the French Revolution, pamphleteers stepped up their attacks on Priestley and he and his church were even threatened with legal action.\nIn 1787, 1789, and 1790, Dissenters again tried to repeal the Test and Corporation Acts. Although they might have succeeded initially, by 1790, with the fears of revolution looming in Parliament, few were swayed by appeals to equal rights. Political cartoons, one of the most effective and popular media of the time, skewered the Dissenters and Priestley. In Parliament, William Pitt and Edmund Burke argued against the repeal, a betrayal that angered Priestley and his friends, who had expected the two men's support. Priestley wrote a series of \"Letters to William Pitt\" and \"Letters to Burke\".\nDissenters such as Priestley who supported the French Revolution came under increasing suspicion as scepticism regarding the revolution grew. In its propaganda against \"radicals\", Pitt's administration used the \"gunpowder\" statement to argue that Priestley and other Dissenters wanted to overthrow the government. Burke, in his famous \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" (1790), tied natural philosophers, and specifically Priestley, to the French Revolution, writing that radicals who supported science in Britain \"consider men in their experiments no more than they do mice in an air pump\". \nBurke also associated republican principles with alchemy and insubstantial air, mocking the scientific work done by both Priestley and French chemists. He made much in his later writings of the connections between \"Gunpowder Joe\", science, and Lavoisier\u2014who was improving gunpowder for use by French forces in the French Revolutionary Wars. Paradoxically, a secular statesman, Burke, argued against science and maintained that religion should be the basis of civil society, whereas a Dissenting minister, Priestley, argued that religion could not provide the basis for civil society and should be restricted to one's private life. Priestley was also a supporter of the campaign to abolish Britain's involvement in the Atlantic slave trade, publishing a sermon in 1788 in which he declared that nobody treated slaves \"with so much cruelty as the English\".\nBirmingham riots of 1791.\nThe animus that had been building against Dissenters and supporters of the American and French Revolutions exploded in July 1791. Priestley and several other Dissenters had arranged to have a celebratory dinner on Bastille Day, the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille, a provocative action in a country where many disapproved of the French Revolution and feared that it might spread to Britain. Amid fears of violence, Priestley was convinced by his friends not to attend. Rioters gathered outside the hotel during the banquet and attacked the attendees as they left. The rioters moved on to the New Meeting and Old Meeting churches, and burned both to the ground. Priestley and his wife fled from their home; although their son William and others stayed behind to protect their property, the mob overcame them and torched Priestley's house \"Fairhill\" at Sparkbrook, destroying his valuable laboratory and all of the family's belongings. Twenty-six other Dissenters' homes and three more churches were burned in the three-day riot. \nPriestley spent several days hiding with friends until he was able to travel safely to London. The carefully executed attacks of the \"mob\" and the farcical trials of only a handful of the \"leaders\" convinced many at the time\u2014and modern historians later\u2014that the attacks were planned and condoned by local Birmingham magistrates. When George III was eventually forced to send troops to the area, he said: \"I cannot but feel better pleased that Priestley is the sufferer for the doctrines he and his party have instilled, and that the people see them in their true light.\"\nHackney (1791\u20131794).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n... Lo! Priestley there, patriot, and saint, and sage,\nHim, full of years, from his loved native land\nStatesmen blood-stained and priests idolatrous\nBy dark lies maddening the blind multitude\nDrove with vain hate\u00a0...\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \"Religious Musings\" (1796) by Samuel Taylor Coleridge\nUnable to return to Birmingham, the Priestleys eventually settled in Lower Clapton, a district in Hackney, Middlesex where he gave a series of lectures on history and natural philosophy at the Dissenting academy, the New College at Hackney. Friends helped the couple rebuild their lives, contributing money, books, and laboratory equipment. Priestley tried to obtain restitution from the government for the destruction of his Birmingham property, but he was never fully reimbursed. He also published \"An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Riots in Birmingham\" (1791), which indicted the people of Birmingham for allowing the riots to occur and for \"violating the principles of English government\".\nThe couple's friends urged them to leave Britain and emigrate to either France or the new United States, even though Priestley had received an appointment to preach for the Gravel Pit Meeting congregation. Priestley was minister between 1793 and 1794 and the sermons he preached there, particularly the two Fast Sermons, reflect his growing millenarianism, his belief that the end of the world was fast approaching. After comparing Biblical prophecies to recent history, Priestley concluded that the French Revolution was a harbinger of the Second Coming of Christ. Priestley's works had always had a millennial cast, but after the beginning of the French Revolution, this strain increased. He wrote to a younger friend that while he himself would not see the Second Coming, his friend \"may probably live to see it\u00a0... It cannot, I think be more than twenty years [away].\"\nDaily life became more difficult for the family: Priestley was burned in effigy along with Thomas Paine; vicious political cartoons continued to be published about him; letters were sent to him from across the country, comparing him to the devil and Guy Fawkes; tradespeople feared the family's business; and Priestley's Royal Academy friends distanced themselves. As the penalties became harsher for those who spoke out against the government, Priestley examined options for removing himself and his family from England.\nJoseph Priestley's son William was presented to the French Assembly and granted letters of naturalisation on 8 June 1792. Priestley learned about it from the \"Morning Chronicle\". A decree of 26 August 1792 by the French National Assembly conferred French citizenship on Joseph Priestley and others who had \"served the cause of liberty\" by their writings. Priestley accepted French citizenship, considering it \"the greatest of honours\". In the French National Convention election on 5 September 1792, Joseph Priestley was elected to the French National Convention by at least two departments, (Orne and Rh\u00f4ne-et-Loire). He declined the honour, on the grounds that he was not fluent in French.\nAs relations between England and France worsened, a removal to France became impracticable. Following the declaration of war of February 1793, and the Aliens Bill of March 1793, which forbade correspondence or travel between England and France, William Priestley left France for America. Joseph Priestley's sons Harry and Joseph chose to leave England for America in August 1793. Finally Priestley himself followed with his wife, boarding the \"Sansom\" at Gravesend on 7 April 1794. Five weeks after Priestley left, William Pitt's administration began arresting radicals for seditious libel, resulting in the famous 1794 Treason Trials.\nPennsylvania (1794\u20131804).\nThe Priestleys arrived in New York City on 4 June 1794, where they were f\u00eated by various political factions vying for Priestley's endorsement. Priestley declined their entreaties, hoping to avoid political discord in his new country. Before travelling to a new home in the backwoods of Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, at Point township (now the Borough of Northumberland), Priestley and his wife lodged in Philadelphia, where he gave a series of sermons which led to the founding of the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia. Priestley turned down an opportunity to teach chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania.\nPriestley's son Joseph Priestley Jr. was a leading member of a consortium that had purchased of virgin woodland between the forks of Loyalsock Creek. This they intended to lease or sell in plots, with payment deferred to seven annual instalments, with interest. His brothers, William and Henry, bought a plot of woodland which they attempted to transform into a farm, later called \"Fairhill\", felling and uprooting trees, and making lime to sweeten the soil by building their own lime kilns. Henry Priestley died 11 December 1795, possibly of malaria which he may have contracted after landing at New York. Mary Priestley's health, already poor, deteriorated further; although William's wife, Margaret Foulke-Priestley, moved in with the couple to nurse Mary 24 hours a day, Mary Priestley died 17 September 1796. Priestley then moved in with his elder son, Joseph Jr., and his wife Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley. Thomas Cooper, whose son, Thomas Jr., was living with the Priestleys, was a frequent visitor.\nSince his arrival in America, Priestley had continued to defend his Christian Unitarian beliefs; now, falling increasingly under the influence of Thomas Cooper and Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley, he was unable to avoid becoming embroiled in political controversy. In 1798, when, in response to the Pinckney affair, a belligerent President Adams sought to enlarge the navy and mobilise the militia into what Priestley and Cooper saw as a 'standing army', Priestley published an anonymous newspaper article: \"Maxims of political arithmetic\", which attacked Adams, defended free trade, and advocated a form of Jeffersonian isolationism. In the same year, a small package, addressed vaguely: \"Dr Priestley in America,\" was seized by the Royal Navy on board a neutral Danish boat. It was found to contain three letters, one of which was signed by the radical printer John Hurford Stone. These intercepted letters were published in London, and copied in numerous papers in America. One of the letters was addressed to \"MBP\", with a note: \"I inclose a note for our friend MBP\u2014but, as ignorant of the name he bears at present among you, I must beg you to seal and address it.\" This gave the intercepted letters a tinge of intrigue. Fearful lest they be taken as evidence of him being a 'spy in the interest of France', Priestley sent a clumsy letter to numerous newspaper editors, in which he naively named \"MBP\" (Member of the British Parliament) as Mr. Benjamin Vaughan, who \"like me, thought it necessary to leave England, and for some time is said to have assumed a feigned name.\" William Cobbett, in his \"Porcupine's Gazette\", 20 August 1798, added that Priestley \"has told us who Mr MBP is, and has confirmed me in the opinion of their both being spies in the interest of France.\"\nJoseph Priestley Jr. left on a visit to England at Christmas 1798, not returning until August 1800. In his absence, his wife Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley and Thomas Cooper became increasing close, collaborating in numerous political essays. Priestley continued to be influenced by Elizabeth and Cooper, even helping hawk a seditious handbill Cooper had printed around Point township, and across the Susquehanna at Sunbury. In September 1799, William Cobbett printed extracts from this handbill, asserting that: \"Dr Priestley has taken great pains to circulate this address, has travelled through the country for the purpose, and is in fact the patron of it.\" He challenged Priestley to \"clear himself of the accusation\" or face prosecution.\" Barely a month later, in November and December 1799, Priestley stepped forward in his own defence, with his \"Letters to the inhabitants of Northumberland\".\nPriestley's son, William, now living in Philadelphia, was increasingly embarrassed by his father's actions. He confronted his father, expressing John and Benjamin Vaughan's unease, his own wife's concerns about Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley's dietary care, and his own concerns at the closeness of Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley and Thomas Cooper's relationship, and their adverse influence on Dr Priestley; but this only led to a further estrangement between William and his sister-in-law. When, a while later, Priestley's household suffered a bout of food poisoning, perhaps from milk sickness or a bacterial infection, Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley falsely accused William of having poisoned the family's flour. Although this allegation has attracted the attention of some modern historians, it is believed to be without foundation.\nPriestley continued the educational projects that had always been important to him, helping to establish the \"Northumberland Academy\" and donating his library to the fledgling institution. He exchanged letters regarding the proper structure of a university with Thomas Jefferson, who used this advice when founding the University of Virginia. Jefferson and Priestley became close, and when the latter had completed his \"General History of the Christian Church\", he dedicated it to President Jefferson, writing that \"it is now only that I can say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power, the government under which I live being for the first time truly favourable to me.\"\nPriestley tried to continue his scientific investigations in America with the support of the American Philosophical Society, to which he had been previously elected a member in 1785. He was hampered by lack of news from Europe; unaware of the latest scientific developments, Priestley was no longer on the forefront of discovery. Although the majority of his publications focused on defending phlogiston theory, he also did some original work on spontaneous generation and dreams. Despite Priestley's reduced scientific output, his presence stimulated American interest in chemistry.\nBy 1801, Priestley had become so ill that he could no longer write or experiment. He died on the morning of 6 February 1804, aged seventy and was buried at Riverview Cemetery in Northumberland, Pennsylvania.\nPriestley's epitaph reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nReturn unto thy rest, O my soul, for the\nLord hath dealt bountifully with thee.\nI will lay me down in peace and sleep till\nI awake in the morning of the resurrection.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nDegrees.\nPRIESTLEY, JOSEPH, LL.D.; University of Edinburgh. Preacher; librarian Earl of Shelburne 1773\u201380; pastor Unitarian congregation, Birmingham, 1780\u201391; Gravel Pit meeting house. Hackney, London, 1791\u201394; resident Northumberland, Penn, 1794\u20131804; discoverer nitric oxide 1772; oxygen, hydrochloric acid and ammonia, 1774; sulphur dioxide and silicon tetrafluoride, 1775; nitrous oxide; member Royal Society 1766; American Philosophical Society; b. Fieldhead, near Leeds, Yorkshire, England, 24 March 1733; d. Northumberland, Penn., 6 February 1804.\nLegacy.\nBy the time he died in 1804, Priestley had been made a member of every major scientific society in the Western world and he had discovered numerous substances. The 19th-century French naturalist George Cuvier, in his eulogy of Priestley, praised his discoveries while at the same time lamenting his refusal to abandon phlogiston theory, calling him \"the father of modern chemistry [who] never acknowledged his daughter\". Priestley published more than 150 works on topics ranging from political philosophy to education to theology to natural philosophy. He led and inspired British radicals during the 1790s, paved the way for utilitarianism, and helped found Unitarianism. A wide variety of philosophers, scientists, and poets became associationists as a result of his redaction of David Hartley's \"Observations on Man\", including Erasmus Darwin, Coleridge, William Wordsworth, John Stuart Mill, Alexander Bain, and Herbert Spencer. Immanuel Kant praised Priestley in his \"Critique of Pure Reason\" (1781), writing that he \"knew how to combine his paradoxical teaching with the interests of religion\". Indeed, it was Priestley's aim to \"put the most 'advanced' Enlightenment ideas into the service of a rationalized though heterodox Christianity, under the guidance of the basic principles of scientific method\".\nConsidering the extent of Priestley's influence, relatively little scholarship has been devoted to him. In the early 20th century, Priestley was most often described as a conservative and dogmatic scientist who was nevertheless a political and religious reformer. In a historiographic review essay, historian of science Simon Schaffer describes the two dominant portraits of Priestley: the first depicts him as \"a playful innocent\" who stumbled across his discoveries; the second portrays him as innocent as well as \"warped\" for not understanding their implications better. Assessing Priestley's works as a whole has been difficult for scholars because of his wide-ranging interests. His scientific discoveries have usually been divorced from his theological and metaphysical publications to make an analysis of his life and writings easier, but this approach has been challenged recently by scholars such as John McEvoy and Robert Schofield. Although early Priestley scholarship claimed that his theological and metaphysical works were \"distractions\" and \"obstacles\" to his scientific work, scholarship published in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s maintained that Priestley's works constituted a unified theory. However, as Schaffer explains, no convincing synthesis of his work has yet been expounded. More recently, in 2001, historian of science Dan Eshet has argued that efforts to create a \"synoptic view\" have resulted only in a rationalisation of the contradictions in Priestley's thought, because they have been \"organized around philosophical categories\" and have \"separate[d] the producers of scientific ideas from any social conflict\".\nPriestley has been remembered by the towns in which he served as a reforming educator and minister and by the scientific organisations he influenced. Two educational institutions have been named in his honour\u2014Priestley College in Warrington and Joseph Priestley College in Leeds (now part of Leeds City College)\u2014and an asteroid, 5577 Priestley, discovered in 1986 by Duncan Waldron. In Birstall, the Leeds City Square, and in Birmingham, he is memorialised through statues, and plaques commemorating him have been posted in Birmingham, Calne and Warrington. The main undergraduate chemistry laboratories at the University of Leeds were refurbished as part of a \u00a34m refurbishment plan in 2006 and renamed as the Priestley Laboratories in his honour as a prominent chemist from Leeds. In 2016 the University of Huddersfield renamed the building housing its Applied Sciences department as the Joseph Priestley Building, as part of an effort to rename all campus buildings after prominent local figures.\nSince 1952 Dickinson College, Pennsylvania, has presented the Priestley Award to a \"distinguished scientist whose work has contributed to the welfare of humanity\". Priestley's work is recognised by a National Historic Chemical Landmark designation for his discovery of oxygen, made on 1 August 1994, at the Priestley House in Northumberland, Penn., by the American Chemical Society. Similar recognition was made on 7 August 2000, at Bowood House in Wiltshire, England. The ACS also awards their highest honour, the Priestley Medal, in his name.\nSeveral of his descendants became physicians, including the noted American surgeon James Taggart Priestley II of the Mayo Clinic.\nArchives.\nPapers of Joseph Priestley are held at the Cadbury Research Library, University of Birmingham.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe most exhaustive biography of Priestley is Robert Schofield's two-volume work; several older one-volume treatments exist: those of Gibbs, Holt and Thorpe. Graham and Smith focus on Priestley's life in America and Uglow and Jackson both discuss Priestley's life in the context of other developments in science.\nSecondary materials\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary materials\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40177", "revid": "38854409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40177", "title": "550s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 559 BC\u2013550 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40178", "revid": "50354756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40178", "title": "7th millennium BC", "text": "Millennium between 7000 BC and 6001 BC\nThe 7th millennium BC spanned the years 7000 BC to 6001 BC (c. 9\u00a0ka to c. 8\u00a0ka). It is impossible to precisely date events around this millennium, and all dates mentioned here are estimates mostly based on geological and anthropological analysis. \nTowards the end of this millennium, the islands of Great Britain, and Ireland were severed from continental Europe by rising sea levels.\nCommunities.\nPopulation.\nNeolithic culture and technology were established in the Near East by 7000 BC and there is increasing evidence through the millennium of its spread or introduction to Europe and the Far East. In most of the world, however, including north and western Europe, people still lived in scattered Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer communities. The Mehrgarh Chalcolithic civilization began around 7000 BC. The world population is believed to have been stable and slowly increasing. It has been estimated that there were perhaps ten million people worldwide at the end of this millennium, growing to forty million by 5000 BC and 100 million by 1600 BC, an average growth rate of 0.027% p.a. from the beginning of the Neolithic to the Middle Bronze Age.\nEurope.\nNeolithic culture and technology reached modern Turkey and Greece c. 7000 BC; and Crete about the same time. The innovations, including the introduction of farming, spread from the Middle East through Turkey and Egypt. There is evidence of domesticated sheep or goats, pigs, and cattle, together with grains of cultivated bread wheat. The domestication of pigs in Eastern Europe is believed to have begun c. 6800 BC. The pigs may have descended from European wild boar or were probably introduced by farmers migrating from the Middle East. There is evidence, c. 6200 BC, of farmers from the Middle East reaching the Danube and moving into Romania and Serbia. Farming gradually spread westward and northward over the next four millennia, finally reaching Great Britain and Scandinavia c. 3000 BC to complete the transition of Europe from the Mesolithic to the Neolithic.\nNear East.\nThe Ubaid period (c. 6500\u20133800 BC) began in Mesopotamia, its name derived from Tell al-'Ubaid where the first significant excavation took place.\nBy the end of this millennium, Jericho had become a large agricultural settlement with some eight to ten acres within its walls. Kathleen Kenyon reckoned that it was home to about three thousand people. Construction was done using stone implements to mould clay into bricks. The main crop was wheat.\nThe Steppe.\n\"Sheep and goats were domesticated in South West Asia, probably in the region of eastern Anatolia and northern Syria between 8000 and 7500 BC, and were part of the agricultural package that was transmitted to Greece and the Balkans during the pioneering movements in the seventh millennium. From there the herding of domesticated sheep and goats was gradually taken up by foraging communities in the Pontic-Caspian steppe during the sixth and fifth millennia and became an essential part of the herder economy.\"\nGeologic and climatic change.\nThe Northgrippian.\nIn the geologic time scale, the \"Northgrippian\" succeeded the \"Greenlandian\" c. 6236 BC (to c. 2250 BC). The starting point for the Northgrippian is the so-called 8.2 kiloyear event, which was an abrupt climate change lasting some four centuries in which there was a marked decrease in global temperatures, possibly caused by an influx of glacial meltwater into the North Atlantic Ocean.\nCreation of Great Britain and Ireland.\nThe influx is believed to be one factor in the creation of Great Britain and Ireland as islands separate from the European continent. After the Last Ice Age ended c. 9700 BC, increasing sea levels gradually inundated Doggerland, a land bridge that linked Great Britain to Denmark and the Netherlands. This process began the formation of the North Sea and the English Channel. Further west, another low-lying land area was being flooded to form the Irish Sea and create Ireland. Sometime in the second half of the 7th millennium, the Storegga Slides occurred off Norway to generate a huge tsunami that completely overwhelmed Doggerland and its Mesolithic community of an estimated 5,000 hunter-gatherers. By about 6100 BC, Great Britain had become an island.\nAstronomy.\nJupiter occulted Saturn in 6857 BC. This is one of the rarest astronomical events in the Solar System, with the next occurrence on 17 February, 7541.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40179", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40179", "title": "6th millennium BC", "text": "Millennium between 6000 BC and 5001 BC\nThe 6th millennium BC spanned the years 6000 BC to 5001 BC (c. 8\u00a0ka to c. 7\u00a0ka). It is impossible to precisely date events that happened around the time of this millennium and all dates mentioned here are estimates mostly based on geological and anthropological analysis. The only exceptions are the felling dates for some construction timbers from Neolithic wells in Central Europe. \nThis millennium is reckoned to mark the end of the global deglaciation, which had followed the Last Glacial Maximum and caused sea levels to rise by some over a period of about 5,000 years. \nOverview.\nNeolithic culture and technology had spread from the Near East and into Eastern Europe by 6000 BC. Its development in the Far East grew apace and there is increasing evidence through the millennium of its presence in prehistoric Egypt and the Far East. In much of the world, however, including Northern and Western Europe, people still lived in scattered Palaeolithic/Mesolithic hunter-gatherer communities. The world population is believed to have increased sharply, possibly quadrupling, as a result of the Neolithic Revolution. It has been estimated that there were perhaps forty million people worldwide at the end of this millennium, growing to 100 million by the Middle Bronze Age c. 1600 BC.\nEurope.\nIt has been estimated that humans first settled in Malta c. 5900 BC, arriving across the Mediterranean from both Europe and North Africa.\nUse of pottery found near Tbilisi is evidence that grapes were being used for winemaking about 5980 BC.\nEvidence of cheese-making in Poland is dated c. 5500 BC.\nFour identified cultures starting around 5300 BC were the Dnieper-Donets, the Narva (eastern Baltic), the Erteb\u00f8lle (Denmark and northern Germany), and the Swifterbant (Low Countries). They were linked by a common pottery style that had spread westward from Asia and is sometimes called \"ceramic Mesolithic\", distinguishable by a point or knob base and flared rims.\nNorth Asia.\nAccording to Vasily Radlov, among the Paleo-Siberian inhabitants of Central Siberia and Southern Siberia were the Yeniseians, of whom the Kets are considered the last remainder. The Yeniseians were followed by the Uralic Samoyeds, who came from the northern Ural region. Proto-Uralic is the unattested reconstructed language ancestral to the modern Uralic language family. The hypothetical language is thought to have been originally spoken in a small area in about 7000\u20132000 BC, and expanded to give differentiated protolanguages. Some newer research has pushed the \"Proto-Uralic homeland\" east of the Ural Mountains into Western Siberia.\nPolities harbouring the Uralic peoples thrive. \nThe shores of all Siberian lakes, which filled the depressions during the Lacustrine period, abound in remains dating from the Neolithic age. Countless \"kurgans\" (tumuli), furnaces, and other archaeological artifacts bear witness to a dense population. Some of the earliest artifacts found in Central Asia derive from Siberia. Large scale constructions occur as early as 6000\u00a0BC. Prehistoric settlements in remote Siberia have revealed that 8,000 years ago construction of complex defensive structures, such as the Amnya complex, occurred with political warfare. They are the oldest fortresses in the world. Finding such ancient fortifications challenges previous understanding of early human societies. It suggests that agriculture was not the only driver for people to start building permanent settlements.\nLarge scale backwards migrations occur with Native American populations migrating back into Asia, settling in areas such as the Altai Mountains several times over a span of thousands of years, earliest dated to 5500\u00a0BC. This is potentially linked to the environmental changes at the time (see Mount Mazama), which remained preserved in the oral history of the North American cultures to this day. \nNa-Den\u00e9-speaking peoples finally entered North America starting around \u00a0BCE, reaching the Pacific Northwest by \u00a0BCE, and from there migrating along the Pacific Coast and into the interior. Linguists, anthropologists, and archeologists believe their ancestors constituted a separate migration into North America, later than the first Paleo-Indians. They migrated into Alaska and northern Canada, south along the Pacific Coast, into the interior of Canada, and south to the Great Plains and the American Southwest.\nIndo-European cultures, descended from Ancient North Eurasians long ago, continue to expand Westwards from Central Russia. It provides linguistic evidence for the geographical location of these languages around that time, agreeing with archeological evidence that Indo-European speakers were present in the Pontic-Caspian steppes by around 4500\u00a0BCE (the Kurgan hypothesis) and that Uralic speakers may have been established in the Pit-Comb Ware culture to their north in the fifth millennium BCE.\nSuch words as those for \"hundred\", \"pig\", and \"king\" have something in common: they represent \"cultural vocabulary\" as opposed to \"basic vocabulary\". They are likely to have been acquired along with a novel number system and the domestic pig from Indo-Europeans in the south. Similarly, the Indo-Europeans themselves had acquired such words and cultural items from peoples and cultures to their south or west, including possibly their words for \"ox\", \"*g\u02b7ou-\" (compare English \"cow\") and \"grain\", \"*b\u02b0ars-\" (compare English \"barley\"). In contrast, basic vocabulary \u2013 words such as \"me\", \"hand\", \"water\", and \"be\" \u2013 is much less readily borrowed between languages. If Indo-European and Uralic are genetically related, there should be agreements regarding basic vocabulary, with more agreements if they are closely related, fewer if they are less closely related.\nIndo-European cultures in Central Asia flourish, these cultures are the: Middle Volga culture (followed by the Samara culture at the turn of the millennium), the contemporary Dnieper\u2013Donets culture. From around 5200\u00a0BC, the patriarchal Dnieper-Donets culture leaves the Mesolithic hunter-gatherer lifestyle and begins keeping cattle, sheep and goats. Other domestic animals kept included pigs, horses and dogs.\nSouth Asia.\nJunglefowl were domesticated around c. 5500 BC in Southeast Asia.\nEast Asia.\nThe Zhaobaogou culture in China began c. 5400 BC. It was in the north-eastern part of the country, primarily in the Luan River valley in Inner Mongolia and northern Hebei.\nThe Yangshao culture () was a Neolithic culture that existed extensively along the middle reaches of the Yellow River in China from around the end of this millennium, from 5000\u00a0BC to 3000\u00a0BC. Excavations found that children were buried in painted pottery jars. Pottery style emerging from the Yangshao culture spread westward to the Majiayao culture, and then further to Xinjiang and Central Asia along a proto-Silk Road.\nOceania.\nIndigenous Australians in what is now southwestern Victoria were farming and smoking eels as a food source and trade good using stone weirs, canals, and woven traps around 6000\u00a0BC.\nEnvironmental changes.\nThe early Holocene sea level rise (EHSLR), which began c. 10,000\u00a0BC, tailed off during the 6th millennium BC. Global water levels had risen by about 60 metres due to deglaciation of ice masses since the end of the Last Ice Age. Accelerated rises in sea level rise, called meltwater pulses, occurred three times during the EHSLR. The last one, Meltwater Pulse 1C, which peaked c. 6000\u00a0BC, produced a rise of 6.5 metres in only 140 years. It is believed that the cause was a major ice sheet collapse in Antarctica.\nApproximately 8,000 years ago (c. 6000\u00a0BC), a massive volcanic landslide off Mount Etna, Sicily, caused a megatsunami that devastated the eastern Mediterranean coastline on the continents of Asia, Africa and Europe.\nIn South America, a large eruption occurred at Cueros de Purulla c. 5870\u00a0BC, forming a buoyant cloud and depositing the Cerro Paranilla Ash in the Calchaqu\u00ed Valleys. A cataclysmic volcanic eruption occurred c. 5700 BC in Oregon when high Mount Mazama created Crater Lake as the resulting caldera filled with water. Another major eruption occurred c. 5550\u00a0BC on Mount Takahe, Antarctica, possibly creating an ozone hole in the region.\nThe carbon-14 content in tree rings created c. 5480\u00a0BC indicates an abnormal level of solar activity.\nAstronomy and calendars.\nThe epoch of the Byzantine calendar, used in the Byzantine Empire and many Christian Orthodox countries, is equivalent to 1 September 5509 BC on the Julian proleptic calendar (see image).\nThe 6th millennium BC falls entirely within the Astrological Age of Gemini (c. 6450 BC to c. 4300 BC) according to some astrologers.\nAccording to Gregory of Tours God created the world 5597 years prior to the death of Martin of Tours, which would be 5200 BC. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40180", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40180", "title": "Bessemer process", "text": "Steel production method\nThe Bessemer process was the first inexpensive industrial process for the mass production of steel from molten pig iron before the development of the open hearth furnace. The key principle is removal of impurities and undesired elements, primarily excess carbon contained in the pig iron by oxidation with air being blown through the molten iron. Oxidation of the excess carbon also raises the temperature of the iron mass and keeps it molten.\nVirtually all the pig iron carbon is removed by the converter and so carbon must be added at the end of the process to create steel, 0.25% carbon content is a typical value for low carbon steel which is used in construction and other low-stress applications. \nThe modern process is named after its inventor, the Englishman Henry Bessemer, who took out a patent on the process in 1856. The process was said to be independently discovered in 1851 by the American inventor William Kelly though the claim is controversial.\nThe process using a basic refractory lining is known as the \"basic Bessemer process\" or Gilchrist\u2013Thomas process after the English discoverers Percy Gilchrist and Sidney Gilchrist Thomas.\nHistory.\nPatent.\nIn the early to mid-1850s, the American inventor William Kelly experimented with a method similar to the Bessemer process. Wagner\nwrites that Kelly may have been inspired by techniques introduced by Chinese ironworkers hired by Kelly in 1854. The claim that both Kelly and Bessemer invented the same process remains controversial. When Bessemer's patent for the process was reported by \"Scientific American\", Kelly responded by writing a letter to the magazine. In the letter, Kelly states that he had previously experimented with the process and claimed that Bessemer knew of Kelly's discovery. He wrote that \"I have reason to believe my discovery was known in England three or four years ago, as a number of English puddlers visited this place to see my new process. Several of them have since returned to England and may have spoken of my invention there.\" It is suggested Kelly's process was less developed and less successful than Bessemer's process.\nSir Henry Bessemer described the origin of his invention in his autobiography written in 1890. During the outbreak of the Crimean War, many English industrialists and inventors became interested in military technology. According to Bessemer, his invention was inspired by a conversation with Napoleon III in 1854 pertaining to the steel required for better artillery. Bessemer claimed that it \"was the spark which kindled one of the greatest revolutions that the present century had to record, for during my solitary ride in a cab that night from Vincennes to Paris, I made up my mind to try what I could to improve the quality of iron in the manufacture of guns.\" At the time, steel was used to make only small items like cutlery and tools, but was too expensive for cannons. Starting in January 1855, he began working on a way to produce steel in the massive quantities required for artillery and by October he filed his first patent related to the Bessemer process. He patented the method a year later in 1856. William Kelly was awarded priority patent in 1857.\nBessemer licensed the patent for his process to four ironmasters, for a total of \u00a327,000, but the licensees failed to produce the quality of steel he had promised\u2014it was \"rotten hot and rotten cold\", according to his friend, William Clay\u2014and he later bought them back for \u00a332,500. His plan had been to offer the licenses to one company in each of several geographic areas, at a royalty price per ton that included a lower rate on a proportion of their output in order to encourage production, but not so large a proportion that they might decide to reduce their selling prices. By this method he hoped to cause the new process to gain in standing and market share.\nHe realised that the technical problem was due to impurities in the iron and concluded that the solution lay in knowing when to turn off the flow of air in his process so that the impurities were burned off but just the right amount of carbon remained. However, despite spending tens of thousands of pounds on experiments, he could not find the answer. Certain grades of steel are sensitive to the 78% nitrogen which was part of the air blast passing through the steel.\nThe solution was first discovered by English metallurgist Robert Forester Mushet, who had carried out thousands of experiments in the Forest of Dean. His method was to first burn off, as far as possible, \"all\" the impurities and carbon, then reintroduce carbon and manganese by adding an exact amount of spiegeleisen, an alloy of iron and manganese with trace amounts of carbon and silicon. This had the effect of improving the quality of the finished product, increasing its malleability\u2014its ability to withstand rolling and forging at high temperatures and making it more suitable for a vast array of uses. Mushet's patent ultimately lapsed due to Mushet's inability to pay the patent fees and was acquired by Bessemer. Bessemer earned over 5 million dollars in royalties from the patents.\nThe first company to license the process was the Manchester firm of W &amp; J Galloway, and they did so before Bessemer announced it at Cheltenham in 1856. They are not included in his list of the four to whom he refunded the license fees. However, they subsequently rescinded their license in 1858 in return for the opportunity to invest in a partnership with Bessemer and others. This partnership began to manufacture steel in Sheffield from 1858, initially using imported charcoal pig iron from Sweden. This was the first commercial production.\nA 20% share in the Bessemer patent was also purchased for use in Sweden and Norway by Swedish trader and Consul G\u00f6ran Fredrik G\u00f6ransson during a visit to London in 1857. During the first half of 1858, G\u00f6ransson, together with a small group of engineers, experimented with the Bessemer process at Edsken near Hofors, Sweden before he finally succeeded. Later in 1858 he again met with Henry Bessemer in London, managed to convince him of his success with the process, and negotiated the right to sell his steel in England. Production continued in Edsken, but it was far too small for the industrial-scale production needed. In 1862 G\u00f6ransson built a new factory for his H\u00f6gbo Iron and Steel Works company on the shore of Lake Storsj\u00f6n, where the town of Sandviken was founded. The company was renamed Sandviken's Ironworks, continued to grow and eventually became Sandvik in the 1970s.\nIndustrial revolution.\nAlexander Lyman Holley contributed significantly to the success of Bessemer steel in the United States. His \"A Treatise on Ordnance and Armor\" is an important work on contemporary weapons manufacturing and steel-making practices. In 1862, he visited Bessemer's Sheffield works, and became interested in licensing the process for use in the US. Upon returning to the US, Holley met with two iron producers from Troy, New York, John F. Winslow and John Augustus Griswold, who asked him to return to the United Kingdom and negotiate with the Bank of England on their behalf. Holley secured a license for Griswold and Winslow to use Bessemer's patented processes and returned to the United States in late 1863.\nThe trio began setting up a mill in Troy, New York in 1865. The factory contained a number of Holley's innovations that greatly improved productivity over Bessemer's factory in Sheffield, and the owners gave a successful public exhibition in 1867. The Troy factory attracted the attention of the Pennsylvania Railroad, which wanted to use the new process to manufacture steel rail. It funded Holley's second mill as part of its Pennsylvania Steel subsidiary. Between 1866 and 1877, the partners were able to license a total of 11 Bessemer steel mills.\nOne of the investors they attracted was Andrew Carnegie, who saw great promise in the new steel technology after a visit to Bessemer in 1872, and saw it as a useful adjunct to his existing businesses, the Keystone Bridge Company and the Union Iron Works. Holley built the new steel mill for Carnegie, and continued to improve and refine the process. The new mill, known as the Edgar Thomson Steel Works, opened in 1875, and started the growth of the United States as a major world steel producer. Using the Bessemer process, Carnegie Steel was able to reduce the costs of steel railroad rails from $100 per ton to $50 per ton between 1873 and 1875. The price of steel continued to fall until Carnegie was selling rails for $18 per ton by the 1890s. Prior to the opening of Carnegie's Thomson Works, steel output in the United States totaled around 157,000 tons per year. By 1910, American companies were producing 26 million tons of steel annually.\nWilliam Walker Scranton, manager and owner of the Lackawanna Iron &amp; Coal Company in Scranton, Pennsylvania, had also investigated the process in Europe. He built a mill in 1876 using the Bessemer process for steel rails and quadrupled his production.\nBessemer steel was used in the United States primarily for railroad rails. During the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge, a major dispute arose over whether crucible steel should be used instead of the cheaper Bessemer steel. In 1877, Abram Hewitt wrote a letter urging against the use of Bessemer steel. Bids had been submitted for both crucible steel and Bessemer steel; John A. Roebling's Sons submitted the lowest bid for Bessemer steel, but at Hewitt's direction, the contract was awarded to J. Lloyd Haigh Co.\nTechnical details.\nUsing the Bessemer process, it took between 10 and 20 minutes to convert three to five tons of iron into steel\u00a0\u2013 it would previously take at least a full day of heating, stirring and reheating to achieve this.\nOxidation.\nBlowing air through the molten pig iron introduces oxygen into the melt. This oxidizes impurities such as silicon, manganese, and carbon. These oxides either escape as gas or form a solid slag. The refractory lining of the converter plays a role in the conversion \u2014 clay linings may be used when little phosphorus is present in the raw material. Bessemer himself used ganister sandstone\u2013in the acid Bessemer process. Given high phosphorus content, dolomite or magnesite linings are used in the basic Bessemer limestone process. Materials such as spiegeleisen (a ferromanganese alloy), can then be added to the molten steel to establish specific properties.\nProcess.\nWhen the required steel forms, it is poured into ladles and then transferred into moulds while the (lighter) slag is left behind. The conversion process, called the \"blow\", initially took approximately 20 minutes. During this interval, the progress of the oxidation of the impurities is judged by the appearance of the flame in the mouth of the converter. The human eye was later replaced by photoelectric methods of monitoring the flame, increasing ultimate precision. After the blow, carbon is readded to the liquid metal and other alloying materials are added.\nA Bessemer converter could treat a \"heat\" (batch of hot metal) of 5 to 30 tons at a time. They were usually operated in pairs: one was blown while the other was filled or tapped.\n\"Basic\" vs. acidic Bessemer process.\nIndustrial chemist Sidney Gilchrist Thomas tackled the problem of phosphorus in iron, which resulted in the production of low grade steel. Believing that he had discovered a solution, he contacted his cousin, Percy Gilchrist, who was a chemist at the Blaenavon Ironworks. The manager there, Edward Martin, offered Thomas test equipment and helped him draw up a patent issued in May 1878. Thomas's invention consisted of using dolomite or limestone linings for the Bessemer converter rather than clay, and it became known as the 'basic' Bessemer rather than the 'acid' Bessemer process. An additional advantage was that the processes formed more slag in the converter, and this could be recovered and used profitably as fertilizer.\nImportance.\nIn 1898, \"Scientific American\" published an 1890 speech by politician and ironmaking industrialist Abram S. Hewitt called \"Bessemer Steel and its Effect on the World\" explaining the significant economic effects of the increased supply in cheap steel. They noted that the expansion of railroads into previously sparsely inhabited regions of the country had led to settlement in those regions, and had made the trade of certain goods profitable, which had previously been too costly to transport.\nThe Bessemer process revolutionized steel manufacture by decreasing its cost, from \u00a340 per long ton to \u00a36\u20137 per long ton, along with greatly increasing the scale and speed of production of this vital raw material. The process also decreased the labor requirements for steel-making. Before it was introduced, steel was far too expensive to make bridges or the framework for buildings and thus wrought iron had been used throughout the Industrial Revolution. After the introduction of the Bessemer process, steel and wrought iron became similarly priced, and some users, primarily railroads, turned to steel. Quality problems, such as brittleness caused by nitrogen in the blowing air, prevented Bessemer steel from being used for many structural applications. Open-hearth steel was suitable for structural applications.\nSteel greatly improved the productivity of railroads. Steel rails lasted ten times longer than iron rails. Steel rails could carry heavier locomotives, which could pull longer trains. Steel rail cars were longer and were able to increase the freight to car weight from 1:1 to 2:1.\nObsolescence.\nAs early as 1895 in the UK it was being noted that the heyday of the Bessemer process was over and that the open hearth method predominated. The \"Iron and Coal Trades Review\" said that it was \"in a semi-moribund condition. Year after year, it has not only ceased to make progress, but it has absolutely declined.\" It has been suggested, both at that time and more recently, that the cause of this was the lack of trained personnel and investment in technology rather than anything intrinsic to the process itself. For example, one of the major causes of the decline of the giant ironmaking company Bolckow Vaughan of Middlesbrough was its failure to upgrade its technology. The basic process, the Thomas-Gilchrist process, remained in use longer, especially in Continental Europe, where iron ores were of high phosphorus content and the open-hearth process was not able to remove all phosphorus; almost all inexpensive construction steel in Germany was produced with this method in the 1950s and 1960s. It was eventually superseded by basic oxygen steelmaking.\nIn the U.S., commercial steel production using this method stopped in 1968. It was replaced by processes such as the basic oxygen (Linz\u2013Donawitz) process, which offered better control of final chemistry. The Bessemer process was so fast (10\u201320 minutes for a heat) that it allowed little time for chemical analysis or adjustment of the alloying elements in the steel. Bessemer converters did not remove phosphorus efficiently from the molten steel; as low-phosphorus ores became more expensive, conversion costs increased. The process permitted only limited amount of scrap steel to be charged, further increasing costs, especially when scrap was inexpensive. Use of electric arc furnace technology competed favourably with the Bessemer process resulting in its obsolescence.\nBasic oxygen steelmaking is essentially an improved version of the Bessemer process (decarburization by blowing oxygen as gas into the heat rather than burning the excess carbon away by adding oxygen carrying substances into the heat). The advantages of pure oxygen blast over air blast were known to Henry Bessemer, but 19th-century technology was not advanced enough to allow for the production of the large quantities of pure oxygen necessary to make it economical.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40181", "revid": "34387623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40181", "title": "9th millennium BC", "text": "Millennium between 9000 BC and 8001 BC\nThe 9th millennium BC spanned the years 9000 BC to 8001 BC (11 to 10 thousand years ago). In chronological terms, it is the first full millennium of the current Holocene epoch that is generally reckoned to have begun by 9700 BC (11.7 thousand years ago). It is impossible to precisely date events that happened around the time of this millennium and all dates mentioned here are estimates mostly based on geological and anthropological analysis, or by radiometric dating.\nIn the Near East, especially in the Fertile Crescent, the transitory Epipalaeolithic age was gradually superseded by the Neolithic with evidence of agriculture across the Levant to the Zagros Mountains in modern-day Iran. The key characteristic of the Neolithic is agricultural settlement, albeit with wooden and stone tools and weapons still in use. It is believed that agriculture had begun in China by the end of the millennium. Elsewhere, especially in Europe, the Palaeolithic continued.\nGlobal environment.\nIn the geologic time scale, the first stratigraphic stage of the Holocene is the \"Greenlandian\" from about 9700 BC to the fixed date 6236 BC and so including the whole of the 9th millennium. The starting point for the Greenlandian has been correlated with the end of the Younger Dryas and a climate shift from near-glacial to interglacial, causing glaciers to retreat and sea levels to rise.\nIt has been estimated that the Bering Land Bridge was inundated around 8500 BC by the rising sea levels so that North America and Asia were again separated by the waters of the Bering Strait and the Chukchi Sea. It is generally believed that there was a migration across the land bridge from eastern Siberia into North America during the Last Glacial Maximum. Sometime after the American glaciers melted, these peoples expanded southward into the wider continent to become the Native Americans. After the land bridge was inundated by the rising sea water, no further migration was possible from Siberia.\nDuring the millennium, there were three known volcanic eruptions which registered magnitude 5 or more on the volcanic explosivity index (VEI). These were at Ulleungdo (\"aka\" Ulreung), an island east of the Korean Peninsula about 8750 BC; Gr\u00edmsv\u00f6tn, north east Iceland about 8230 BC; and Taupo Caldera, New Zealand about 8130 BC. The biggest eruption was at Gr\u00edmsv\u00f6tn, VEI 6, producing some of tephra.\nPopulation and communities.\nAs the Neolithic began in the Fertile Crescent, most people around the world still lived in scattered hunter-gatherer communities which remained firmly in the Palaeolithic. The world population was probably stable and slowly increasing. It has been estimated that there were some five million people in 10,000 BC growing to forty million by 5000 BC and 100 million by 1600 BC. That is an average growth rate of 0.027% per annum from the beginning of the Neolithic to the Middle Bronze Age.\nNear East.\nFrom the beginning of the 9th millennium, G\u00f6bekli Tepe was inhabited after possibly being first occupied during the previous millennium. It is a carved stone hilltop sanctuary in south-eastern Anatolia which includes the world's oldest known megaliths. As with G\u00f6bekli Tepe, the site at Tell Qaramel, in north-west Syria, was inhabited from 9000 BC following possible first occupation in the previous millennium. In the same region, the settlement at Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori has been dated about 8500 BC. Elsewhere in the Fertile Crescent, there is evidence of settlements at Mureybet and Ganj Dareh from around 8500 BC. Towards the end of the millennium, by 8200 BC, the site of A\u015f\u0131kl\u0131 H\u00f6y\u00fck in central Anatolia was first occupied (until around 7400 BC).\nEurope.\nIt is believed that European sites settled before 8500 were still Palaeolithic, or at best Mesolithic, communities. At Star Carr in North Yorkshire, the results of radiocarbon analysis in 2018 indicate that occupation first commenced between 9335 and 9275\u00a0BC, lasting for a period of around 800 years until 8525\u20138440\u00a0BC, although such occupations may have been episodic in nature, varying in intensity between different periods. Archaeological excavations at Cramond in prehistoric Scotland have uncovered evidence of habitation dating to around 8500 BC. Another settlement may have been established at \u00c6r\u00f8 in Denmark.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the J\u014dmon culture had probably been established by small communities on the Pacific side of Honshu by this time. The word means \"cord-pattern\", referring to the distinctive pottery of the period. As there was no potter's wheel, the clay was prepared in the shape of a rope and manually coiled upwards to create a vessel that was baked in an open fire. At first, the vessels were simple bowls and jars but later became artistic. Proposed dates for the start of the Jomon are wildly variable, ranging from the Ice Ages to as late as c. 4500. It is generally accepted that the period ended c. 300 BC when it was superseded by the Yayoi culture.\nAmericas.\nIn North America, the Paleo-Indian Clovis culture is believed to have ended around 8800 BC having fathered numerous local variants. One of these was the Folsom complex which was centred in the Great Plains and is dated from c. 9000 to c. 8000 BC. The people were hunter-gatherers who hunted the now-extinct \"Bison antiquus\".\nIn Patagonia, the Fell's Tradition prevailed through the millennium at Cueva Fell. Another Paleo-Indian site in the region is the Las Cuevas Canyon near Los Toldos (Santa Cruz), where rock art has been found.\nIn Central America, remains of three prehistoric human fossils have been discovered since 2006 in the cave system at Chan Hol in Quintana Roo, Mexico. All have been dated to around the 9th millennium.\nEarly warfare.\nEvidence of a precursor to warfare has been found at Nataruk in Kenya. Remains of at least 27 individuals have been found and dated to 7550\u20138550 BC. The condition of the skeletons indicates that a massacre took place as hands were bound and skulls were smashed by blunt force. Communities in Africa at the time would have been nomadic hunter-gatherers.\nRise of agriculture.\nThe Natufian culture continued to prevail in the Levantine and upper Mesopotamian areas of the Fertile Crescent with their most significant site at Jericho (Tell es-Sultan) in the Jordan Valley. The Natufian people had been sedentary or semi-sedentary through the 10th millennium, even before the introduction of agriculture.\nBy about 8500 BC, the Natufians were harvesting wild wheat with flint-edged sickles. It was around that time, or soon afterwards, that the wild wheat crossed with a natural goat grass to form emmer, the seeds of which could scatter in the wind to spread naturally. Later, emmer crossed with another goat grass to form the even larger hybrid that is bread wheat. The Natufians learned how to harvest the new wheat, grind it into flour and make bread. The early bread was unleavened, with the dough allowed to dry on hot stones. Writing in 1973, Jacob Bronowski argued that the combination of wheat and water at Jericho enabled man to begin civilisation. Jericho, having a natural spring, was an oasis on the edge of the Syrian Desert and, although similar developments occurred elsewhere, Bronowski called Jericho \"a microcosm of history\".\nThe earliest known cultivation of lentils was at Mureybet in Syria, where wheat and barley were also grown. Lentils were later (by 7500 BC) found at Hacilar and \u00c7ay\u00f6n\u00fc in Turkey. Ganj Dareh, in Iranian Kurdistan, has been cited as the earliest settlement to domesticate animals, specifically the goat, towards the end of the millennium.\nAgriculture may have begun in the Far East before 8300 BC, the estimated date for the earliest cultivation of common millet. Proso millet (\"Panicum miliaceum\") and foxtail millet (\"Setaria italica\") were important crops beginning in the Early Neolithic of China. Some of the earliest evidence of millet cultivation in China was found at Cishan (north), where proso millet husk phytoliths and biomolecular components have been identified around 10,300\u20138,700 years ago in storage pits along with remains of pit-houses, pottery, and stone tools related to millet cultivation.\nPottery and dating systems.\nBeginning with China c. 18,000 BC, pottery is believed to have been invented independently in various places \u2013 for example, at Ounjougou in central Mali (dated c. 9400 BC). These early innovations were probably created accidentally by fires lit on clay soil. The potter's wheel had not yet been invented and, where pottery as such was made, it was still hand-built, often by means of coiling, and pit fired.\nThe first chronological pottery system was the Early, Middle and Late Minoan framework devised in the early 20th century by Sir Arthur Evans for his Bronze Age findings at Knossos for the period c. 2800 BC to c. 1050 BC. Dame Kathleen Kenyon was the principal archaeologist at Tell es-Sultan (ancient Jericho) and she discovered that there was no pottery there. The vessels she found were made from stone and she reasonably surmised that others made from wood or vegetable fibres would have long since decayed. Using Evans' system as a benchmark, Kenyon divided the Near East Neolithic into phases called Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), from c. 10,000 BC to c. 8800 BC; Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB), from c. 8800 BC to c. 6500 BC; and then Pottery Neolithic (PN), which had varied start-points from c. 6500 BC until the beginnings of the Bronze Age towards the end of the 4th millennium. At the beginning of the 9th millennium, the Natufian culture co-existed with the PPNA which prevailed in the Levantine and upper Mesopotamian areas of the Fertile Crescent.\nMetallurgy.\nCopper (Cu, 29) was originally found in raw surface lumps and first used in the Middle East. It was later extracted from ores such as malachite. A copper pendant from Mesopotamia is dated 8700 BC. The use of copper and, from the eighth millennium, lead (Pb, 82) was gradual \u2013 it could not become widespread until systematic processes had been developed for extraction of the metals from their ores; this did not happen until about the sixth millennium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40182", "revid": "38867660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40182", "title": "Photomontage", "text": "Composite image created from two or more photographs\nPhotomontage is the process and the result of making a composite photograph by cutting, gluing, rearranging and overlapping two or more photographs into a new image. Sometimes the resulting composite image is photographed so that the final image may appear as a seamless physical print. A similar method, although one that does not use film, is realized today through image-editing software. This latter technique is referred to by professionals as \"compositing\", and in casual usage is often called \"photoshopping\" (from the name of the popular software system). A composite of related photographs to extend a view of a single scene or subject would not be labeled as a montage, but instead a stitched image or a digital image mosaic.\nHistory.\nAuthor Oliver Grau in his book, \"Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion\", notes that the creation of an artificial immersive virtual reality, arising as a result of technical exploitation of new inventions, is a long-standing human practice throughout the ages. Such environments as dioramas were made of composited images.\n19th century.\nThe first and most famous mid-Victorian photomontage (then called combination printing) was \"The Two Ways of Life\" (1857) by Oscar Rejlander, followed shortly thereafter by the images of photographer Henry Peach Robinson such as \"Fading Away\" (1858). These works actively set out to challenge the then-dominant painting and theatrical tableau vivants.\nIn late Victorian North America, William Notman of Montreal used photomontage to commemorate large social events which could not otherwise be captured on film. Fantasy photomontage postcards were also popular in the late Victorian era and Edwardian era. One of the preeminent producers in this period was the Bamforth &amp; Co Ltd, of Holmfirth, West Yorkshire, and New York. The high point of its popularity came, however, during World War I, when photographers in France, Great Britain, Germany, Austria, and Hungary produced a profusion of postcards showing soldiers on one plane and lovers, wives, children, families, or parents on another. Many of the early examples of fine-art photomontage consist of photographed elements superimposed on watercolours, a combination returned to by (e.g.) George Grosz in about 1915.\n20th century.\nHeartfield, Grosz, and Dada.\nIn 1916, John Heartfield and George Grosz experimented with pasting pictures together, a form of art later named \"Photomontage.\u201d\nGeorge Grosz wrote, \"When John Heartfield and I invented photomontage in my South End studio at five o\u2019clock on a May morning in 1916, neither of us had any inkling of its great possibilities, nor of the thorny yet successful road it was to take. As so often happens in life, we had stumbled across a vein of gold without knowing it.\"\nJohn Heartfield and George Grosz were members of Berlin Club Dada (1916\u20131920). The German Dadists were instrumental in making montage into a modern art-form. The term \"photomontage\u201d became widely known at the end of World War I, around 1918 or 1919.[5]\nHeartfield used photomontage extensively in his innovative book dust jackets for the Berlin publishing house Malik-Verlag. He revolutionized the look of these book covers. Heartfield was the first to use photomontage to tell a \u201cstory\u201d from the front cover of the book to the back cover. He also employed groundbreaking typography to enhance the effect.\nFrom 1930 to 1938, John Heartfield used photomontage to create 240 \u201cPhotomontages of The Nazi Period\u201d to use art as a weapon against fascism and The Third Reich. The photomontages appeared on street covers all over Berlin on the cover of the widely circulated AIZ magazine published by Willi M\u00fcnzenberg, Heartfield lived in Berlin until April, 1933, when he escaped to Czechoslovakia after he was targeted for assassination by the SS. Continuing to produce anti-fascist art in Czechoslovakia until 1938, Heartfield's political photomontages earned him the number five position on the Gestapo's Most Wanted List.\nHannah H\u00f6ch began experimenting with photomontage in 1918. H\u00f6ch worked for Ullstein Verlag designing knitting and embroidery patterns that were inspired by her photomontage work of the time. She continued to work with photomontage for almost the rest of her life, even after she broke from the Berlin Dadaists.\nOther major artists who were members of Berlin Club Dada and major exponents of photomontage were Kurt Schwitters, Raoul Hausmann, and Johannes Baader. Individual photographs combined to create a new subject or visual image proved to be a powerful tool for the Dadists protesting World War I and the interests that they believed inspired the war. Photomontage survived Dada and was a technique inherited and used by European Surrealists such as Salvador Dal\u00ed. Its influence also spread to Japan where avant-garde painter Harue Koga produced photomontage-style paintings based on images culled from magazines. The world's first retrospective show of photomontage was held in Germany in 1931. A later term coined in Europe was, \"photocollage\", which usually referred to large and ambitious works that added typography, brushwork, or even objects stuck to the photomontage.\nRussian/Soviet Constructivism.\nParallel to the Germans, Russian Constructivist artists such as El Lissitzky, Alexander Rodchenko, and the husband-and-wife team of Gustav Klutsis and Valentina Kulagina created pioneering photomontage work as propaganda, such as in the journal USSR in Construction, for the Soviet government.\nIn the Americas.\nFollowing his exile to Mexico in the late 1930s, Spanish Civil War activist and montage artist, Josep Renau Berenguer, compiled his acclaimed, \"Fata Morgana USA: the American Way of Life\", a book of photomontage images highly critical of American culture and North American \"consumer culture\". His contemporary, Lola Alvarez Bravo, experimented with photomontage on life and social issues in Mexican cities.\nIn Argentina during the late 1940s, the German exile, Grete Stern, began to contribute photomontage work on the theme of \"Sue\u00f1os\" (Dreams), as part of a regular psychoanalytical article in the magazine, \"Idilio\".\nPostwar photomontage.\nThe pioneering techniques of early photomontage artists were co-opted by the advertising industry from the late 1920s onward. The American photographer Alfred Gescheidt, while working primarily in advertising and commercial art in the 1960s and 1970s, used photomontage techniques to create satirical posters and postcards.\nStarting in the 1960s, Jerry Uelsmann became influential in the photomontage world, using multiple enlargers to utilize many techniques that would someday influence digital photomontage, down to the naming of tools in Photoshop. In 1985 he even published a book demonstrating and explaining his techniques, two years before Thomas and John Knoll began selling Photoshop through Adobe.\nTen years later in 1995, Adobe's creative director Russel Brown tried to get Uelsmann to test out Photoshop. Uelsmann didn't like it, but his wife Maggie Taylor did, and began using it to produce digital photomontage, becoming a founder of the modern genre.\nTechniques.\nOther methods for combining images are also called photomontage, such as Victorian \"combination printing\", the printing of more than one negative on a single piece of printing paper (e.g. O. G. Rejlander, 1857), front-projection and computer montage techniques. Much as a collage is composed of multiple facets, artists also combine montage techniques. A series of black and white \"photomontage projections\" by Romare Bearden (1912\u20131988) is an example. His method began with compositions of paper, paint, and photographs put on boards measuring 8\u00bd \u00d7 11\u00a0inches. Bearden fixed the imagery with an emulsion that he then applied with hand roller. Subsequently, he photographed and enlarged them. The nineteenth century tradition of physically joining multiple images into a composite and photographing the results prevailed in press photography and offset lithography until the widespread use of digital image editing.\n20th century Xerox technology made possible the ability to copy both flat images and three-dimensional objects using the copier as a scanning camera. Such copier images could then be combined with real objects in a traditional cut-and-glue collage manner.\nContemporary photograph editors in magazines now create \"paste-ups\" digitally. Creating a photomontage has, for the most part, become easier with the advent of computer software such as Adobe Photoshop, Paint Shop Pro, Corel Photopaint, Pixelmator, Paint.NET, or GIMP. These programs make the changes digitally, allowing for faster workflow and more precise results. They also mitigate mistakes by allowing the artist to \"undo\" errors. Yet some artists are pushing the boundaries of digital image editing to create extremely time-intensive compositions that rival the demands of the traditional arts. The current trend is to create images that combine painting, theatre, illustration, and graphics in a seamless photographic whole.\nLegal and ethical issues.\nA photomontage may contain elements at once real and imaginary. Combined photographs and digital manipulations may set up a conflict between aesthetics and ethics \u2013 for instance, in fake photographs that are presented to the world as real news. For example, in the United States, the National Press Photographers Association (NPPA) has set out a Code of Ethics promoting the accuracy of published images, advising that photographers \"do not manipulate images\u00a0... that can mislead viewers or misrepresent subjects.\"\nScrapbooking.\nPhotomontage also may be present in the scrapbooking phenomenon, in which family images are pasted into scrapbooks and a collage created along with paper ephemera and decorative items.\nDigital art scrapbooking employs a computer to create simple collage designs and captions. The amateur scrapbooker can turn home projects into professional output, such as CDs, DVDs, displays on television, uploads to a website for viewing, or assemblies into one or more books for sharing.\nPhotograph manipulation.\nPhotograph manipulation refers to alterations made to an image. Often, the goal of photograph manipulation is to create another 'realistic' image. This has led to numerous political and ethical concerns, particularly in journalism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40183", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40183", "title": "10th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 1000 BC to 901 BC\nThe 10th century BC comprises the years from 1000 BC to 901 BC. This period followed the Late Bronze Age collapse in the Near East, and the century saw the Early Iron Age take hold there. The Greek Dark Ages which had come about in 1200 BC continued. The Neo-Assyrian Empire is established towards the end of the 10th century BC. In the Iron Age in India, the Vedic period is ongoing. In China, the Zhou dynasty is in power. Bronze Age Europe continued with Urnfield culture. Japan was inhabited by an evolving hunter-gatherer society during the J\u014dmon period.\nEvents.\nLate 10th century BC: \nSovereign states.\nSee: List of sovereign states in the 10th century BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40186", "revid": "34387623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40186", "title": "8th millennium BC", "text": "Millennium between 8000 BC and 7001 BC\nThe 8th millennium BC spanned the years 8000 BC to 7001 BC (c. 10\u00a0ka to c. 9\u00a0ka). In chronological terms, it is the second full millennium of the current Holocene epoch and is entirely within the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) phase of the Early Neolithic. It is impossible to precisely date events that happened around the time of this millennium and all dates mentioned here are estimates mostly based on geological and anthropological analysis, or by radiometric dating.\nGlobal environment.\nIn the geologic time scale, the first stratigraphic stage of the Holocene epoch is the \"Greenlandian\" from about 9700 BC to the fixed date 6236 BC and so including the whole of the 8th millennium. The Greenlandian followed the Younger Dryas and essentially featured a climate shift from near-glacial to interglacial, causing glaciers to retreat and sea levels to rise. Towards the end of the 8th millennium, the Holocene Climate Optimum (HCO) \u2013 also called the Holocene Thermal Maximum (HTM) \u2013 began as a warm period lasting roughly 4,000 years until about 3000 BC. Insolation during summers in the northern hemisphere was unusually strong with pronounced warming in the higher latitudes such as Greenland, northern Canada and northern Europe with a resultant reduction in Arctic sea ice.\nDuring the 8th millennium, there were four known volcanic eruptions that registered magnitude 5 above on the Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI). These were at Rotoma Caldera in New Zealand's Taup\u014d Volcanic Zone about 7560 BC; Lvinaya Past in the Kuril Islands about 7480 BC; Pinatubo on the island of Luzon in the Philippines about 7460 BC; Fisher Caldera, and on Unimak Island in the Aleutians about 7420 BC The biggest eruption was at Fisher Caldera, VEI 6, producing more than of tephra.\nThe date of c. 7640 BC has been theorised for the impact of Tollmann's hypothetical bolide with Earth. The hypothesis holds that there was a resultant global cataclysm such as the legendary Universal Deluge. Bolides are asteroids or comets.\nAccording to radiometric dates, the main occupation phases recognized at Shillourokambos took place between the end of the 9th millennium BC and the end of this millennium, long before the Khirokitia Culture. The fact remains that its disappearance in the Middle Phase at Shillourokambos, in the second half of this millennium, is not an isolated incident but one of a number of expressions of a deep cultural change.\nPopulation and communities.\nOutside the Near East, most people around the world still lived in scattered hunter-gatherer communities that remained firmly in the Palaeolithic. Within the Near East, Neolithic culture and technology had become established throughout much of the Fertile Crescent by 8000 BC and was gradually spreading westward, though it is not believed to have reached Europe till about the end of this millennium. Planting and harvesting techniques were transferred through Asia Minor and across the Aegean Sea to Greece and the Balkans. The techniques were, in the main, cultivation of wheats and barleys; and domestication of sheep, goats and cattle.\nThe world population was probably stable and slowly increasing. It has been estimated that there were some five million people c. 10,000 BC growing to forty million by 5000 BC and 100 million by 1600 BC. That is an average growth rate of 0.027% p.a. from the beginning of the Neolithic to the Middle Bronze Age.\nFertile Crescent.\nBy c. 7500 BC (see map above right), important sites in or near the Fertile Crescent included Jericho, 'Ain Ghazal, Huleh, Tell Aswad, Tell Abu Hureyra, Tell Qaramel, Tell Mureibit, Jerf el Ahmar, G\u00f6bekli Tepe, Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori, Hacilar, \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck, Hallan \u00c7emi Tepesi, \u00c7ay\u00f6n\u00fc Tepesi, Shanidar, Jarmo, Zrebar, Ganj Dareh and Ali Kosh. Jericho in the Jordan Valley continued to be the world's most significant site through this millennium. \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck (see image) was a large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern Anatolia that flourished from c. 7500 BC until it was abandoned c. 5700 BC.\nPottery and dating systems.\nThere was no pottery \"per se\" in the Near East at this time as the potter's wheel had not yet been invented. Rudimentary clay vessels were hand-built, often by means of coiling, and pit fired. Dame Kathleen Kenyon was the principal archaeologist at Tell es-Sultan (ancient Jericho) and she discovered that there was no pottery there. The vessels she found were made from stone and she reasonably surmised that others made from wood or vegetable fibres would have long since decayed. The first chronological pottery system had been devised by Sir Arthur Evans for his Bronze Age findings at Knossos and Kenyon used this as a benchmark for the Near East Neolithic. She divided the period into phases called Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), from c. 10,000 BC to c. 8800 BC; Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB), which includes the entire 8th millennium, from c. 8800 BC to c. 6500 BC; and then Pottery Neolithic (PN), which had varied start-points from c. 6500 BC until the beginnings of the Bronze Age towards the end of the 4th millennium (c. 3000 BC).\nAgriculture in the Americas.\nIt was from c. 8000 BC that agriculture developed throughout the Americas, especially in modern Mexico. There were numerous New World crops, as they are now termed, and domestication began with the potato and the cucurbita (squash) about this time. Other crops began to be harvested over the next 7,500 years including chili peppers, maize, peanut, avocado, beans, cotton, sunflower, cocoa and tomato.\nOther cultural developments.\nThe Mount Sandel Mesolithic site in Ireland is dated to c. 7900\u20137600 BC. This was long thought to be the earliest human activity on the island, until the discovery of the Alice and Gwendoline Cave pushed the date back to 10,000 BC.\nThe date for construction of a round-house near Howick, Northumberland is calculated c. 7600 BC by radiocarbon dating. The site is believed to have been occupied for about 100 years.\nThe \"Homo sapiens\" fossil from Combe-Capelle in southern France, discovered in 1909, is estimated to be 9,500 years old (c. 7500 BC).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40187", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40187", "title": "Conjugate (acid-base theory)", "text": "Chemical compound formed when an acid donates a proton to a base\nA conjugate acid, within the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory, is a chemical compound formed when an acid gives a proton () to a base\u2014in other words, it is a base with a hydrogen ion added to it, as it loses a hydrogen ion in the reverse reaction. On the other hand, a conjugate base is what remains after an acid has donated a proton during a chemical reaction. Hence, a conjugate base is a substance formed by the removal of a proton from an acid, as it can gain a hydrogen ion in the reverse reaction. Because some acids can give multiple protons, the conjugate base of an acid may itself be acidic.\nIn summary, this can be represented as the following chemical reaction:\nformula_1\nJohannes Nicolaus Br\u00f8nsted and Martin Lowry introduced the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry theory, which said that any compound that can give a proton to another compound is an acid, and the compound that receives the proton is a base. A proton is a subatomic particle in the nucleus with a unit positive electrical charge. It is represented by the symbol because it has the nucleus of a hydrogen atom, that is, a hydrogen cation.\nA cation can be a conjugate acid, and an anion can be a conjugate base, depending on which substance is involved and which acid\u2013base theory is used. The simplest anion which can be a conjugate base is the free electron in a solution whose conjugate acid is the atomic hydrogen.\nAcid\u2013base reactions.\nIn an acid\u2013base reaction, an acid and a base react to form a conjugate base and a conjugate acid respectively. The acid loses a proton and the base gains a proton. In diagrams which indicate this, the new bond formed between the base and the proton is shown by an arrow that starts on an electron pair from the base and ends at the hydrogen ion (proton) that will be transferred: \nIn this case, the water molecule is the conjugate acid of the basic hydroxide ion after the latter received the hydrogen ion from ammonium. On the other hand, ammonia is the conjugate base for the acidic ammonium after ammonium has donated a hydrogen ion to produce the water molecule. Also, OH\u2212 can be considered as the conjugate base of H2O, since the water molecule donates a proton to give NH4+ in the reverse reaction. The terms \"acid\", \"base\", \"conjugate acid\", and \"conjugate base\" are not fixed for a certain chemical substance but can be swapped if the reaction taking place is reversed.\nStrength of conjugates.\nThe strength of a conjugate acid is proportional to its splitting constant. A stronger conjugate acid will split more easily into its products, \"push\" hydrogen protons away and have a higher equilibrium constant. The strength of a conjugate base can be seen as its tendency to \"pull\" hydrogen protons towards itself. If a conjugate base is classified as strong, it will \"hold on\" to the hydrogen proton when dissolved and its acid will not split.\nIf a chemical is a strong acid, its conjugate base will be weak. An example of this case would be the splitting of hydrochloric acid HCl in water. Since HCl is a strong acid (it splits up to a large extent), its conjugate base (Cl-) will be weak. Therefore, in this system, most H+ will be hydronium ions H3O+ instead of attached to Cl\u2212 anions and the conjugate bases will be weaker than water molecules.\nOn the other hand, if a chemical is a weak acid its conjugate base will not necessarily be strong. Consider that ethanoate, the conjugate base of ethanoic acid, has a base splitting constant (Kb) of about , making it a weak base.\nIn order for a species to have a strong conjugate base it has to be a very weak acid, like water.\nIdentifying conjugate acid\u2013base pairs.\nTo identify the conjugate acid, look for the pair of compounds that are related. The acid\u2013base reaction can be viewed in a before and after sense. The before is the reactant side of the equation, the after is the product side of the equation. The conjugate acid in the after side of an equation gains a hydrogen ion, so in the before side of the equation the compound that has one less hydrogen ion of the conjugate acid is the base. The conjugate base in the after side of the equation lost a hydrogen ion, so in the before side of the equation, the compound that has one more hydrogen ion of the conjugate base is the acid.\nConsider the following acid\u2013base reaction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;HNO3 + H2O \u2192 H3O+ + NO3-\nNitric acid (HNO3) is an \"acid\" because it donates a proton to the water molecule and its \"conjugate base\" is nitrate (NO3-). The water molecule acts as a base because it receives the hydrogen cation (proton) and its conjugate acid is the hydronium ion (H3O+).\nApplications.\nOne use of conjugate acids and bases lies in buffering systems, which include a buffer solution. In a buffer, a weak acid and its conjugate base (in the form of a salt), or a weak base and its conjugate acid, are used in order to limit the pH change during a titration process. Buffers have both organic and non-organic chemical applications. For example, besides buffers being used in lab processes, human blood acts as a buffer to maintain pH. The most important buffer in our bloodstream is the carbonic acid-bicarbonate buffer, which prevents drastic pH changes when CO2 is introduced. This functions as such:\n&lt;chem display=\"block\"&gt;CO2 + H2O &lt;=&gt; H2CO3 &lt;=&gt; HCO3^- + H+&lt;/chem&gt;\nFurthermore, here is a table of common buffers.\nA second common application with an organic compound would be the production of a buffer with acetic acid. If acetic acid, a weak acid with the formula CH3COOH, was made into a buffer solution, it would need to be combined with its conjugate base CH3COO- in the form of a salt. The resulting mixture is called an acetate buffer, consisting of aqueous CH3COOH and aqueous CH3COONa. Acetic acid, along with many other weak acids, serve as useful components of buffers in different lab settings, each useful within their own pH range.\nRinger's lactate solution is an example where the conjugate base of an organic acid, lactic acid, CH3CH(OH)CO2\u2212 is combined with sodium, calcium and potassium cations and chloride anions in distilled water which together form a fluid which is isotonic in relation to human blood and is used for fluid resuscitation after blood loss due to trauma, surgery, or a burn injury.\nTable of acids and their conjugate bases.\nBelow are several examples of acids and their corresponding conjugate bases; note how they differ by just one proton (H+ ion). Acid strength decreases and conjugate base strength increases down the table.\nTable of bases and their conjugate acids.\nIn contrast, here is a table of bases and their conjugate acids. Similarly, base strength decreases and conjugate acid strength increases down the table.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40188", "revid": "8570870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40188", "title": "Conjugate base", "text": ""}
{"id": "40189", "revid": "23512014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40189", "title": "Founding of Rome", "text": "Archaeological evidence and mythical tale for Rome's origins\nThe founding of Rome was a prehistoric event or process later greatly embellished by Roman historians and poets. Archaeological evidence indicates that Rome developed from the gradual union of several hilltop villages during the Final Bronze Age or early Iron Age. Prehistoric habitation of the Italian Peninsula occurred by 48,000 years ago, with the area of Rome being settled by around 1600\u00a0BC. Some evidence on the Capitoline Hill possibly dates as early as c.\u20091700\u00a0BC and the nearby valley that later housed the Roman Forum had a developed necropolis by at least 1000BC. The combination of the hilltop settlements into a single polity by the later 8th centuryBC was probably influenced by the trend for city-state formation emerging from ancient Greece.\nRoman myth held that their city was founded by Romulus, son of the war god Mars and the Vestal virgin Rhea Silvia, fallen princess of Alba Longa and descendant of Aeneas of Troy. Exposed on the Tiber river, Romulus and his twin Remus were suckled by a she-wolf at the Lupercal before being raised by the shepherd Faustulus, taking revenge on their usurping great-uncle Amulius, and restoring Alba Longa to their grandfather Numitor. The brothers then decided to establish a new town but quarrelled over some details, ending with Remus's murder and the establishment of Rome on the Palatine Hill. The year of the supposed founding was variously computed by ancient historians, but the two dates seeming to be officially sanctioned were the Varronian chronology's 753\u00a0BC (used by Claudius's Secular Games and Hadrian's Romaea) and the adjacent year of 752\u00a0BC (used by the Fasti and the Secular Games of Antoninus Pius and Philip I). Despite known errors in Varro's calculations, it is the 753BC date that continues to form the basis for most modern calculations of the AUC calendar era.\nThe legendary account was still much discussed and celebrated in Roman times. The Parilia Festival on 21 April was considered to commemorate the anniversary of the city's founding during the late Republic and that aspect of the holiday grew in importance under the Empire until it was fully transformed into the Romaea in AD121. Most modern historians dismiss these ancient accounts of a single founder descended from a Trojan lineage establishing the city at specific point in time as fiction.\nCultural context.\nThe conventional division of pre-Roman cultures in Italy deals with cultures which spoke Indo-European and non-Indo-European languages. The Italic languages, which include Latin, are Indo-European and were spoken, according to inscriptions, in the lower Tiber Valley. It was once thought that Faliscan \u2013 spoken north of Veii on the right bank of the Tiber \u2013 was a separate language, but inscriptions discovered in the 1980s indicate that Latin was spoken more generally in the area. Etruscan speakers were concentrated in modern Tuscany with a similar language called Raetic spoken on the upper Adige (the foothills of the eastern Italian Alps).\nWhen drawing a connection between peoples and their languages, a reconstruction emerges with Indo-European peoples arriving in various waves of migrations during the first and second millennia BC: first a western Italic group (including Latin), followed by a central Italic group of Osco-Umbrian dialects, with a late arrival of Greek and Celtic on the Italian peninsula, from across the Adriatic and Alps, respectively. These migrations are generally believed to have displaced speakers of Etruscan and other pre-Indo-European languages; although it is possible that Etruscan arrived also by migration, almost certainly before 2000\u00a0BC.\nThe start of the Iron age saw a gradual increase in social complexity and population that led to the emergence of proto-urban settlements in central and northern Italy writ large. These proto-urban agglomerations were normally clusters of smaller settlements that were insufficiently distant to be separated communities; over time, they would unify.\nArchaeological evidence.\nThere is archaeological evidence of human occupation of the area of modern Rome from at least 5,000 years ago, but the dense layer of much younger debris obscures any Palaeolithic and Neolithic sites. Traces of occupation have been found in the general region\u00a0\u2013 including Lavinium and the coast near Ardea\u00a0\u2013 going back to the 15th century\u00a0BC. The area was home to the Apennine and Proto-Villanovan cultures before the advent of the more regional Latial culture.\nBronze Age.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that Rome developed over a long period, but it was definitely occupied by the middle of the Bronze Age. Core samples have shown that the terrain of Bronze-Age Rome differed greatly from what is present now. The area of the Forum Boarium north of the Aventine Hill was a seasonally dry plain that simultaneously provided a safe inland port for the era's seafaring ships, a wide area for watering horses and cattle, and a safe ford of the Tiber with shallow and slow-flowing water even if Tiber Island had not yet formed, one of the river's major fords between Etruria and Campania. This advantageous but exposed location was closely flanked by the Capitoline, which at that time rose sharply from the more easterly bank of the Tiber and provided a ready citadel for defense and for control of the salt production along the river and at its mouth. The other hills and the marshes between them provided similarly defensible points for settlement.\nAccordingly, thick deposits of manure and ancient pottery shards have been discovered in the Forum Boarium from the middle of the Bronze Age. Current evidence suggests that there were three separate bronze-using settlements on the Capitoline during the period 1700\u20131350\u00a0BC and in the neighboring valley that later became the Roman Forum from 1350\u20131120\u00a0BC. Some 13th centuryBC structures indicate that the Capitoline was already being terraced to manage its slope. Evidence in the Final Bronze Age around 1200\u2013975\u00a0BC is clearer, showing occupation of the Capitoline, Forum, and adjacent Palatine. Excavations near the modern Capitoline Museums suggest the construction of fortifications and some scholars have speculated that settlements also existed on the other hills, especially the Janiculum, Quirinal, and Aventine. The Capitoline currently seems to have been the earliest settled but it is debated whether the settlements on the other hills were independent, colonies of the Capitoline settlement, or formerly separate villages already consolidated into a single polity. By 1000\u00a0BC, a necropolis existed in the Forum for cremation graves. By the early Iron Age c.\u2009900\u00a0BC, graves started to be placed into the ground. Other cemeteries appear on the Esquiline, Quirinal, and Viminal Hills by the 9th century, containing pottery, imported Greek wares, fibulae, and bronze objects. Remains from huts on the Palatine have been found that date to the 9th or 8th centuries BC, with accelerating development by the early to middle 8th century BC.\nEighth and seventh centuries\u00a0BC.\nBy this time, four major settlements emerged in Rome. The nuclei appeared on the Palatine, the Capitoline, the Quirinal and Viminal, and the Caelian, Oppian, and Velia. There is, however, no evidence linking any settlement on the Quirinal hill with the Sabines, as is alleged by some ancient accounts.\nThe area of the Forum also was converted at this time into a public space. Burials there discontinued and portions of it were paved over. Votive offerings appear in the \"comitium\" in the eighth century, indicating a more central religious cult, and other public buildings appear to have been erected around that time. One of those buildings was the \"domus publica\" (the official residence of the \"pontifex maximus\"), which is now believed to have been constructed between 750 and 700\u00a0BC. Religious activity started also in this period on the Capitoline hill, suggesting a connection to the ancient cult of Jupiter Feretrius. Other offerings discovered indicate Rome's connections outside Latium, with imported Greek pottery from Euboea and Corinth.\nThe first evidence of a wall appears in the middle or late eighth century on the Palatine, dated between 730 and 720\u00a0BC. It is possible that the circuit of the wall marked out what later Romans believed to be the original pomerium (sacred boundary) of the city. The discovery of gates and streets connected to the wall, with the remains of various huts, suggest that Rome had by this time:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;acquired a defined boundary ... [and] a more sophisticated level of social and political organisation ... the use of the Forum as a public space point[s] to the development of [a] shared civil and ritual space[] for the inhabitants of all communities, demonstrating an increasing level of centralisation.\nLike other Villanovan proto-urban centres, this archaic Rome was likely organised around clans that guarded their own areas, but by the later eighth century had confederated. The development of city-states was likely a Greek innovation that spread through the Mediterranean from 850 to 750\u00a0BC. The earliest votive deposits are found in the early seventh century on the Capitoline and Quirinal hills, suggesting that by that time a city had formed with monumental architecture and public religious sanctuaries. Certainly, by 600\u00a0BC, a process of was complete and a unified Rome \u2013 reflected in the production of a central forum area, public monumental architecture, and civic structures \u2013 had by then been formed.\nAncient tradition and founding myths.\nBy the late Republic, the usual Roman origin myth held that their city was founded by a Latin named Romulus on the day of the Parilia Festival (21 April) in some year around 750BC. Important aspects of the myth concerned Romulus's murder of his twin Remus, the brothers' descent from the god Mars and the royal family of Alba Longa, and that dynasty's supposed descent from Aeneas, himself supposedly descended from the goddess Aphrodite and the royal family of Troy. The accounts in the first book of Livy's \"History of Rome\" and in Vergil's \"Aeneid\" were particularly influential. Some accounts further asserted that there had been a Mycenaean Greek settlement on the Palatine (later dubbed Pallantium) even earlier than Romulus and Remus, at some time prior to the Trojan War.\nModern scholars disregard most of the traditional accounts as myths. There is no persuasive archaeological evidence for either the Romulan foundation or for the idea of an early Greek settlement. Even the name Romulus is now generally believed to have been retrojected from the city's name \u2013 glossed as \"Mr Rome\" by the classicist Mary Beard \u2013 rather than reflecting a historical or actual figure. Some scholars, particularly Andrea Carandini, have argued that it remains possible that these foundation myths reflect actual historical events in some form and that the city and Roman Kingdom were in fact founded by a single actor in some way. This remains a minority viewpoint in present scholarship and highly controversial in the absence of further evidence, with the arguments made by Carandini and others appearing to rest on highly tendentious interpretations of what is currently known with certainty from scientific excavations. \nThe Romans' origin myths, however, provide evidence of how the Romans conceived of themselves as a mixture of different ethnic groups and foreign influences, The Romans took the foundation of their own new cities seriously, undertaking many rituals and attributing many of them to remote antiquity. They long maintained the Hut of Romulus, a primitive dwelling on the Palatine attributed to their founder, although they had no firm basis for associating it with him specifically.\nChronological disagreements.\nWhile the Romans believed that their city had been founded by an eponymous founder at a specific time, when that occurred was disputed by the ancient historians. The earliest dates placed it c.\u20091100BC out of a belief that Romulus had been Aeneas's grandson. This moved Rome's foundation much closer to the fall of Troy, dated by Eratosthenes to 1184\u201383\u00a0BC; these dates are attested as early as the 4th centuryBC. Romulus was later chronologically connected to Aeneas and the time of the Trojan War by introducing a line of Alban kings, which scholars consider to be entirely spurious.\nMost scholars view the move from a foundation date in the 1100s to one in the 700s to have come from Roman calculations from estimates of the lengths of the republican and regal periods. Their attempts to estimate how long the regal period lasted, however, are largely rejected as synthetic calculations. It may also be that the date of the city's foundation was assigned from Greek historiography, especially influenced by Timaeus of Tauromenium (born c.\u2009350\u00a0BC) who may have been the first to move the founding of the city from the era of the Trojan war to the more historical 814\u00a0BC. A later intervention, possibly at the hands of Fabius Pictor (born c.\u2009270\u00a0BC) or his source Diocles of Peparethus, then placed the foundation date within the Olympiads (ie within \"historical\" time), settling eventually on c.\u2009750\u00a0BC. Dionysius of Halicarnassus (born c.\u200960\u00a0BC) placed it in the first year of the 7th Olympiad, that is, 752 BC.\nFrom Claudius's Secular Games in AD47 to Hadrian's Romaea in AD121, the official date seems to have used the chronology established by Varro in the late 1st centuryBC, placing Rome's founding in 753BC. Augustus's Fasti running to AD13 and the Secular Games celebrated at Rome's 900th and 1000th anniversaries under Antoninus Pius and PhilipI, meanwhile, used dates computed from a foundation a year later in 752BC. Despite known errors in Varro's work, it is the former date that has become the most repeated in modernity and is still used for computing the AUC calendar era.\nRomulus and Remus.\nIn the best known form of the legend, Romulus and Remus are the grandsons of Numitor, the king of Alba Longa. After Numitor is deposed by his brother Amulius and his daughter Rhea Silvia is forced to become a Vestal virgin, she becomes pregnant\u00a0\u2013 allegedly raped by the war god Mars\u00a0\u2013 and delivers the two illegitimate brothers. Amulius orders that the children be left to die on the slopes of the Palatine or in the Tiber River, but they are suckled by a she-wolf at the Lupercal cave and then discovered by the shepherd Faustulus and taken in by him and his wife Acca Larentia. (Livy combines Larentia and the she-wolf, considering them most likely to have referred to a prostitute, also known in Latin slang as a or she-wolf.) Faustulus eventually reveals the brothers' true origins, and they depose or murder Amulius and restore Numitor to his throne. They then leave or are sent to establish a new city at the location where they had been rescued.\nThe twins then come into conflict during the foundation of the city, leading to the murder of Remus. The dispute is variously said to have been over the naming of the new city, over the interpretation of auguries, whether to place it on the Palatine or Aventine Hill, or concerned with Remus's disrespect of the new town's ritual furrow or wall. Some accounts say Romulus slays his brother with his own hand, others that Remus and sometimes Faustulus are killed in a general melee. Wiseman and some others attribute the aspects of fratricide to the 4th-century BC Conflict of the Orders, when Rome's lower-class plebeians began to resist excesses by the upper-class patricians.\nRomulus, after ritualistically ploughing the generally square course of the city's future boundary, erects its first walls and declares the settlement an asylum for exiles, criminals, and runaway slaves. The city becomes larger but also acquires a mostly male population. When Romulus' attempts to secure the women of neighbouring settlements by diplomacy fail, he uses the religious celebration of Consualia to abduct the women of the Sabines. According to Livy, when the Sabines rally an army to take their women back, the women force the two groups to make peace and install the Sabine king Titus Tatius as comonarch with Romulus.\nThe story has been theorised by some modern scholars to reflect anti-Roman propaganda from the late fourth century BC, but more likely reflects an indigenous Roman tradition, given the Capitoline Wolf which likely dates to the sixth century\u00a0BC. Regardless, by the third century, it was widely accepted by Romans and put onto some of Rome's first silver coins in 269\u00a0BC. In his 1995 \"Beginnings of Rome\", Tim Cornell argues that the myths of Romulus and Remus are \"popular expressions of some universal human need or experience\" rather than borrowings from the Greek east or Mesopotamia, inasmuch as the story of virgin birth, intercession by animals and humble stepparents, with triumphant return expelling an evil leader are common mythological elements across Eurasia and even into the Americas.\nAeneas.\nThe tradition of Romulus was also combined with a legend telling of Aeneas coming from Troy and travelling to Italy. This tradition emerges from the Iliad's prophecy that Aeneas's descendants would one day return and rule Troy once more. Greeks by 550\u00a0BC had begun to speculate, given the lack of any clear descendants of Aeneas, that the figure had established a dynasty outside the proper Greek world. The first attempts to tie this story to Rome were in the works of two Greek historians at the end of the fifth century BC, Hellanicus of Lesbos and Damastes of Sigeum, likely only mentioning off hand the possibility of a Roman connection; a more assured connection only emerged at the end of the fourth century\u00a0BC when Rome started having formal dealings with the Greek world.\nThe ancient Roman annalists, historians, and antiquarians faced an issue tying Aeneas to Romulus, as they believed that Romulus lived centuries after the Trojan War, which was dated at the time c.\u20091100\u00a0BC. For this, they fabricated a story of Aeneas's son founding the city of Alba Longa and establishing a dynasty there, which eventually produced Romulus.\nIn Livy's first book he recounts how Aeneas, a demigod of the Trojan royal Anchises and the goddess Venus, leaves Troy after its destruction during the Trojan War and sailed to the western Mediterranean. He brings his son \u2013 Ascanius \u2013 and a group of companions. Landing in Italy, he forms an alliance with a local magnate called Latinus and marries his daughter Lavinia, joining the two into a new group called the Latini; they then found a new city, called Lavinium. After a series of wars against the Rutuli and Caere, the Latins conquer the Alban Hills and its environs. His son Ascanius then founds the legendary city of Alba Longa, which became the dominant city in the region. The later descendants of the royal lineage of Alba Longa eventually produce Romulus and Remus, setting up the events of their mythological story.\nDionysius of Halicarnassus similarly attempted to show a Greek connection, giving a similar story for Aeneas, but also a previous series of migrations. He describes migrations of Arcadians into southern Italy some time in the 18th century BC, migrations into Umbria by Greeks from Thessaly, and the foundation of a settlement on the Palatine hill by Evander (originally hailing also from Arcadia) and Hercules, \nThe introduction of Aeneas follows a trend across Italy towards Hellenising their own early mythologies by rationalising myths and legends of the Greek Heroic Age into a pseudo-historical tradition of prehistoric times; this was in part due to Greek historians' eagerness to construct narratives purporting that the Italians were actually descended from Greeks and their heroes. These narratives were accepted by non-Greek peoples due Greek historiography's prestige and claims to systematic validity.\nArchaeological evidence shows that worship of Aeneas had been established at Lavinium by the sixth century BC. Similarly, a cult to Hercules had been established at the Ara Maxima in Rome during the archaic period. By the early fifth century BC, these stories had become entrenched in Roman historical beliefs. These cults, along with the early \u2013 in literary terms \u2013 account of Cato the Elder, show how Italians and Romans took these Greek histories seriously and as reliable evidence by later annalists, even though they were speculations of little value. Much of the syncretism, however, may simply reflect Roman desires to give themselves a prestigious backstory: claim of Trojan descent proved politically advantageous with the Greeks by justifying both claims of common heritage and ancestral enmity.\nOther myths.\nThere was no single mythic tradition of Rome's founding. By the time of the Pyrrhic War (280\u2013275\u00a0BC), there were some sixty different myths for Rome's foundation that circulated in the Greek world. Most of them attributed the city to an eponymous founder, usually \"Rhomos\" or \"Rhome\" rather than Romulus. One story told how Romos, a son of Odysseus and Circe, was the one who founded Rome. Martin P. Nilsson speculates that this older story was becoming a bit embarrassing as Rome became more powerful and tensions with the Greeks grew. Being descendants of the Greeks was no longer preferable, so the Romans settled on the Trojan foundation myth instead. Nilsson further speculates that the name of Romos was changed by some Romans to the native name Romulus, but the same name Romos (later changed to the native Remus) was never forgotten by many of the people, so both these names were used to represent the founders of the city.\nAnother story, attributed to Hellanicus of Lesbos by Dionysius of Halicarnassus, says that Rome was founded by a woman named Rhome, one of the followers of Aeneas, after landing in Italy and burning their ships. That by the middle of the fifth century Aeneas was also allegedly the founder of two or three other cities across Italy was no object. These myths also differed as to whether their eponymous matriarch Roma was born in Troy or Italy \u2013 i.e. before or after Aeneas's journey \u2013 or otherwise if their Romus was a direct or collateral descendant of Aeneas.\nMyths of the early third century also differed greatly in the claimed genealogy of Romulus or the founder, if an intermediate actor was posited. One tale posited that a Romus, son of Zeus, founded the city. Callias posited that Romulus was descended from Latinus and a woman called Roma who was the daughter of Aeneas and a homonymous mother. Other authors depicted Romulus and Romus, as a son of Aeneas, founding not only Rome but also Capua. Authors also wrote their home regions into the story. Polybius, who hailed from Arcadia, for example, gave Rome not a Trojan colonial origin but rather an Arcadian one.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40195", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40195", "title": "Telecommunications in Azerbaijan", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Azerbaijan provides information about television, radio, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet in Azerbaijan.\nThe Azerbaijan economy has been markedly stronger recently and, not surprisingly, the country has been making progress in developing ICT sector. Nonetheless, it still faces problems. These include poor infrastructure and an immature telecom regulatory regime. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies of Azerbaijan (MCIT), as well as being an operator through its role in Aztelekom, is both a policy-maker and regulator.\n\"Country comparison to the world:\" 64\n\"Country comparison to the world:\" 75\nTelephones.\nTelephone system.\nAzerbaijan's telephone system is a combination of old Soviet era technology used by Azerbaijani citizens and small- to medium-size commercial establishments, and modern cellular telephones used by an increasing middle class, large commercial ventures, international companies, and most government officials; the average citizen waits on a 200,000-person list for telephone service; Internet and e-mail service are available in all major cities and some remote towns.\n&lt;br&gt;\"general assessment:\"' inadequate; requires considerable expansion and modernization; teledensity of 15 main lines per 100 persons is low; mobile-cellular penetration is increasing and is currently about 50 telephones per 100 persons.\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\" local - the majority of telephones are in Baku or other industrial centers - about 700 villages still do not have public telephone service; intercity; all long-distance service must use Azertel's (Ministry of Communications) lines; satellite service connects Baku to a modern switch in its separated enclave of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\" the old Soviet system of cable and microwave is still serviceable; satellite service between Baku and Turkey provides access to 200 countries; additional satellite providers supply services between Baku and specific countries; Azerbaijan is a signator of the Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line (TAE); their lines are not laid but a Turkish satellite and a microwave link between Azerbaijan and Iran could provide Azerbaijan worldwide access\nMobile phone.\nAs of June 2014, Azerbaijan has 11.0 million subscribers in total, and a 107% penetration rate.\nThere are three major mobile phone operators currently in Azerbaijan: Azercell, Bakcell and Nar (Brand of Azerfon). Azercell, Bakcell and Nar (Brand of Azerfon) offer 2G, 3G and 4G services. All three networks are widely modern and reliable, with shops located in major towns and cities where one can purchase a sim card or get assistance if needed. Most unlocked mobile phones can be used on roaming, however network charges apply. Azercell, Bakcell and Azerfon are often recommended to tourists due to the variety of tariffs available and the help available in a variety of languages. Other mobile phone operators include Aztelekom, AzEuroTel, Caspian Telecom and Catel Eurasiacom.\nAs of June 2014, approximately 95% of all main lines are digitized. The remaining 5% is in the modernization process.\nInternational system.\nAzerbaijan is connected to the Trans-Asia-Europe (TAE) fiber-optic cable, providing international connectivity to the rest of the world. Additionally, the old Soviet system by microwave radio relay and landline connections to other countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States is still available, and by satellite earth stations. The main backbones of Azerbaijani networks are made by E3 or STM-1 lines via microwave units across the whole country with many passive retranslations.\nThere are two major private companies in Azerbaijan that connect the country to the global Internet network. These are AzerTelecom and Delta Telekom companies.\nRadio.\nAs of 2014, Azerbaijan has 9 AM stations, 17 FM stations, and one shortwave station. Additionally, there are approximately 4,350,000 radios in existence. The primary network provider is the Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies of Azerbaijan (MCIT). According to MCIT, the FM radio penetration rate is 97% according to 2014 data.\nTelevision.\nAzerbaijan has a total of 47 television channels, of which 4 are public television channels and 43 are private television channels of which 12 are national television channels and 31 regional television channels. According to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies of Azerbaijan (MCIT), the television penetration rate is 99% according to 2014 data. The penetration rate of cable television in Azerbaijan totaled 28.1% of households in 2013, from a study by the State Statistical Committee of the Azerbaijan Republic. Almost 39% of the cable television subscriber base is concentrated in major cities. The penetration rate is 59.1% in the city of Baku.\n\"Country comparison to the world:\" 98\n\"Country comparison to the world:\" 70\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "40196", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40196", "title": "Transport in Azerbaijan", "text": " \nThe transport in Azerbaijan involves air traffic, waterways and railroads. All transportation services in Azerbaijan except for oil and gas pipelines are regulated by the Ministry of Transportation of Azerbaijan Republic.\nRailways.\nThere are of rail tracks out of which only are in common carrier service and are industrial lines.\n&lt;br&gt;\"Total:\" (2013)\n&lt;br&gt;\"Country comparison to the world:\" 59\n&lt;br&gt;\"Broad gauge:\" gauge\nMetro.\nCurrently, the only metro system in Azerbaijan is the Baku Metro, located in Baku, the country's capital.\nNew plans to open metro systems in the most populated and developed cities of Azerbaijan were unveiled. Sumgayit, Nakhchivan and Ganja all plan to have subway systems in the future.\nRoadways.\nThere are about 25,000 kilometres of roads in Azerbaijan, serving domestic cargo traffic and providing access to international main highways. Highways are mostly in fair condition and need an upgrade to international standards in a view to accommodating growing transit traffic. Main and rural roads are in poor condition and in urgent need of rehabilitation and maintenance. The total vehicle fleet in Azerbaijan was about 517,000 in 2004, with about 49 private passenger cars per 1,000 inhabitants, which is quite low compared to European benchmarks but rapidly increasing due to the fast economic growth. Road transport accounted for 54% of all freight in 2003, up from about 48% in 1999.\nInternational highways.\nMain highways carrying international traffic are the Baku\u2013Alat\u2013Ganja\u2013Qazakh\u2013Georgian Border corridor (Azerbaijani section of TRACECA corridor) with a length of 503\u00a0km and the so-called North\u2013South Transport Corridor that stretches out from the Russian to the Iranian border along 521\u00a0km. Road connections are disrupted with Armenia because of the unresolved conflict regarding the possession of the Nagorno-Karabakh. Travel between the mainland and the detached exclave of Nakhchivan is made by air or by road through Iran. Nakhchivan has a 9-kilometre strategic border with Turkey.\nPipelines.\nBaku is the centre of major oil- and gas-producing regions, and major long-distance pipelines radiate from the region's oil fields to all neighbouring areas. Pipelines are generally high-capacity lines and have diameters of either 1,020 or 1,220 millimetres. The main petroleum pipeline was completed in 2005 under American pressure to limit Russian and Iranian influence in the area. It runs from Baku via Tbilisi to Ceyhan in Turkey, therefore the acronym BTC pipeline. It made partly obsolete the old Soviet pipeline pumping crude oil from the onshore and offshore Caspian fields near Baku west across Azerbaijan and Georgia to the port of Batumi, where the oil is either exported in its crude form or processed at Batumi's refinery. Two natural gas lines parallel the old petroleum line as far as Tbilisi, where they turn north across the Caucasus Mountains to join the grid of natural gas pipelines that supply cities throughout Russia and Eastern Europe.\nCondensate 89\u00a0km; gas 3,890\u00a0km; oil 2,446\u00a0km\nPorts and harbours.\nSea and water cargo transportation have vital importance for Azerbaijan, especially in regions where road and rail connections are disputed. Azerbaijan has direct maritime connections only with other Caspian littoral states (Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan). However, the Volga\u2013Don Canal provides maritime access to the high seas. The main activity is the transport of cargo, mainly of oil and oil products. Shipping regions are the Caspian, Black, Mediterranean, and Marmara Seas. The main shipping company owes 72 ships, 37 of which are tankers (including 1 water carrier).\nBaku International Marine Trade Port is the largest port on the Caspian Sea. Its ferry terminal underwent a major reconstruction supported by a US$16.2 million loan from EBRD. It is now able to handle 30 million tons of freight a year. The Caspian Sea provides vital transport links with other countries and is being used to ship oil until various pipeline projects are completed.\nIn 2014, Azerbaijan stated it would seek to ease transportation on the Caspian Sea due to increased demand by its neighbouring states.\nOn June 4, 2004, the Ministry of Transportation of the Republic of Azerbaijan established the Maritime Administration. As the regulatory authority in maritime transport, its functions include participating in the formulation of state policy, regulating transport demand of goods and passengers and for other types of maritime transport services, as well as implementing state programs, concepts, and projects for the development of maritime transport.\nMerchant marine.\n\"Total:\" 305 ships \n&lt;br&gt;\"Ships by type:\" general cargo 40, oil tanker 48, other 217\n\"Country comparison to the world:\" 53\nAirports.\nThere are regular passenger flights between Azerbaijan and former Soviet countries, UK, Germany, France, Austria, Italy, Israel, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, UAE, United States, China, Georgia and cargo flights to UAE, Turkey, Luxembourg, Germany, China, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan, and Iraq. The national airline is Azerbaijan Airlines (AZAL). There are 5 international airports located in Baku, Ganja, Nakhchivan, Lankaran and Zaqatala. Heydar Aliyev International Airport in Baku reopened in 1999 after a US$64 million upgrade and extension financed by Turkish company Enka. The airport can now handle 1,600 passengers an hour. The new runways are also able to serve jumbo jets. The complete overhaul of the international airport in Nakhchivan was completed in May 2004. The US$32 million reconstruction project of Ganja Airport has been launched by the Government and was completed by mid-2006. In 2008, two more airports were opened in Azerbaijan. The Lankaran International Airport is located in the southern part of Azerbaijan, Zaqatala Airport is in the north-west of Azerbaijan territory.\nAirports: 37 \n&lt;br&gt;\"Country comparison to the world:\" 107\nAirports \u2013 with paved runways.\n\"Total:\" 30\n&lt;br&gt;\"Over 3,047 m:\" 5\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 5\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 13\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 4\n&lt;br&gt;\"Under 914 m:\" 3\nAirports \u2013 with unpaved runways.\n\"Total:\" 7\n&lt;br&gt;\"Under 914 m:\" 7\nHeliports.\n\"Total:\" 4\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40197", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40197", "title": "Vapor pressure", "text": "Pressure exerted by a vapor in thermodynamic equilibrium\nVapor pressure or equilibrium vapor pressure is the pressure exerted by a vapor in thermodynamic equilibrium with its condensed phases (solid or liquid) at a given temperature in a closed system. The equilibrium vapor pressure is an indication of a liquid's thermodynamic tendency to evaporate. It relates to the balance of particles escaping from the liquid (or solid) in equilibrium with those in a coexisting vapor phase. A substance with a high vapor pressure at normal temperatures is often referred to as \"volatile\". The pressure exhibited by vapor present above a liquid surface is known as vapor pressure. As the temperature of a liquid increases, the attractive interactions between liquid molecules become less significant in comparison to the entropy of those molecules in the gas phase, increasing the vapor pressure. Thus, liquids with strong intermolecular interactions are likely to have smaller vapor pressures, with the reverse true for weaker interactions.\nThe vapor pressure of any substance increases non-linearly with temperature, often described by the Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation. The atmospheric pressure boiling point of a liquid (also known as the normal boiling point) is the temperature at which the vapor pressure equals the ambient atmospheric pressure. With any incremental increase in that temperature, the vapor pressure becomes sufficient to overcome atmospheric pressure and cause the liquid to form vapor bubbles. Bubble formation in greater depths of liquid requires a slightly higher temperature due to the higher fluid pressure, due to hydrostatic pressure of the fluid mass above. More important at shallow depths is the higher temperature required to start bubble formation. The surface tension of the bubble wall leads to an overpressure in the very small initial bubbles.\nMeasurement and units.\nVapor pressure is measured in the standard units of pressure. The International System of Units (SI) recognizes pressure as a derived unit with the dimension of force per area and designates the pascal (Pa) as its standard unit. One pascal is one newton per square meter (N\u00b7m\u22122 or kg\u00b7m\u22121\u00b7s\u22122).\nExperimental measurement of vapor pressure is a simple procedure for common pressures between 1 and 200 kPa. The most accurate results are obtained near the boiling point of the substance; measurements smaller than are subject to major errors. Procedures often consist of purifying the test substance, isolating it in a container, evacuating any foreign gas, then measuring the equilibrium pressure of the gaseous phase of the substance in the container at different temperatures. Better accuracy is achieved when care is taken to ensure that the entire substance and its vapor are both at the prescribed temperature. This is often done, as with the use of an isoteniscope, by submerging the containment area in a liquid bath.\nVery low vapor pressures of solids can be measured using the Knudsen effusion cell method.\nIn a medical context, vapor pressure is sometimes expressed in other units, specifically millimeters of mercury (mmHg). Accurate knowledge of the vapor pressure is important for volatile inhalational anesthetics, most of which are liquids at body temperature but have a relatively high vapor pressure.\nEstimating vapor pressures with Antoine equation.\nThe Antoine equation is a pragmatic mathematical expression of the relation between the vapor pressure and the temperature of pure liquid or solid substances. It is obtained by curve-fitting and is adapted to the fact that vapor pressure is usually increasing and concave as a function of temperature. The basic form of the equation is:\nformula_1\nand it can be transformed into this temperature-explicit form:\nformula_2\nwhere:\nA simpler form of the equation with only two coefficients is sometimes used:\nformula_11\nwhich can be transformed to:\nformula_12\nSublimations and vaporizations of the same substance have separate sets of Antoine coefficients, as do components in mixtures. Each parameter set for a specific compound is only applicable over a specified temperature range. Generally, temperature ranges are chosen to maintain the equation's accuracy of a few up to 8\u201310 percent. For many volatile substances, several different sets of parameters are available and used for different temperature ranges. The Antoine equation has poor accuracy with any single parameter set when used from a compound's melting point to its critical temperature. Accuracy is also usually poor when vapor pressure is under 10 Torr because of the limitations of the apparatus used to establish the Antoine parameter values.\nThe Wagner equation gives \"one of the best\" fits to experimental data but is quite complex. It expresses reduced vapor pressure as a function of reduced temperature.\nRelation to boiling point of liquids.\nAs a general trend, vapor pressures of liquids at ambient temperatures increase with decreasing boiling points. This is illustrated in the vapor pressure chart (see right) that shows graphs of the vapor pressures versus temperatures for a variety of liquids. At the normal boiling point of a liquid, the vapor pressure is equal to the standard atmospheric pressure defined as 1 atmosphere, 760Torr, 101.325kPa, or 14.69595psi.\nFor example, at any given temperature, methyl chloride has the highest vapor pressure of any of the liquids in the chart. It also has the lowest normal boiling point at , which is where the vapor pressure curve of methyl chloride (the blue line) intersects the horizontal pressure line of one atmosphere (atm) of absolute vapor pressure.\nAlthough the relation between vapor pressure and temperature is non-linear, the chart uses a logarithmic vertical axis to produce slightly curved lines, so one chart can graph many liquids. A nearly straight line is obtained when the logarithm of the vapor pressure is plotted against 1/(T + 230) where T is the temperature in degrees Celsius. The vapor pressure of a liquid at its boiling point equals the pressure of its surrounding environment.\nLiquid mixtures: Raoult's law.\nRaoult's law gives an approximation to the vapor pressure of mixtures of liquids. It states that the activity (pressure or fugacity) of a single-phase mixture is equal to the mole-fraction-weighted sum of the components' vapor pressures:\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 is the mixture's vapor pressure, formula_15 is the mole fraction of component formula_16 in the liquid phase and formula_17 is the mole fraction of component formula_16 in the vapor phase respectively. formula_19 is the vapor pressure of component formula_16. Raoult's law is applicable only to non-electrolytes (uncharged species); it is most appropriate for non-polar molecules with only weak intermolecular attractions (such as London forces).\nSystems that have vapor pressures higher than indicated by the above formula are said to have positive deviations. Such a deviation suggests weaker intermolecular attraction than in the pure components, so that the molecules can be thought of as being \"held in\" the liquid phase less strongly than in the pure liquid. An example is the azeotrope of approximately 95% ethanol and water. Because the azeotrope's vapor pressure is higher than predicted by Raoult's law, it boils at a temperature below that of either pure component.\nThere are also systems with negative deviations that have vapor pressures that are lower than expected. Such a deviation is evidence for stronger intermolecular attraction between the constituents of the mixture than exists in the pure components. Thus, the molecules are \"held in\" the liquid more strongly when a second molecule is present. An example is a mixture of trichloromethane (chloroform) and 2-propanone (acetone), which boils above the boiling point of either pure component.\nThe negative and positive deviations can be used to determine thermodynamic activity coefficients of the components of mixtures.\nSolids.\nEquilibrium vapor pressure can be defined as the pressure reached when a condensed phase is in equilibrium with its own vapor. In the case of an equilibrium solid, such as a crystal, this can be defined as the pressure when the rate of sublimation of a solid matches the rate of deposition of its vapor phase. For most solids this pressure is very low, but some notable exceptions are naphthalene, dry ice (the vapor pressure of dry ice is 5.73 MPa (831 psi, 56.5 atm) at 20\u00a0\u00b0C, which causes most sealed containers to rupture), and ice. All solid materials have a vapor pressure. However, due to their often extremely low values, measurement can be rather difficult. Typical techniques include the use of thermogravimetry and gas transpiration.\nThere are a number of methods for calculating the sublimation pressure (i.e., the vapor pressure) of a solid. One method is to estimate the sublimation pressure from extrapolated liquid vapor pressures (of the supercooled liquid), if the heat of fusion is known, by using this particular form of the Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation:\nformula_21\nwhere:\nThis method assumes that the heat of fusion is temperature-independent, ignores additional transition temperatures between different solid phases, and it gives a fair estimation for temperatures not too far from the melting point. It also shows that the sublimation pressure is lower than the extrapolated liquid vapor pressure (\u0394fus\"H\" &gt; 0) and the difference grows with increased distance from the melting point.\nBoiling point of water.\nLike all liquids, water boils when its vapor pressure reaches its surrounding pressure. In nature, the atmospheric pressure is lower at higher elevations and water boils at a lower temperature. The boiling temperature of water for atmospheric pressures can be approximated by the Antoine equation:\nformula_30\nor transformed into this temperature-explicit form:\nformula_31\nwhere the temperature formula_32 is the boiling point in degrees Celsius and the pressure formula_3 is in torr.\nD\u00fchring's rule.\nD\u00fchring's rule states that a linear relationship exists between the temperatures at which two solutions exert the same vapor pressure.\nExamples.\nThe following table is a list of a variety of substances ordered by increasing vapor pressure (in absolute units).\nEstimating vapor pressure from molecular structure.\nSeveral empirical methods exist to estimate the vapor pressure from molecular structure for organic molecules. Some examples are SIMPOL.1 method, the method of Moller et al., and EVAPORATION (Estimation of VApour Pressure of ORganics, Accounting for Temperature, Intramolecular, and Non-additivity effects).\nMeaning in meteorology.\nIn meteorology, the term vapor pressure means the partial pressure of water vapor in the atmosphere, even if it is not in equilibrium. This differs from its meaning in other sciences.\nAccording to the American Meteorological Society \"Glossary of Meteorology\", saturation vapor pressure properly refers to the equilibrium vapor pressure of water above a flat surface of liquid water or solid ice, and is a function only of temperature and whether the condensed phase is liquid or solid.\nRelative humidity is defined relative to saturation vapor pressure.\nEquilibrium vapor pressure does not require the condensed phase to be a flat surface; it might consist of tiny droplets possibly containing solutes (impurities), such as a cloud. Equilibrium vapor pressure may differ significantly from saturation vapor pressure depending on the size of droplets and presence of other particles which act as cloud condensation nuclei.\nHowever, these terms are used inconsistently, and some authors use \"saturation vapor pressure\" outside the narrow meaning given by the AMS \"Glossary\". For example, a text on atmospheric convection states, \"The Kelvin effect causes the saturation vapor pressure over the curved surface of the droplet to be greater than that over a flat water surface\" (emphasis added).\nThe still-current term \"saturation vapor pressure\" derives from the obsolete theory that water vapor dissolves into air, and that air at a given temperature can only hold a certain amount of water before becoming \"saturated\". Actually, as stated by Dalton's law (known since 1802), the partial pressure of water vapor or any substance does not depend on air at all, and the relevant temperature is that of the liquid. Nevertheless, the erroneous belief persists among the public and even meteorologists, aided by the misleading terms \"saturation pressure\" and \"supersaturation\" and the related definition of \"relative humidity\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40202", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40202", "title": "12th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 1200 BC to 1101 BC\nThe 12th century BC is the period from 1200 to 1101 BC. The Late Bronze Age collapse in the ancient Near East and eastern Mediterranean is often considered to begin in this century.\nSovereign states.\nSee: List of sovereign states in the 12th century BC\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40203", "revid": "12845131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40203", "title": "Hubble Space Telescope", "text": "NASA/ESA space telescope launched in 1990\nThe Hubble Space Telescope (HST or Hubble) is a space telescope that was launched into low Earth orbit in 1990 and remains in operation. It was not the first space telescope, but it is one of the largest and most versatile, renowned as a vital research tool and as a public relations boon for astronomy. The Hubble Space Telescope is named after astronomer Edwin Hubble and is one of NASA's Great Observatories. The Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) selects Hubble's targets and processes the resulting data, while the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) controls the spacecraft.\nHubble features a mirror, and its five main instruments observe in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Hubble's orbit outside the distortion of Earth's atmosphere allows it to capture extremely high-resolution images with substantially lower background light than ground-based telescopes. It has recorded some of the most detailed visible light images, allowing a deep view into space. Many Hubble observations have led to breakthroughs in astrophysics, such as determining the rate of expansion of the universe.\nThe Hubble Space Telescope was funded and built in the 1970s by NASA with contributions from the European Space Agency. Its intended launch was in 1983, but the project was beset by technical delays, budget problems, and the 1986 \"Challenger\" disaster. Hubble was launched on STS-31 in 1990, but its main mirror had been ground incorrectly, resulting in spherical aberration that compromised the telescope's capabilities. The optics were corrected to their intended quality by a servicing mission, STS-61, in 1993.\nHubble is the only telescope designed to be maintained in space by astronauts. Five Space Shuttle missions repaired, upgraded, and replaced systems on the telescope, including all five of the main instruments. The fifth mission was initially canceled on safety grounds following the \"Columbia\" disaster (2003), but after NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin approved it, the servicing mission was completed in 2009. Hubble completed 30 years of operation in April 2020 and is predicted to last until 2030 to 2040.\nHubble is the visible light telescope in NASA's Great Observatories program; other parts of the spectrum are covered by the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the Chandra X-ray Observatory, and the Spitzer Space Telescope (which covers the infrared bands).\nThe mid-IR-to-visible band successor to the Hubble telescope is the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), which was launched on December 25, 2021, with the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope due to follow in 2027.\nConcept, design and aim.\nProposals and precursors.\nIn 1923 Hermann Oberth, considered a father of modern rocketry along with Robert H. Goddard and Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, published \"\" (\"The Rocket into Planetary Space\"), which mentioned how a telescope could be propelled into Earth orbit by a rocket.\nThe history of the Hubble Space Telescope can be traced to 1946, to astronomer Lyman Spitzer's paper \"Astronomical advantages of an extraterrestrial observatory\". In it, he discussed the two main advantages that a space-based observatory would have over ground-based telescopes. First, the angular resolution (the smallest separation at which objects can be clearly distinguished) would be limited only by diffraction, rather than by the turbulence in the atmosphere, which causes stars to twinkle, known to astronomers as seeing. At that time ground-based telescopes were limited to resolutions of 0.5\u20131.0 arcseconds, compared to a theoretical diffraction-limited resolution of about 0.05 arcsec for an optical telescope with a mirror in diameter. Second, a space-based telescope could observe infrared and ultraviolet light, which are strongly absorbed by the atmosphere of Earth.\nSpitzer devoted much of his career to pushing for the development of a space telescope. In 1962, a report by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences recommended development of a space telescope as part of the space program, and in 1965, Spitzer was appointed as head of a committee given the task of defining scientific objectives for a large space telescope.\nAlso crucial was the work of Nancy Grace Roman, the \"Mother of Hubble\". Well before it became an official NASA project, she gave public lectures touting the scientific value of the telescope. After it was approved, she became the program scientist, setting up the steering committee in charge of making astronomer needs feasible to implement and writing testimony to Congress throughout the 1970s to advocate continued funding of the telescope. Her work as project scientist helped set the standards for NASA's operation of large scientific projects.\nSpace-based astronomy had begun on a very small scale following World War II, as scientists made use of developments that had taken place in rocket technology. The first ultraviolet spectrum of the Sun was obtained in 1946, and NASA launched the Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) to obtain UV, X-ray, and gamma-ray spectra in 1962. An orbiting solar telescope was launched in 1962 by the United Kingdom as part of the Ariel programme, and in 1966 NASA launched the first Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (OAO) mission. OAO-1's battery failed after three days, terminating the mission. It was followed by Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO-2), which carried out ultraviolet observations of stars and galaxies from its launch in 1968 until 1972, well beyond its original planned lifetime of one year.\nThe OSO and OAO missions demonstrated the important role space-based observations could play in astronomy. In 1968, NASA developed firm plans for a space-based reflecting telescope with a mirror in diameter, known provisionally as the Large Orbiting Telescope or Large Space Telescope (LST), with a launch slated for 1979. These plans emphasized the need for crewed maintenance missions to the telescope to ensure such a costly program had a lengthy working life, and the concurrent development of plans for the reusable Space Shuttle indicated that the technology to allow this was soon to become available.\nQuest for funding.\nThe continuing success of the OAO program encouraged increasingly strong consensus within the astronomical community that the LST should be a major goal. In 1970, NASA established two committees, one to plan the engineering side of the space telescope project, and the other to determine the scientific goals of the mission. Once these had been established, the next hurdle for NASA was to obtain funding for the instrument, which would be far more costly than any Earth-based telescope. The U.S. Congress questioned many aspects of the proposed budget for the telescope and forced cuts in the budget for the planning stages, which at the time consisted of very detailed studies of potential instruments and hardware for the telescope. In 1974, public spending cuts led to Congress deleting all funding for the telescope project.\nIn 1977, then NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher proposed a token $5million for Hubble in NASA's budget. Then NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Noel Hinners, instead cut all funding for Hubble, gambling that this would galvanize the scientific community into fighting for full funding. As Hinners recalls:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was clear that year that we weren't going to be able to get a full-up start. There was some opposition on [Capitol] Hill to getting a new start on [Hubble]. It was driven, in large part as I recall, by the budget situation. Jim Fletcher proposed that we put in five million as a placeholder. I didn't like that idea. It was, in today's vernacular, a \"sop\" to the astronomy community. \"There's something in there, so all is well\".\nI figured in my own little head that to get that community energized we'd be better off zeroing it out. Then they would say, \"Whoa, we're in deep trouble\", and it would marshal the troops. So I advocated that we not put anything in. I don't remember any of the detailed discussions or whether there were any, but Jim went along with that so we zeroed it out. It had, from my perspective, the desired impact of stimulating the astronomy community to renew their efforts on the lobbying front. While I like to think in hindsight it was a brilliant political move, I'm not sure I thought it through all that well. It was something that was spur of the moment.\n[...] five million would let them think that all is well anyway, but it's not. So let's give them a message. My own thinking, get them stimulated to get into action. Zeroing it out would certainly give that message. I think it was as simple as that. Didn't talk to anybody else about doing it first, just, \"Let's go do that\". Voila, it worked. Don't know whether I'd do that again.\nThe political ploy worked. In response to Hubble being zeroed out of NASA's budget, a nationwide lobbying effort was coordinated among astronomers. Many astronomers met congressmen and senators in person, and large-scale letter-writing campaigns were organized. The National Academy of Sciences published a report emphasizing the need for a space telescope, and eventually, the Senate agreed to half the budget that had originally been approved by Congress.\nThe funding issues led to a reduction in the scale of the project, with the proposed mirror diameter reduced from 3 m to 2.4 m, both to cut costs and to allow a more compact and effective configuration for the telescope hardware. A proposed precursor space telescope to test the systems to be used on the main satellite was dropped, and budgetary concerns also prompted collaboration with the European Space Agency (ESA). ESA agreed to provide funding and supply one of the first generation instruments for the telescope, as well as the solar cells that would power it, and staff to work on the telescope in the United States, in return for European astronomers being guaranteed at least 15% of the observing time on the telescope. Congress eventually approved funding of $36million for 1978, and the design of the LST began in earnest, aiming for a launch date of 1983. In 1983, the telescope was named after Edwin Hubble, who confirmed one of the greatest scientific discoveries of the 20th century, made by Georges Lema\u00eetre, that the universe is expanding.\nConstruction and engineering.\nOnce the Space Telescope project had been given the go-ahead, work on the program was divided among many institutions. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) was given responsibility for the design, development, and construction of the telescope, while Goddard Space Flight Center was given overall control of the scientific instruments and ground-control center for the mission. MSFC commissioned the optics company Perkin-Elmer to design and build the optical telescope assembly (OTA) and Fine Guidance Sensors for the space telescope. Lockheed was commissioned to construct and integrate the spacecraft in which the telescope would be housed.\nOptical telescope assembly.\nOptically, the HST is a Cassegrain reflector of Ritchey\u2013Chr\u00e9tien design, as are most large professional telescopes. This design, with two hyperbolic mirrors, is known for good imaging performance over a wide field of view, with the disadvantage that the mirrors have shapes that are hard to fabricate and test. The mirror and optical systems of the telescope determine the final performance, and they were designed to exacting specifications. Optical telescopes typically have mirrors polished to an accuracy of about a tenth of the wavelength of visible light, but the Space Telescope was to be used for observations from the visible through the ultraviolet (shorter wavelengths) and was specified to be diffraction limited to take full advantage of the space environment. Therefore, its mirror needed to be polished to an accuracy of 10 nanometers, or about 1/65 of the wavelength of red light. On the long wavelength end, the OTA was not designed with optimum infrared performance in mind, e.g. the mirrors are kept at stable (and warm, about 15\u00b0C) temperatures by heaters. This limits Hubble's performance as an infrared telescope.\nPerkin-Elmer (PE) intended to use custom-built and extremely sophisticated computer-controlled polishing machines to grind the mirror to the required shape. However, in case their cutting-edge technology ran into difficulties, NASA demanded that PE sub-contract to Kodak to construct a back-up mirror using traditional mirror-polishing techniques. (The team of Kodak and Itek also bid on the original mirror polishing work. Their bid called for the two companies to double-check each other's work, which would have almost certainly caught the polishing error that later caused problems.) The Kodak mirror is now on permanent display at the National Air and Space Museum. An Itek mirror built as part of the effort is now used in the 2.4 m telescope at the Magdalena Ridge Observatory.\nConstruction of the Perkin-Elmer mirror began in 1979, starting with a blank manufactured by Corning from their ultra-low expansion glass. To keep the mirror's weight to a minimum it consisted of top and bottom plates, each thick, sandwiching a honeycomb lattice. Perkin-Elmer simulated microgravity by supporting the mirror from the back with 130 rods that exerted varying amounts of force. This ensured the mirror's final shape would be correct and to specification when deployed. Mirror polishing continued until May 1981. NASA reports at the time questioned Perkin-Elmer's managerial structure, and the polishing began to slip behind schedule and over budget. To save money, NASA halted work on the back-up mirror and moved the launch date of the telescope to October 1984. The mirror was completed by the end of 1981; it was washed using of hot, deionized water and then received a reflective coating of 65\u2011nm\u2011thick aluminum and a protective coating of 25\u2011nm\u2011thick magnesium fluoride.\nDoubts continued to be expressed about Perkin-Elmer's competence on a project of this importance, as their budget and timescale for producing the rest of the OTA continued to inflate. In response to a schedule described as \"unsettled and changing daily\", NASA postponed the launch date of the telescope until April 1985. Perkin-Elmer's schedules continued to slip at a rate of about one month per quarter, and at times delays reached one day for each day of work. NASA was forced to postpone the launch date until March and then September 1986. By this time, the total project budget had risen to $1.175billion.\nSpacecraft systems.\nThe spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments were to be housed was another major engineering challenge. It would have to withstand frequent passages from direct sunlight into the darkness of Earth's shadow, which would cause major changes in temperature, while being stable enough to allow extremely accurate pointing of the telescope. A shroud of multi-layer insulation keeps the temperature within the telescope stable and surrounds a light aluminum shell in which the telescope and instruments sit. Within the shell, a graphite-epoxy frame keeps the working parts of the telescope firmly aligned. Because graphite composites are hygroscopic, there was a risk that water vapor absorbed by the truss while in Lockheed's clean room would later be expressed in the vacuum of space; resulting in the telescope's instruments being covered by ice. To reduce that risk, a nitrogen gas purge was performed before launching the telescope into space.\nAs well as electrical power systems, the Pointing Control System controls HST orientation using five types of sensors (magnetic sensors, optical sensors, and six gyroscopes) and two types of actuators (reaction wheels and magnetic torquers).\nWhile construction of the spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments would be housed proceeded somewhat more smoothly than the construction of the OTA, Lockheed experienced some budget and schedule slippage, and by the summer 1985, construction of the spacecraft was 30% over budget and three months behind schedule. An MSFC report said Lockheed tended to rely on NASA directions rather than take their own initiative in the construction.\nComputer systems and data processing.\nThe two initial, primary computers on the HST were the 1.25 MHz DF-224 system, built by Rockwell Autonetics, which contained three redundant CPUs, and two redundant NSSC-1 (NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer, Model 1) systems, developed by Westinghouse and GSFC using diode\u2013transistor logic (DTL). A co-processor for the DF-224 was added during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993, which consisted of two redundant strings of an Intel-based 80386 processor with an 80387 math co-processor. The DF-224 and its 386 co-processor were replaced by a 25MHz Intel-based 80486 processor system during Servicing Mission 3A in 1999. The new computer is 20 times faster, with six times more memory, than the DF-224 it replaced. It increases throughput by moving some computing tasks from the ground to the spacecraft and saves money by allowing the use of modern programming languages.\nAdditionally, some of the science instruments and components had their own embedded microprocessor-based control systems. The MATs (Multiple Access Transponder) components, MAT-1 and MAT-2, use Hughes Aircraft CDP1802CD microprocessors. The Wide Field and Planetary Camera (WFPC) also used an RCA 1802 microprocessor (or possibly the older 1801 version). The WFPC-1 was replaced by the WFPC-2 during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993, which was then replaced by the Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) during Servicing Mission 4 in 2009. The upgrade extended Hubble's capability of seeing deeper into the universe and providing images in three broad regions of the spectrum.\nInitial instruments.\nWhen launched, the HST carried five scientific instruments: the Wide Field and Planetary Camera (WF/PC), Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS), High Speed Photometer (HSP), Faint Object Camera (FOC) and the Faint Object Spectrograph (FOS). WF/PC used a radial instrument bay, and the other four instruments were each installed in an axial instrument bay.\nWF/PC was a high-resolution imaging device primarily intended for optical observations. It was built by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and incorporated a set of 48 filters isolating spectral lines of particular astrophysical interest. The instrument contained eight charge-coupled device (CCD) chips divided between two cameras, each using four CCDs. Each CCD has a resolution of 0.64 megapixels. The wide field camera (WFC) covered a large angular field at the expense of resolution, while the planetary camera (PC) took images at a longer effective focal length than the WF chips, giving it a greater magnification.\nThe Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS) was a spectrograph designed to operate in the ultraviolet. It was built by the Goddard Space Flight Center and could achieve a spectral resolution of 90,000. Also optimized for ultraviolet observations were the FOC and FOS, which were capable of the highest spatial resolution of any instruments on Hubble. Rather than CCDs, these three instruments used photon-counting digicons as their detectors. The FOC was constructed by ESA, while the University of California, San Diego, and Martin Marietta Corporation built the FOS.\nThe final instrument was the HSP, designed and built at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison. It was optimized for visible and ultraviolet light observations of variable stars and other astronomical objects varying in brightness. It could take up to 100,000 measurements per second with a photometric accuracy of about 2% or better.\nHST's guidance system can also be used as a scientific instrument. Its three Fine Guidance Sensors (FGS) are primarily used to keep the telescope accurately pointed during an observation, but can also be used to carry out extremely accurate astrometry; measurements accurate to within 0.0003 arcseconds have been achieved.\nGround support.\nThe Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) is responsible for the scientific operation of the telescope and the delivery of data products to astronomers. STScI is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA) and is physically located in Baltimore, Maryland on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University, one of the 39 U.S. universities and seven international affiliates that make up the AURA consortium. STScI was established in 1981 after something of a power struggle between NASA and the scientific community at large. NASA had wanted to keep this function in-house, but scientists wanted it to be based in an academic establishment. The Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (ST-ECF), established at Garching bei M\u00fcnchen near Munich in 1984, provided similar support for European astronomers until 2011, when these activities were moved to the European Space Astronomy Centre.\nOne complex task that falls to STScI is scheduling observations for the telescope. Hubble is in a low-Earth orbit to enable servicing missions, which results in most astronomical targets being occulted by the Earth for slightly less than half of each orbit. Observations cannot take place when the telescope passes through the South Atlantic Anomaly due to elevated radiation levels, and there are also sizable exclusion zones around the Sun (precluding observations of Mercury), Moon and Earth. The solar avoidance angle is about 50\u00b0, to keep sunlight from illuminating any part of the OTA. Earth and Moon avoidance keeps bright light out of the FGSs, and keeps scattered light from entering the instruments. If the FGSs are turned off, the Moon and Earth can be observed. Earth observations were used very early in the program to generate flat-fields for the WFPC1 instrument. There is a so-called continuous viewing zone (CVZ), within roughly 24\u00b0 of Hubble's orbital poles, in which targets are not occulted for long periods.\nDue to the precession of the orbit, the location of the CVZ moves slowly over a period of eight weeks. Because the limb of the Earth is always within about 30\u00b0 of regions within the CVZ, the brightness of scattered earthshine may be elevated for long periods during CVZ observations. Hubble orbits in low Earth orbit at an altitude of approximately and an inclination of 28.5\u00b0. The position along its orbit changes over time in a way that is not accurately predictable. The density of the upper atmosphere varies according to many factors, and this means Hubble's predicted position for six weeks' time could be in error by up to . Observation schedules are typically finalized only a few days in advance, as a longer lead time would mean there was a chance the target would be unobservable by the time it was due to be observed. Engineering support for HST is provided by NASA and contractor personnel at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, south of the STScI. Hubble's operation is monitored 24 hours per day by four teams of flight controllers who make up Hubble's Flight Operations Team.\n\"Challenger\" disaster, delays, and eventual launch.\nBy January 1986, the planned launch date for Hubble that October looked feasible, but the \"Challenger\" disaster brought the U.S. space program to a halt, grounded the Shuttle fleet, and forced the launch to be postponed for several years. During this delay the telescope was kept in a clean room, powered up and purged with nitrogen, until a launch could be rescheduled. This costly situation (about $6million per month) pushed the overall costs of the project higher. However, this delay allowed time for engineers to perform extensive tests, swap out a possibly failure-prone battery, and make other improvements. Furthermore, the ground software needed to control Hubble was not ready in 1986, and was barely ready by the 1990 launch. Following the resumption of shuttle flights, Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" successfully launched the Hubble on April 24, 1990, as part of the STS-31 mission.\nAt launch, NASA had spent approximately $4.7 billion in inflation-adjusted 2010 dollars on the project. Hubble's cumulative costs are estimated to be about $11.3billion in 2015 dollars, which include all subsequent servicing costs, but not ongoing operations, making it the most expensive science mission in NASA history.\nList of Hubble instruments.\nHubble accommodates five science instruments at a given time, plus the Fine Guidance Sensors, which are mainly used for aiming the telescope but are occasionally used for scientific astrometry measurements. Early instruments were replaced with more advanced ones during the Shuttle servicing missions. COSTAR was a corrective optics device rather than a science instrument, but occupied one of the four axial instrument bays.\nSince the final servicing mission in 2009, the four active instruments have been ACS, COS, STIS and WFC3. NICMOS is kept in hibernation, but may be revived if WFC3 were to fail in the future.\nOf the former instruments, three (COSTAR, FOS and WFPC2) are displayed in the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. The FOC is in the Dornier museum, Germany. The HSP is in the Space Place at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison. The first WFPC was dismantled, and some components were then re-used in WFC3.\nFlawed mirror.\nWithin weeks of the launch of the telescope, the returned images indicated a serious problem with the optical system. Although the first images appeared to be sharper than those of ground-based telescopes, Hubble failed to achieve a final sharp focus and the best image quality obtained was drastically lower than expected. Images of point sources spread out over a radius of more than one arcsecond, instead of having a point spread function (PSF) concentrated within a circle 0.1arcseconds (485nrad) in diameter, as had been specified in the design criteria.\nAnalysis of the flawed images revealed that the primary mirror had been polished to the wrong shape. Although it was believed to be one of the most precisely figured optical mirrors ever made, smooth to about 10 nanometers, the outer perimeter was too flat by about 2200 nanometers (about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044450 mm or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204411000 inch). This difference was catastrophic, introducing severe spherical aberration, a flaw in which light reflecting off the edge of a mirror focuses on a different point from the light reflecting off its center.\nThe effect of the mirror flaw on scientific observations depended on the particular observation. The core of the aberrated PSF was sharp enough to permit high-resolution observations of bright objects, and spectroscopy of point sources was affected only through a sensitivity loss; however, the loss of light to the large, out-of-focus halo severely reduced the usefulness of the telescope for faint objects or high-contrast imaging. This meant nearly all the cosmological programs were essentially impossible, since they required observation of exceptionally faint objects. This led politicians to question NASA's competence, scientists to rue the cost which could have gone to more productive endeavors, and comedians to make jokes about NASA and the telescope. In the 1991 comedy \"\", in a scene where historical disasters are displayed, Hubble is pictured with the \"Titanic\" and the \"Hindenburg\". Nonetheless, during the first three years of the Hubble mission, before the optical corrections, the telescope carried out a large number of productive observations of less demanding targets. The error was well characterized and stable, enabling astronomers to partially compensate for the defective mirror by using sophisticated image processing techniques such as deconvolution.\nOrigin of the problem.\nA commission headed by Lew Allen, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was established to determine how the error could have arisen. The Allen Commission found that a reflective null corrector, a testing device used to achieve a properly shaped non-spherical mirror, had been incorrectly assembled. (One lens was out of position by .) During the initial grinding and polishing of the mirror, Perkin-Elmer analyzed its surface with two conventional refractive null correctors. However, for the final manufacturing step (figuring), they switched to the custom-built reflective null corrector, designed explicitly to meet very strict tolerances. The incorrect assembly of this device resulted in the mirror being ground very precisely but to the wrong shape. During fabrication, a few tests using conventional null correctors correctly reported spherical aberration. But these results were dismissed, thus missing the opportunity to catch the error, because the reflective null corrector was considered more accurate.\nThe commission blamed the failings primarily on Perkin-Elmer. Relations between NASA and the optics company had been severely strained during the telescope construction, due to frequent schedule slippage and cost overruns. NASA found that Perkin-Elmer did not review or supervise the mirror construction adequately, did not assign its best optical scientists to the project (as it had for the prototype), and in particular did not involve the optical designers in the construction and verification of the mirror. While the commission heavily criticized Perkin-Elmer for these managerial failings, NASA was also criticized for not picking up on the quality control shortcomings, such as relying totally on test results from a single instrument.\nDesign of a solution.\nMany feared that Hubble would be abandoned. The design of the telescope had always incorporated servicing missions, and astronomers immediately began to seek potential solutions to the problem that could be applied at the first servicing mission, scheduled for 1993. While Kodak had ground a back-up mirror for Hubble, it would have been impossible to replace the mirror in orbit, and too expensive and time-consuming to bring the telescope back to Earth for a refit. Instead, the fact that the mirror had been ground so precisely to the wrong shape led to the design of new optical components with exactly the same error but in the opposite sense, to be added to the telescope at the servicing mission, effectively acting as \"spectacles\" to correct the spherical aberration.\nThe first step was a precise characterization of the error in the main mirror. Working backwards from images of point sources, astronomers determined that the conic constant of the mirror as built was , instead of the intended . The same number was also derived by analyzing the null corrector used by Perkin-Elmer to figure the mirror, as well as by analyzing interferograms obtained during ground testing of the mirror.\nBecause of the way the HST's instruments were designed, two different sets of correctors were required. The design of the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2, already planned to replace the existing WF/PC, included relay mirrors to direct light onto the four separate charge-coupled device (CCD) chips making up its two cameras. An inverse error built into their surfaces could completely cancel the aberration of the primary. However, the other instruments lacked any intermediate surfaces that could be configured in this way, and so required an external correction device.\nThe Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement (COSTAR) system was designed to correct the spherical aberration for light focused at the FOC, FOS, and GHRS. It consists of two mirrors in the light path with one ground to correct the aberration. To fit the COSTAR system onto the telescope, one of the other instruments had to be removed, and astronomers selected the High Speed Photometer to be sacrificed. By 2002, all the original instruments requiring COSTAR had been replaced by instruments with their own corrective optics. COSTAR was then removed and returned to Earth in 2009 where it is exhibited at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. The area previously used by COSTAR is now occupied by the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph.\nServicing missions and new instruments.\nServicing overview.\nHubble was designed to accommodate regular servicing and equipment upgrades while in orbit. Instruments and limited life items were designed as orbital replacement units. Five servicing missions (SM 1, 2, 3A, 3B, and 4) were flown by NASA Space Shuttles, the first in December 1993 and the last in May 2009. Servicing missions were delicate operations that began with maneuvering to intercept the telescope in orbit and carefully retrieving it with the shuttle's mechanical arm. The necessary work was then carried out in multiple tethered spacewalks over a period of four to five days. After a visual inspection of the telescope, astronauts conducted repairs, replaced failed or degraded components, upgraded equipment, and installed new instruments. Once work was completed, the telescope was redeployed, typically after boosting to a higher orbit to address the orbital decay caused by atmospheric drag.\nServicing Mission 1.\nThe first Hubble servicing mission was scheduled for 1993 before the mirror problem was discovered. It assumed greater importance, as the astronauts would need to do extensive work to install corrective optics; failure would have resulted in either abandoning Hubble or accepting its permanent disability. Other components failed before the mission, causing the repair cost to rise to $500million (not including the cost of the shuttle flight). A successful repair would help demonstrate the viability of building Space Station Alpha.\nSTS-49 in 1992 demonstrated the difficulty of space work. While its rescue of Intelsat 603 received praise, the astronauts had taken possibly reckless risks in doing so. Neither the rescue nor the unrelated assembly of prototype space station components occurred as the astronauts had trained, causing NASA to reassess planning and training, including for the Hubble repair. The agency assigned to the mission Story Musgrave (who had worked on satellite repair procedures since 1976) and six other experienced astronauts, including two from STS-49. The first mission director since Project Apollo would coordinate a crew with 16 previous shuttle flights. The astronauts were trained to use about a hundred specialized tools.\nHeat had been the problem on prior spacewalks, which occurred in sunlight. Hubble needed to be repaired out of sunlight. Musgrave discovered during vacuum training, seven months before the mission, that spacesuit gloves did not sufficiently protect against the cold of space. After STS-57 confirmed the issue in orbit, NASA quickly changed equipment, procedures, and flight plan. Seven total mission simulations occurred before launch, the most thorough preparation in shuttle history. No complete Hubble mockup existed, so the astronauts studied many separate models (including one at the Smithsonian) and mentally combined their varying and contradictory details.\nService Mission 1 flew aboard \"Endeavour\" in December 1993, and involved installation of several instruments and other equipment over ten days. Most importantly, the High Speed Photometer was replaced with the COSTAR corrective optics package, and WF/PC was replaced with the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 (WFPC2) with an internal optical correction system. The solar arrays and their drive electronics were also replaced, as well as four gyroscopes in the telescope pointing system, two electrical control units and other electrical components, and two magnetometers. The onboard computers were upgraded with added coprocessors, and Hubble's orbit was boosted.\nOn January 13, 1994, NASA declared the mission a complete success and showed the first sharper images. The mission was one of the most complex performed to that date, involving five long extra-vehicular activity periods. Its success was a boon for NASA, as well as for the astronomers who now had a more capable space telescope.\nServicing Mission 2.\nServicing Mission 2, flown by \"Discovery\" in February 1997, replaced the GHRS and the FOS with the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS), replaced an Engineering and Science Tape Recorder with a new Solid State Recorder, and repaired thermal insulation. NICMOS contained a heat sink of solid nitrogen to reduce the thermal noise from the instrument, but shortly after it was installed, an unexpected thermal expansion resulted in part of the heat sink coming into contact with an optical baffle. This led to an increased warming rate for the instrument and reduced its original expected lifetime of 4.5 years to about two years.\nServicing Mission 3A.\nServicing Mission 3A, flown by \"Discovery\", took place in December 1999, and was a split-off from Servicing Mission3 after three of the six onboard gyroscopes had failed. The fourth failed a few weeks before the mission, rendering the telescope incapable of performing scientific observations. The mission replaced all six gyroscopes, replaced a Fine Guidance Sensor and the computer, installed a Voltage/temperature Improvement Kit (VIK) to prevent battery overcharging, and replaced thermal insulation blankets.\nServicing Mission 3B.\nServicing Mission 3B flown by \"Columbia\" in March 2002 saw the installation of a new instrument, with the FOC (which, except for the Fine Guidance Sensors when used for astrometry, was the last of the original instruments) being replaced by the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS). This meant COSTAR was no longer required, since all new instruments had built-in correction for the main mirror aberration. The mission also revived NICMOS by installing a closed-cycle cooler and replaced the solar arrays for the second time, providing 30 percent more power.\nServicing Mission 4.\nPlans called for Hubble to be serviced in February 2005, but the \"Columbia\" disaster in 2003, in which the orbiter disintegrated on re-entry into the atmosphere, had wide-ranging effects to the Hubble program and other NASA missions. NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe decided all future shuttle missions had to be able to reach the safe haven of the International Space Station should in-flight problems develop. As no shuttles were capable of reaching both HST and the space station during the same mission, future crewed service missions were canceled. This decision was criticized by numerous astronomers who felt Hubble was valuable enough to merit the human risk. HST's planned successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), by 2004 was not expected to launch until at least 2011. JWST was eventually launched in December 2021. A gap in space-observing capabilities between a decommissioning of Hubble and the commissioning of a successor was of major concern to many astronomers, given the significant scientific impact of HST. The consideration that JWST will not be located in low Earth orbit, and therefore cannot be easily upgraded or repaired in the event of an early failure, only made concerns more acute. On the other hand, NASA officials were concerned that continuing to service Hubble would consume funds from other programs and delay the JWST.\nIn January 2004, O'Keefe said he would review his decision to cancel the final servicing mission to HST, due to public outcry and requests from Congress for NASA to look for a way to save it. The National Academy of Sciences convened an official panel, which recommended in July 2004 that the HST should be preserved despite the apparent risks. Their report urged \"NASA should take no actions that would preclude a space shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope\". In August 2004, O'Keefe asked Goddard Space Flight Center to prepare a detailed proposal for a robotic service mission. These plans were later canceled, the robotic mission being described as \"not feasible\". In late 2004, several Congressional members, led by Senator Barbara Mikulski, held public hearings and carried on a fight with much public support (including thousands of letters from school children across the U.S.) to get the Bush Administration and NASA to reconsider the decision to drop plans for a Hubble rescue mission.\nThe nomination in April 2005 of a new NASA Administrator, Michael D. Griffin, changed the situation, as Griffin stated he would consider a crewed servicing mission. Soon after his appointment Griffin authorized Goddard to proceed with preparations for a crewed Hubble maintenance flight, saying he would make the final decision after the next two shuttle missions. In October 2006 Griffin gave the final go-ahead, and the 11-day mission by \"Atlantis\" was scheduled for October 2008. Hubble's main data-handling unit failed in September 2008, halting all reporting of scientific data until its back-up was brought online on October 25, 2008. Since a failure of the backup unit would leave the HST helpless, the service mission was postponed to incorporate a replacement for the primary unit.\nServicing Mission 4 (SM4), flown by \"Atlantis\" in May 2009, was the last scheduled shuttle mission for HST. SM4 installed the replacement data-handling unit, repaired the ACS and STIS systems, installed improved nickel\u2013hydrogen batteries, and replaced other components including all six gyroscopes. SM4 also installed two new observation instruments: Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) and the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) and the Soft Capture and Rendezvous System, which will enable the future rendezvous, capture, and safe disposal of Hubble by either a crewed or robotic mission. Except for the ACS's High Resolution Channel, which could not be repaired and was disabled, the work accomplished during SM4 rendered the telescope fully functional.\nMajor projects.\nSince the start of the program, a number of research projects have been carried out, some of them almost solely with Hubble, others coordinated facilities such as Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESO's Very Large Telescope. Although the Hubble observatory is nearing the end of its life, there are still major projects scheduled for it. One example is the current (2022) ULLYSES project (Ultraviolet Legacy Library of Young Stars as Essential Standards) which will last for three years to observe a set of high- and low-mass young stars and will shed light on star formation and composition. Another is the OPAL project (Outer Planet Atmospheres Legacy), which is focussed on understanding the evolution and dynamics of the atmosphere of the outer planets (such as Jupiter and Uranus) by making baseline observations over an extended period.\nCosmic Assembly Near-infrared Deep Extragalactic Legacy Survey.\nIn an August 2013 press release, CANDELS was referred to as \"the largest project in the history of Hubble\". The survey \"aims to explore galactic evolution in the early Universe, and the first seeds of cosmic structure at less than one billion years after the Big Bang.\" The CANDELS project site describes the survey's goals as the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Cosmic Assembly Near-IR Deep Extragalactic Legacy Survey is designed to document the first third of galactic evolution from z = 8 to 1.5 via deep imaging of more than 250,000 galaxies with WFC3/IR and ACS. It will also find the first Type Ia SNe beyond z &gt; 1.5 and establish their accuracy as standard candles for cosmology. Five premier multi-wavelength sky regions are selected; each has multi-wavelength data from Spitzer and other facilities, and has extensive spectroscopy of the brighter galaxies. The use of five widely separated fields mitigates cosmic variance and yields statistically robust and complete samples of galaxies down to 109 solar masses out to z ~ 8.\nFrontier Fields program.\nThe program, officially named \"Hubble Deep Fields Initiative 2012\", is aimed to advance the knowledge of early galaxy formation by studying high-redshift galaxies in blank fields with the help of gravitational lensing to see the \"faintest galaxies in the distant universe\". The Frontier Fields web page describes the goals of the program being:\nCosmic Evolution Survey (COSMOS).\nThe Cosmic Evolution Survey (COSMOS) is an astronomical survey designed to probe the formation and evolution of galaxies as a function of both cosmic time (redshift) and the local galaxy environment. The survey covers a two square degree equatorial field with spectroscopy and X-ray to radio imaging by most of the major space-based telescopes and a number of large ground based telescopes, making it a key focus region of extragalactic astrophysics. COSMOS was launched in 2006 as the largest project pursued by the Hubble Space Telescope at the time, and still is the largest continuous area of sky covered for the purposes of mapping deep space in blank fields, 2.5 times the area of the moon on the sky and 17 times larger than the largest of the CANDELS regions. The COSMOS scientific collaboration that was forged from the initial COSMOS survey is the largest and longest-running extragalactic collaboration, known for its collegiality and openness. The study of galaxies in their environment can be done only with large areas of the sky, larger than a half square degree. More than two million galaxies are detected, spanning 90% of the age of the Universe. The COSMOS collaboration is led by Caitlin Casey, Jeyhan Kartaltepe, and Vernesa Smolcic and involves more than 200 scientists in a dozen countries.\nCluster Lensing and Supernova survey with Hubble.\nThe Cluster Lensing and Supernova survey with Hubble (CLASH) was a Treasury Program from 2010 to 2013 conducted by the Hubble Space Telescope to observe 25 massive galaxy clusters by using gravitational lensing. CLASH aimed to examine the distribution of dark matter and dark energy in massive galaxy clusters with the new instruments installed in 2009. Imagery showing the effects of gravitational lensing is one means of detecting dark matter and dark energy, and CLASH focused on trying to gain a better understanding of both mysterious topics.\nPhotomosaic of the Andromeda Galaxy.\nThe Panchromatic Hubble Andromeda Treasury and Panchromatic Hubble Andromeda Southern Treasury (PHAT and PHAST) were observations done by Hubble from July 2010 to October 2013 to map the northern half of the Andromeda Galaxy and from December 2021 to January 2024 to map the southern half. Andromeda is the nearest large galaxy to the Milky Way Galaxy and Hubble created the highest resolution and most detailed photomosaic ever of Andromeda. Two hundred million stars can be seen in this combined image of both Treasury Programs out of a total one trillion stars in Andromeda. Each star looks like a grain of sand. The northern half, PHAT, was mapped in near-ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared wavelengths in 828 orbits and was released in January 2015. The southern half, PHAST, was mapped in near-ultraviolet and visible wavelengths in 195 orbits and was released in January 2025. Observing Andromeda in this detail is the best alternative to observing the Milky Way Galaxy because Earth is within the Milky Way and cannot observe most of the Milky Way due to the galaxy itself blocking observations of 20% of the sky and most of the galaxy. To achieve this mosaic 1,023 Hubble orbits were needed. The mosaic image is made up of at least 2.5billion pixels.\nPublic use.\nProposal process.\nAnyone can apply for time on the telescope; there are no restrictions on nationality or academic affiliation, but funding for analysis is available only to U.S. institutions. Competition for time on the telescope is intense, with about one-fifth of the proposals submitted in each cycle earning time on the schedule.\nCalls for proposals are issued roughly annually, with time allocated for a cycle lasting about one year. Proposals are divided into several categories; \"general observer\" proposals are the most common, covering routine observations. \"Snapshot observations\" are those in which targets require only 45 minutes or less of telescope time, including overheads such as acquiring the target. Snapshot observations are used to fill in gaps in the telescope schedule that cannot be filled by regular general observer programs.\nAstronomers may make \"Target of Opportunity\" proposals, in which observations are scheduled if a transient event covered by the proposal occurs during the scheduling cycle. In addition, up to 10% of the telescope time is designated \"director's discretionary\" (DD) time. Astronomers can apply to use DD time at any time of year, and it is typically awarded for study of unexpected transient phenomena such as supernovae.\nOther uses of DD time have included the observations that led to views of the Hubble Deep Field and Hubble Ultra Deep Field, and in the first four cycles of telescope time, observations that were carried out by amateur astronomers.\nIn 2012, the ESA held a contest for public image processing of Hubble data to encourage the discovery of \"hidden treasures\" in the raw Hubble data.\nUse by amateur astronomers.\nThe first director of STScI, Riccardo Giacconi, announced in 1986 that he intended to devote some of his director discretionary time to allowing amateur astronomers to use the telescope. The total time to be allocated was only a few hours per cycle but excited great interest among amateur astronomers.\nProposals for amateur time were stringently reviewed by a committee of amateur astronomers, and time was awarded only to proposals that were deemed to have genuine scientific merit, did not duplicate proposals made by professionals, and required the unique capabilities of the space telescope. Thirteen amateur astronomers were awarded time on the telescope, with observations being carried out between 1990 and 1997. One such study was \"Transition Comets\u00a0\u2013 UV Search for OH\". The first proposal, \"A Hubble Space Telescope Study of Posteclipse Brightening and Albedo Changes on Io\", was published in \"Icarus\", a journal devoted to solar system studies. A second study from another group of amateurs was also published in \"Icarus\". After that time, however, budget reductions at STScI made the support of work by amateur astronomers untenable, and no additional amateur programs have been carried out.\nRegular Hubble proposals still include findings or discovered objects by amateurs and citizen scientists. These observations are often in a collaboration with professional astronomers. One of the earliest such observations is the Great White Spot of 1990 on planet Saturn, discovered by amateur astronomer S. Wilber and observed by HST under a proposal by J. Westphal (Caltech). Later professional-amateur observations by Hubble include discoveries by the Galaxy Zoo project, such as Voorwerpjes and Green Pea galaxies. The \"Gems of the Galaxies\" program is based on a list of objects by Galaxy Zoo volunteers that was shortened with the help of an online vote. Additionally there are observations of minor planets discovered by amateur astronomers, such as 2I/Borisov and changes in the atmosphere of the gas giants Jupiter and Saturn or the ice giants Uranus and Neptune. In the pro-am collaboration backyard worlds the HST was used to observe a planetary mass object, called WISE J0830+2837. The non-detection by the HST helped to classify this peculiar object.\nScientific results.\nKey projects.\nIn the early 1980s, NASA and STScI convened four panels to discuss key projects. These were projects that were both scientifically important and would require significant telescope time, which would be explicitly dedicated to each project. This guaranteed that these particular projects would be completed early, in case the telescope failed sooner than expected. The panels identified three such projects: 1) a study of the nearby intergalactic medium using quasar absorption lines to determine the properties of the intergalactic medium and the gaseous content of galaxies and groups of galaxies; 2) a medium deep survey using the Wide Field Camera to take data whenever one of the other instruments was being used and 3) a project to determine the Hubble constant within ten percent by reducing the errors, both external and internal, in the calibration of the distance scale.\nImportant discoveries.\nHubble has helped resolve some long-standing problems in astronomy, while also raising new questions. Some results have required new theories to explain them.\nAge and expansion of the universe.\nAmong its primary mission targets was to measure distances to Cepheid variable stars more accurately than ever before, and thus constrain the value of the Hubble constant, the measure of the rate at which the universe is expanding, which is also related to its age. Before the launch of HST, estimates of the Hubble constant typically had errors of up to 50%, but Hubble measurements of Cepheid variables in the Virgo Cluster and other distant galaxy clusters provided a measured value with an accuracy of \u00b110%, which is consistent with other more accurate measurements made since Hubble's launch using other techniques. The estimated age of the universe is now 13.7billion years. (Before the Hubble Telescope it was ten to twenty billion.)\nAstronomers from the High-z Supernova Search Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project used ground-based telescopes and HST to observe distant supernovae and uncovered evidence that, far from decelerating under the influence of gravity, the expansion of the universe is instead accelerating. Three members of these two groups have subsequently been awarded Nobel Prizes for their discovery. The cause of this acceleration remains poorly understood; the term used for the currently-unknown cause is dark energy, signifying that it is dark (unable to be directly seen and detected) to our current scientific instruments.\nBlack holes.\nThe high-resolution spectra and images provided by the HST have been especially well-suited to establishing the prevalence of black holes in the center of nearby galaxies. While it had been hypothesized in the early 1960s that black holes would be found at the centers of some galaxies, and astronomers in the 1980s identified a number of good black hole candidates, work conducted with Hubble shows that black holes are probably common to the centers of all galaxies. The Hubble programs further established that the masses of the nuclear black holes and properties of the galaxies are closely related.\nExtending visible wavelength images.\nA unique window on the Universe enabled by Hubble are the Hubble Deep Field, Hubble Ultra-Deep Field, and Hubble Extreme Deep Field images, which used Hubble's unmatched sensitivity at visible wavelengths to create images of small patches of sky that are the deepest ever obtained at optical wavelengths. The images reveal galaxies billions of light years away, thereby providing information about the early Universe, and have accordingly generated a wealth of scientific papers. The Wide Field Camera3 improved the view of these fields in the infrared and ultraviolet, supporting the discovery of some of the most distant objects yet discovered, such as MACS0647-JD.\nThe non-standard object SCP 06F6 was discovered by the Hubble Space Telescope in February 2006.\nOn March 3, 2016, researchers using Hubble data announced the discovery of the farthest confirmed galaxy to date: GN-z11, which Hubble observed as it existed roughly 400million years after the Big Bang. The Hubble observations occurred on February 11, 2015, and April 3, 2015, as part of the CANDELS/GOODS-North surveys.\nSolar System discoveries.\nThe collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter in 1994 was fortuitously timed for astronomers, coming just a few months after Servicing Mission1 had restored Hubble's optical performance. Hubble images of the planet were sharper than any taken since the passage of \"Voyager\u00a02\" in 1979, and were crucial in studying the dynamics of the collision of a large comet with Jupiter, an event believed to occur once every few centuries.\nIn March 2015, researchers announced that measurements of aurorae around Ganymede, one of Jupiter's moons, revealed that it has a subsurface ocean. Using Hubble to study the motion of its aurorae, the researchers determined that a large saltwater ocean was helping to suppress the interaction between Jupiter's magnetic field and that of Ganymede. The ocean is estimated to be deep, trapped beneath a ice crust.\nHST has also been used to study objects in the outer reaches of the Solar System, including the dwarf planets Pluto, Eris, and Sedna. During June and July 2012, U.S. astronomers using Hubble discovered Styx, a tiny fifth moon orbiting Pluto.\nFrom June to August 2015, Hubble was used to search for a Kuiper belt object (KBO) target for the \"New Horizons\" Kuiper Belt Extended Mission (KEM) when similar searches with ground telescopes failed to find a suitable target. This resulted in the discovery of at least five new KBOs, including the eventual KEM target, 486958 Arrokoth, that \"New Horizons\" performed a close fly-by of on January 1, 2019.\nIn April 2022 NASA announced that astronomers were able to use images from HST to determine the size of the nucleus of comet C/2014 UN271 (Bernardinelli\u2013Bernstein), which is the largest icy comet nucleus ever seen by astronomers. The nucleus of C/2014 UN271 has an estimated mass of fifty trillion tons which is fifty times the mass of other known comets in the Solar System.\nSupernova reappearance.\nOn December 11, 2015, Hubble captured an image of the first-ever predicted reappearance of a supernova, dubbed \"Refsdal\", which was calculated using different mass models of a galaxy cluster whose gravity is warping the supernova's light. The supernova was previously seen in November 2014 behind galaxy cluster MACS J1149.5+2223 as part of Hubble's Frontier Fields program. The light from the cluster took roughly five billion years to reach Earth, while the light from the supernova behind it took five billion more years than that, as measured by their respective redshifts. Because of the gravitational effect of the galaxy cluster, four images of the supernova appeared instead of one, an example of an Einstein cross. Based on early lens models, a fifth image was predicted to reappear by the end of 2015. Refsdal reappeared as predicted in 2015.\nMass and size of Milky Way.\nIn March 2019, observations from Hubble and data from the European Space Agency's Gaia space observatory were combined to determine that the mass of the Milky Way Galaxy is approximately 1.5trillion times the mass of the Sun, a value intermediate between prior estimates.\nOther discoveries.\nOther discoveries made with Hubble data include proto-planetary disks (proplyds) in the Orion Nebula; evidence for the presence of extrasolar planets around Sun-like stars; and the optical counterparts of the still-mysterious gamma-ray bursts. Using gravitational lensing, Hubble observed a galaxy designated MACS 2129-1 approximately ten billion lightyears from Earth. MACS 2129-1 subverted expectations about galaxies in which new star formation had ceased, a significant result for understanding the formation of elliptical galaxies.\nIn 2022 Hubble detected the light of the farthest individual star ever seen to date. The star, WHL0137-LS (nicknamed \"Earendel\"), existed within the first billion years after the Big Bang. It will be observed by NASA's James Webb Space Telescope to confirm Earendel is indeed a star.\nImpact on astronomy.\nMany objective measures show the positive impact of Hubble data on astronomy. As of 2025, over 22,000 papers based on Hubble data have been published in peer-reviewed journals, and countless more have appeared in conference proceedings. Looking at papers several years after their publication, about one-third of all astronomy papers have no citations, while only two percent of papers based on Hubble data have no citations. On average, a paper based on Hubble data receives about twice as many citations as papers based on non-Hubble data. Of the 200 papers published each year that receive the most citations, about 10% are based on Hubble data.\nAlthough the HST has clearly helped astronomical research, its financial cost has been large. A study on the relative astronomical benefits of different sizes of telescopes found that while papers based on HST data generate 15 times as many citations as a ground-based telescope such as the William Herschel Telescope, the HST costs about 100 times as much to build and maintain.\nDeciding between building ground- versus space-based telescopes is complex. Even before Hubble was launched, specialized ground-based techniques such as aperture masking interferometry had obtained higher-resolution optical and infrared images than Hubble would achieve, though restricted to targets about 108 times brighter than the faintest targets observed by Hubble. Since then, advances in adaptive optics have extended the high-resolution imaging capabilities of ground-based telescopes to the infrared imaging of faint objects. The usefulness of adaptive optics versus HST observations depends strongly on the particular details of the research questions being asked. In the visible bands, adaptive optics can correct only a relatively small field of view, whereas HST can conduct high-resolution optical imaging over a wider field. Moreover, Hubble can image more faint objects, since ground-based telescopes are affected by the background of scattered light created by the Earth's atmosphere.\nImpact on aerospace engineering.\nIn addition to its scientific results, Hubble has also made significant contributions to aerospace engineering, in particular the performance of systems in low Earth orbit (LEO). These insights result from Hubble's long lifetime on orbit, extensive instrumentation, and return of assemblies to the Earth where they can be studied in detail. In particular, Hubble has contributed to studies of the behavior of graphite composite structures in vacuum, optical contamination from residual gas and human servicing, radiation damage to electronics and sensors, and the long term behavior of multi-layer insulation. One lesson learned was that gyroscopes assembled using pressurized oxygen to deliver suspension fluid were prone to failure due to electric wire corrosion. Gyroscopes are now assembled using pressurized nitrogen. Another is that optical surfaces in LEO can have surprisingly long lifetimes; Hubble was only expected to last 15 years before the mirror became unusable, but after 14 years there was no measureable degradation. Finally, Hubble servicing missions, particularly those that serviced components not designed for in-space maintenance, have contributed towards the development of new tools and techniques for on-orbit repair.\nHubble data.\nTransmission to Earth.\nHubble data was initially stored on the spacecraft. When launched, the storage facilities were old-fashioned reel-to-reel tape drives, but these were replaced by solid state data storage facilities during servicing missions2 and 3A. About twice daily, the Hubble Space Telescope radios data to a satellite in the geosynchronous Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), which then downlinks the science data to one of two 60-foot (18-meter) diameter high-gain microwave antennas located at the White Sands Test Facility in White Sands, New Mexico. From there they are sent to the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center, and finally to the Space Telescope Science Institute for archiving. Each week, HST downlinks approximately 140 gigabits of data.\nColor images.\nAll images from Hubble are monochromatic grayscale, taken through a variety of filters, each passing specific wavelengths of light, and incorporated in each camera. Color images are created by combining separate monochrome images taken through different filters. This process can also create false-color versions of images including infrared and ultraviolet channels, where infrared is typically rendered as a deep red and ultraviolet is rendered as a deep blue.\nArchives.\nAll Hubble data is eventually made available via the Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes at STScI, CADC and ESA/ESAC. Data is usually proprietary (available only to the principal investigator (PI) and astronomers designated by the PI) for twelve months after being taken. The PI can apply to the director of the STScI to extend or reduce the proprietary period in some circumstances.\nObservations made on Director's Discretionary Time are exempt from the proprietary period, and are released to the public immediately. Calibration data such as flat fields and dark frames are also publicly available straight away. All data in the archive is in the FITS format, which is suitable for astronomical analysis but not for public use. The Hubble Heritage Project processes and releases to the public a small selection of the most striking images in JPEG and TIFF formats.\nPipeline reduction.\nAstronomical data taken with CCDs must undergo several calibration steps before they are suitable for astronomical analysis. STScI has developed sophisticated software that automatically calibrates data when they are requested from the archive using the best calibration files available. This \"on-the-fly\" processing means large data requests can take a day or more to be processed and returned. The process by which data is calibrated automatically is known as \"pipeline reduction\", and is increasingly common at major observatories. Astronomers may if they wish retrieve the calibration files themselves and run the pipeline reduction software locally. This may be desirable when calibration files other than those selected automatically need to be used.\nData analysis.\nHubble data can be analyzed using many different packages. STScI maintains the custom-made Space Telescope Science Data Analysis System (STSDAS) software, which contains all the programs needed to run pipeline reduction on raw data files, as well as many other astronomical image processing tools, tailored to the requirements of Hubble data. The software runs as a module of IRAF, a popular astronomical data reduction program.\nOutreach activities.\nNASA considered it important for the Space Telescope to capture the public's imagination, given the considerable contribution of taxpayers to its construction and operational costs. After the difficult early years when the faulty mirror severely dented Hubble's reputation with the public, the first servicing mission allowed its rehabilitation as the corrected optics produced numerous remarkable images.\nSeveral initiatives have helped to keep the public informed about Hubble activities.\nIn the United States, outreach efforts are coordinated by the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) Office for Public Outreach, which was established in 2000 to ensure that U.S. taxpayers saw the benefits of their investment in the space telescope program. To that end, STScI operates the HubbleSite.org website. The Hubble Heritage Project, operating out of the STScI, provides the public with high-quality images of the most interesting and striking objects observed. The Heritage team is composed of amateur and professional astronomers, as well as people with backgrounds outside astronomy, and emphasizes the aesthetic nature of Hubble images. The Heritage Project is granted a small amount of time to observe objects which, for scientific reasons, may not have images taken at enough wavelengths to construct a full-color image.\nSince 1999, the leading Hubble outreach group in Europe has been the Hubble European Space Agency Information Centre (HEIC). This office was established at the Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility in Munich, Germany. HEIC's mission is to fulfill HST outreach and education tasks for the European Space Agency. The work is centered on the production of news and photo releases that highlight interesting Hubble results and images. These are often European in origin, and so increase awareness of both ESA's Hubble share (15%) and the contribution of European scientists to the observatory. ESA produces educational material, including a videocast series called Hubblecast designed to share world-class scientific news with the public.\nThe Hubble Space Telescope has won two Space Achievement Awards from the Space Foundation, for its outreach activities, in 2001 and 2010.\nA replica of the Hubble Space Telescope is displayed on the courthouse lawn in Marshfield, Missouri, the hometown of namesake Edwin P. Hubble.\nCelebration images.\nThe Hubble Space Telescope celebrated its 20th anniversary in space on April 24, 2010. To commemorate the occasion, NASA, ESA, and the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) released an image from the Carina Nebula.\nTo commemorate Hubble's 25th anniversary in space on April 24, 2015, STScI released images of the Westerlund 2 cluster, located about away in the constellation Carina, through its Hubble 25 website. The European Space Agency created a dedicated 25th anniversary page on its website. In April 2016, a special celebratory image of the Bubble Nebula was released for Hubble's 26th \"birthday\".\nEquipment failures.\nGyroscope rotation sensors.\nHST uses gyroscopes to detect and measure any rotations so it can stabilize itself in orbit and point accurately and steadily at astronomical targets. HST has six of these rate-sensing gyroscopes installed. Three gyroscopes are normally required for operation; observations are still possible with two or one, but the area of sky that can be viewed would be somewhat restricted, and observations requiring very accurate pointing are more difficult. In 2018, the plan was to drop into one-gyroscope mode if fewer than three working gyroscopes were operational. The gyroscopes are part of the Pointing Control System, which uses five types of sensors (magnetic sensors, optical sensors, and the gyroscopes) and two types of actuators (reaction wheels and magnetic torquers).\nAfter the \"Columbia\" disaster in 2003, it was unclear whether another servicing mission would be possible, and gyroscope life became a concern again, so engineers developed new software for two-gyroscope and one-gyroscope modes to maximize the potential lifetime. The development was successful, and in 2005, it was decided to switch to two-gyroscope mode for regular telescope operations as a means of extending the lifetime of the mission. The switch to this mode was made in August 2005, leaving Hubble with two gyroscopes in use, two on backup, and two inoperable. One more gyroscope failed in 2007.\nBy the time of the final repair mission in May 2009, during which all six gyroscopes were replaced (with two new pairs and one refurbished pair), only three were still working. Engineers determined that the gyroscope failures were caused by corrosion of electric wires powering the motor that was initiated by oxygen-pressurized air used to deliver the thick suspending fluid. The new gyroscope models were assembled using pressurized nitrogen and were expected to be much more reliable. In the 2009 servicing mission all six gyroscopes were replaced, and after almost ten years only three gyroscopes failed, and only after exceeding the average expected run time for the design.\nOf the six gyroscopes replaced in 2009, three were of the old design susceptible for flex-lead failure, and three were of the new design with a longer expected lifetime. The first of the old-style gyroscopes failed in March 2014, and the second in April 2018. On October 5, 2018, the last of the old-style gyroscopes failed, and one of the new-style gyroscopes was powered-up from standby state. However, that reserve gyroscope did not immediately perform within operational limits, and so the observatory was placed into \"safe\" mode while scientists attempted to fix the problem. NASA tweeted on October 22, 2018, that the \"rotation rates produced by the backup gyro have reduced and are now within a normal range. Additional tests [are] to be performed to ensure Hubble can return to science operations with this gyro.\"\nThe solution that restored the backup new-style gyroscope to operational range was widely reported as \"turning it off and on again\". A \"running restart\" of the gyroscope was performed, but this had no effect, and the final resolution to the failure was more complex. The failure was attributed to an inconsistency in the fluid surrounding the float within the gyroscope, i.e. an air bubble. On October 18, 2018, the Hubble Operations Team directed the spacecraft into a series of maneuvers, moving it in opposite directions in order to mitigate the inconsistency. Only after the maneuvers, and a subsequent set of maneuvers on October 19, did the gyroscope truly operate within its normal range.\nInstruments and electronics.\nPast servicing missions have exchanged old instruments for new ones, avoiding failure and making new types of science possible. Without servicing missions, all the instruments will eventually fail. In August 2004, the power system of the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) failed, rendering the instrument inoperable. The electronics had originally been fully redundant, but the first set of electronics failed in May 2001. This power supply was fixed during Servicing Mission4 in May 2009.\nSimilarly, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) main camera primary electronics failed in June 2006, and the power supply for the backup electronics failed on January 27, 2007. Only the instrument's Solar Blind Channel (SBC) was operable using the side-1 electronics. A new power supply for the wide angle channel was added during SM 4, but quick tests revealed this did not help the high resolution channel. The Wide Field Channel (WFC) was returned to service by STS-125 in May 2009 but the High Resolution Channel (HRC) remains offline.\nOn January 8, 2019, Hubble entered a partial safe mode following suspected hardware problems in its most advanced instrument, the Wide Field Camera 3 instrument. NASA later reported that the cause of the safe mode within the instrument was a detection of voltage levels out of a defined range. On January 15, 2019, NASA said the cause of the failure was a software problem. Engineering data within the telemetry circuits were not accurate. In addition, all other telemetry within those circuits also contained erroneous values indicating that this was a telemetry issue and not a power supply issue. After resetting the telemetry circuits and associated boards the instrument began functioning again. On January 17, 2019, the device was returned to normal operation and on the same day it completed its first science observations.\n2021 power control issue.\nOn June 13, 2021, Hubble's payload computer halted due to a suspected issue with a memory module. An attempt to restart the computer on June 14 failed. Further attempts to switch to one of three other backup memory modules on board the spacecraft failed on June 18. On June 23 and 24, NASA engineers switched Hubble to a backup payload computer, but these operations have failed as well with the same error. On June 28, 2021, NASA announced that it was extending the investigation to other components. Scientific operations were suspended while NASA worked to diagnose and resolve the issue. After identifying a malfunctioning power control unit (PCU) supplying power to one of Hubble's computers, NASA was able to switch to a backup PCU and bring Hubble back to operational mode on July 16. On October 23, 2021, HST instruments reported missing synchronization messages and went into safe mode. By December 8, 2021, NASA had restored full science operations and was developing updates to make instruments more resilient to missing synchronization messages.\nFuture.\nOrbital decay and controlled reentry.\nHubble orbits the Earth in the extremely tenuous upper atmosphere, and over time its orbit decays due to drag. If not reboosted, it will re-enter the Earth's atmosphere within some decades, with the exact date depending on how active the Sun is and its impact on the upper atmosphere. If Hubble were to descend in a completely uncontrolled re-entry, parts of the main mirror and its support structure would probably survive, leaving the potential for damage or even human fatalities. In 2013, deputy project manager James Jeletic projected that Hubble could survive into the 2020s. Based on solar activity and atmospheric drag, or lack thereof, a natural atmospheric reentry for Hubble will occur between 2028 and 2040. In June 2016, NASA extended the service contract for Hubble until June 2021. In November 2021, NASA extended the service contract for Hubble until June 2026.\nNASA's original plan for safely de-orbiting Hubble was to retrieve it using a Space Shuttle. Hubble would then have most likely been displayed in the Smithsonian Institution. This is no longer possible since the Space Shuttle fleet has been retired, and would have been unlikely in any case due to the cost of the mission and risk to the crew. Instead, NASA considered adding an external propulsion module to allow controlled re-entry. Ultimately, in 2009, as part of Servicing Mission 4, the last servicing mission by the Space Shuttle, NASA installed the Soft Capture Mechanism (SCM), to enable deorbit by either a crewed or robotic mission. The SCM, together with the Relative Navigation System (RNS), mounted on the Shuttle to collect data to \"enable NASA to pursue numerous options for the safe de-orbit of Hubble\", constitute the Soft Capture and Rendezvous System (SCRS).\nPossible service missions.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the Trump Administration was considering a proposal by the Sierra Nevada Corporation to use a crewed version of its Dream Chaser spacecraft to service \"Hubble\" some time in the 2020s as a continuation of its scientific capabilities and as insurance against any malfunctions in the James Webb Space Telescope. In 2020, John Grunsfeld said that SpaceX Crew Dragon or Orion could perform another repair mission within ten years. While robotic technology is not yet sophisticated enough, he said, with another crewed visit \"We could keep Hubble going for another few decades\" with new gyros and instruments.\nBillionaire private astronaut Jared Isaacman proposed to fund a servicing mission using SpaceX spacecraft. Though it might save NASA much money, SpaceX and NASA differed on the mission's risk. In September 2022, NASA and SpaceX signed a Space Act Agreement to investigate the possibility of launching a Crew Dragon mission to service and boost Hubble to a higher orbit, possibly extending its lifespan by another 20 years. This mission could have been the second of the Polaris Program, but by June 2024 NASA had rejected a private servicing mission because of potential damage to the observatory.\nSuccessors.\nThere is no direct replacement to Hubble as an ultraviolet and visible light space telescope, because near-term space telescopes do not duplicate Hubble's wavelength coverage (near-ultraviolet to near-infrared wavelengths), instead concentrating on the further infrared bands. These bands are preferred for studying high redshift and low-temperature objects, objects generally older and farther away in the universe. These wavelengths are also difficult or impossible to study from the ground, justifying the expense of a space-based telescope. Large ground-based telescopes can image some of the same wavelengths as Hubble, sometimes challenge HST in terms of resolution by using adaptive optics (AO), have much larger light-gathering power, and can be upgraded more easily, but cannot yet match Hubble's excellent resolution over a wide field of view with the very dark background of space.\nPlans for a Hubble successor materialized as the Next Generation Space Telescope project, which culminated in plans for the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), the formal successor of Hubble. Very different from a scaled-up Hubble, it is designed to operate colder and farther away from the Earth at the L2 Lagrangian point, where thermal and optical interference from the Earth and Moon are lessened. It is not engineered to be fully serviceable (such as replaceable instruments), but the design includes a docking ring to enable visits from other spacecraft. A main scientific goal of JWST is to observe the most distant objects in the universe, beyond the reach of existing instruments. It is expected to detect stars in the early Universe approximately 280million years older than stars HST now detects. The telescope is an international collaboration between NASA, the European Space Agency, and the Canadian Space Agency since 1996, and was launched on December 25, 2021, on an Ariane 5 rocket. Although JWST is primarily an infrared instrument, its coverage extends down to 600nm wavelength light, or roughly orange in the visible spectrum. A typical human eye can see to about 750nm wavelength light, so there is some overlap with the longest visible wavelength bands, including orange and red light.\nA complementary telescope, looking at even longer wavelengths than Hubble or JWST, was the European Space Agency's Herschel Space Observatory, launched on May 14, 2009. Like JWST, Herschel was not designed to be serviced after launch, and had a mirror substantially larger than Hubble's, but observed only in the far infrared and submillimeter. It needed helium coolant, of which it ran out on April 29, 2013.\nFurther concepts for advanced 21st-century space telescopes include the Large Ultraviolet Optical Infrared Surveyor (LUVOIR), a conceptualized optical space telescope that if realized could be a more direct successor to HST, with the ability to observe and photograph astronomical objects in the visible, ultraviolet, and infrared wavelengths, with substantially better resolution than Hubble or the Spitzer Space Telescope. The final planning report, prepared for the 2020 Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey, suggested a launch date of 2039. The Decadal Survey eventually recommended that ideas for LUVOIR be combined with the Habitable Exoplanet Observer proposal to devise a new, 6-meter flagship telescope that could launch in the 2040s.\nExisting ground-based telescopes, and various proposed Extremely Large Telescopes, can exceed the HST in terms of sheer light-gathering power and diffraction limit due to larger mirrors, but other factors affect telescopes. In some cases, they may be able to match or exceed Hubble in resolution by using adaptive optics (AO). However, AO on large ground-based reflectors will not make Hubble and other space telescopes obsolete. Most AO systems sharpen the view over a very narrow field: Lucky Cam, for example, produces crisp images just 10 to 20 arcseconds wide, whereas Hubble's cameras produce crisp images across a 150-arcsecond (2\u00bd arcminutes) field. Furthermore, space telescopes can study the universe across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, most of which is blocked by Earth's atmosphere. Finally, the background sky is darker in space than on the ground, because air absorbs solar energy during the day and then releases it at night, producing a faint but discernible airglow that washes out low-contrast astronomical objects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40205", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40205", "title": "Foreign relations of Albania", "text": "The foreign relations of Albania are its relations with other governments and peoples. Foreign relations are conducted through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tirana. The current minister is Elisa Spiropali. The current ambassador to the United Nations is Suela Janina.\nAlbania is a sovereign country in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean that declared its independence on 28 November 1912. Its foreign policy has maintained a policy of complementarianism by trying to have friendly relations with all countries. Since the collapse of Communism in 1990, Albania has extended its responsibilities and position in European and international affairs, supporting and establishing friendly relations with other nations around the world. \nThe main factors defining Albanian foreign policy consist of geopolitical location, population, economic crisis, and ties with Albanian diaspora throughout the world. It also maintains strong diplomatic relations with the EU (primarily Croatia, France, Germany, Italy) Balkan countries (primarily Kosovo, Greece and North Macedonia), Arab world, Canada, China, Turkey, Israel, India, Japan, South Korea, Switzerland, UK and the United States.\nThe main objectives of the Albanian foreign policy are the accession of Albania to the European Union, the international recognition of Kosovo, the recognition of expulsion of Cham Albanians, helping and protecting the rights of Albanians in Montenegro, North Macedonia, Greece, Serbia, Italy, and the Albanian diaspora.\nAlbania was voted to become a member of the 15-country United Nations Security Council for a two-year term, 2022\u201323.\nOverview.\nThe government of Albania was concerned with the developments in neighboring Kosovo, particularly in the post-Dayton agreement period. During the Kosovo War in 1999 as well as the ethnic cleansing of Kosovo Albanians by Serbs alongside the subsequent refugee influx into the country, Albania's status as an ally of the United States was confirmed. Albania emerged as being generally supportive of the United States. The support for the United States has remained high at 95% in Muslim majority (56% of the population) Albania in contrast to the rest of the Islamic world.\nBalkans/Albania.\nTurkey.\nDuring the post-cold war, geo-political complexities and conflicts in the Balkans, made Albania seek a protector power with Turkey, which is a NATO member. During the 1990s, state relations between Albania and Turkey were marked by high level visits, military agreements and the deployment of Turkish soldiers. An Albanian-Turkish military cooperation agreement was signed on 29 July 1992. The military agreement entailed education and training of personnel, bilateral cooperation in weapons production, joint military exercises, the exchange of military delegations and joint commissions on expanding further military ties into the future. The agreement also encompassed rebuilding Albania's Pasha Liman Base in the Bay of Vlor\u00eb on the Ionian Sea by Turkey, in return for granting Turkey's access and use. Turkey has trained the Albanian Armed Forces, in particular officers and commando units. During civil war in 1997, Turkey alongside other countries, participated in Operation Alba by providing a brigade of 800 Turkish troops to restore order and its involvement served mainly as a stabilising force.\nTurkey considers its friendship with Albania as important due to the context of state relations with Greece and through policy have exploited difficulties arising in Albanian-Greek relations. Having a powerful ally in Turkey has suited Albania at times regarding difficult interstate relations with Greece. Albania's emergence in the Balkans as a key NATO partner contributed to good and stronger Albanian-Turkish relations, in particular relating to military matters. The military alliance during the 1990s between Turkey and Albania was also aimed against Serbia in case a war over Kosovo had a wider regional spread. Greece has expressed concerns regarding Turkish relations with Albania and interpreted them as an anti-Greek measure to isolate Greece within the wider context of Albania being a potential outlet for expanding Muslim influence and Turkey allying with Muslim populations in the Balkans. Turkey on the other hand claimed Greece increased tensions within the region and conveyed concerns relating to Albanian and Greek polemics with Ankara expressing a partial bias on Albania's side angering the Greeks. Greece, aware of Albanian-Turkish military agreements denounced Turkey's interference in Greek affairs. Though not officially considered in Turkey as a rival within Albania, during the unrest of 1997 Greece was able to become an influential actor in Albania and the early period of the Kosovo crisis (1998-1999) when Albanian officials looked to Greece for assistance. The resumption of closer Albanian-Turkish relations ensured during the Kosovo crisis that made both countries act along the same policy lines toward Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 and the issue of Greater Serbia.\nTurkey supported Albania's membership to become part of NATO. Military cooperation between Albania and Turkey is viewed by NATO as a stabilising factor within the volatile region of the Balkans. Albania has come to depend heavily on Turkish assistance and a high amount of military security. Turkey remains for Albania an important military ally alongside the U.S. Through its military personnel Turkey continues to train Albanian armed forces and also to provide assistance in logistics and modernisation efforts of the Albanian military. Radar systems for the surveillance of Albanian airspace in addition to telecommunication equipment have been supplied by Turkey to Albania. Albania receives Turkish assistance for police training. Turkey has continuously supported Albania from the 1990s on EU related matters as both countries view EU membership as an eventual final goal and common objective. State relations of Albania with Turkey are friendly and close, due to maintenance of close links with the Albanian diaspora in Turkey and strong Turkish sociopolitical, cultural, economic and military ties with Albania. Turkey has been supportive of Albanian geopolitical interests within the Balkans. In Gallup polls conducted in recent times Turkey is viewed as a \"friendly country\" by 73% of people in Albania. Albania has established political and economic ties with Arab countries, in particular with Arab Persian Gulf states who have heavily invested in religious, transport and other infrastructure alongside other facets of the economy in addition to the somewhat limited societal links they share. Albania is also working to develop social-political and economic ties with Israel.\nGreece.\nAfter the fall of the Albanian communist regime in 1991, relations between Greece and Albania became increasingly strained because of widespread allegations of mistreatment by Albanian authorities of the Greek ethnic minority in southern Albania and of mistreatment the Albanian communities in northern Greece. A wave of Albanian illegal economic migrants to Greece exacerbated tensions. The crisis in Greek\u2013Albanian relations reached its peak in late August 1994, when an Albanian court sentenced five members (a sixth member was added later) of the ethnic Greek political party \"Omonia\" to prison terms on charges of undermining the Albanian state. Greece responded by freezing all EU aid to Albania, and sealing its border with Albania. In December 1994, however, Greece began to permit limited EU aid to Albania, while Albania released two of the \"Omonia\" defendants and reduced the sentences of the remaining four. \nThere are still other impending issues in the relations between the two countries, regarding many Albanian workers in Greece who have not received legal papers despite promises by the Greek government. In 1996, the two countries signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship and discussed the issues of the status of Albanian refugees in Greece and education in the mother tongue for the ethnic Greek minority in southern Albania. In the 1990s, Greece preferred and assisted Fatos Nano as Albanian leader due to him being Orthodox over Sali Berisha a Muslim, as Nano was seen as being friendlier to Greek interests. The government of Fatos Nano was viewed by Turkey as having a pro-Greek orientation and expressed some dissatisfaction though during that time still maintained close military relations with Albania in rebuilding its armed forces and a military base.\nToday, as result of very frequent high-level contacts between the governments and the parliaments, relations between the two countries are regarded as excellent. Greece is a staunch supporter of the Euro-Atlantic integration of the Republic of Albania. Since Albania's NATO entry in May 2009, Albanian-Greek relations have been developing on all fronts, and especially after the election victory of Edi Rama in 2013, with the Albanian Chief of Foreign Policy, Ralf Gjoni, describing the diplomatic relations between two countries as \"excellent\". Greece today is Albania's most important European Union ally and NATO partner. At the Albanian government's request, about 250 Greek military personnel are stationed in Albania to assist with the training and restructuring of the Albanian Armed Forces, as part of the NATO programme. Big projects currently in running between the two countries include the touristic development of the Ionian coastline shared between the two countries, and the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP), which helped boosting the relations of the two countries even further.\nAlbania's ties with Greece are also based on cultural and historic relations of the two peoples, including migration and national minorities. In addition, since Albania's transition to democracy, Greece has become a major financial partner of the country with Albania's economy being heavily reliant on investments from Greece. Culturally, the two nations' populations, whilst having a tense history, share numerous cultural and historic traits that have been used to boost the political relations of the neighbouring countries.\nThere had been numerous discussions, research and attempts by Albanians and Greeks to form a confederation during the Ottoman period. In the 19th century there were plans to create a Greek-Albanian confederation, which was revived from the earlier 18th century plans. In 1907 a special protocol and memorandum of understanding was signed by Neoklis Kazazis and Ismail Qemali, the first prime minister of Albania. Furthermore, Arvanite author Aristides Kollias in his book \"The proclamation of the Association of Arvanites\" states \"from 1881 to 1907 we have sustained efforts and repeated consultations between Greeks and Albanians to create a Greek-Albanian state.\" In addition, Thanos Paleologos-Anagnostopoulos in his book \"Greece and Albania in the early 20th century (1995)\" stated that Ismail Qemali, a philhellene, worked with numerous Greek politicians and lobbyists, including Arvanite leaders, on a possible Greek-Albanian federation, one that \"maintains national and religious independence of the two peoples.\" Likewise, Neoklis Kazazis saw this as a way of Greece quashing Italian influence in the region.\nInternational.\nAlbania was voted to become a member of the 15-country UN Security Council for a two-year term, in 2022\u201323, on 11 June 2021. Former ambassador Kadare said that Albania's priorities in the Security Council will include a focus on women, peace, and security, promoting human rights and international law, preventing conflicts, protecting civilians, countering violent extremism, addressing climate change and its links to security, and strengthening multilateralism and the rules-based international order. She tweeted thanks to all countries that: \"entrusted us with this huge responsibility\".\nThe Albanian government supports the protection of the rights of ethnic Albanians outside of its borders but has downplayed them to further its primary foreign policy goal of regional cooperation; Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks full recognition of the declared independence from Serbia; Albanians in the Republic of Macedonia claim discrimination in education, access to public-sector jobs, and representation in government. A handful of Albanian troops have participated in the U.S.-led military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Albanian policy is very favorable to that of the United States and European Union.\nThe $30 million Albanian-American Enterprise Fund (AAEF), launched in 1994, is actively making debt and equity investments in local businesses. AAEF is designed to harness private sector efforts to assist in the economic transformation. U.S. assistance priorities include promotion of agricultural development and a market economy, advancement of democratic institutions (including police training), and improvements in quality of life.\nIn response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Albania has expressed support for Ukraine and also supported Latvia's nomination to join the United Nations Security Council in 2025.\nList of countries.\nList of countries which Albania maintains diplomatic relations with:\nIn 2008 and 2009, the Albanian Parliament ordered the Foreign Ministry to establish diplomatic relations with countries which Albania did not maintain diplomatic relations with, namely Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Belize, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominica, East Timor, Eswatini, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Kiribati, Liberia, Marshall Islands, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Suriname, Rwanda, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda and Vanuatu.\nDiplomatic relations were suspended with Iran on 7 September 2022.\nOrganizations.\nAlbania is member in these international organizations:\nAC, APF, BIE, BSEC, CEB, CoBx, CoE, CERN (Non-Member State), CEI, CCC, CEFTA, ECE, EAPC, EBRD, EITI, ECAA, ECAC, EC, ENTSO-E, Eurocontrol, FAO, FIUs, IAEA, IAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICRC, ICRM, ICCROM, IDA, IDB, IHO, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IPU, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MIGA, NATO, OAS, OB, OIC, OIF, OPCW, OSCE, OTIF, PCA, SEECP, SECI, SETC, UN, UNCTAD, UNDP, UNDSS, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNW, UNIDO, UNWTO, UPU, UfM, VC, WB, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO and WTO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40207", "revid": "271068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40207", "title": "Albanian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Albania\nThe Albanian Armed Forces () are the military of Albania and were formed after the declaration of independence in 1912. Today, it consists of the General Staff, the Albanian Land Force, Albanian Air Force and the Albanian Naval Force.\nThe President of Albania is the Commander-in-Chief of the nation's military. In times of peace, the President's powers as Commander-in-Chief are executed through the Prime Minister and the Defence Minister.\nMissions and duties.\nAccording to the Albanian Constitution, the Albanian Armed Forces are charged to: protect the territorial integrity of the country, be present in areas incurring menace, assist the population in case of natural and industrial disasters, warn the dangers of military and non-military nature, protect the constitutional order as it is determined by law and participate in international operations in composition of multinational forces.\nHistory.\nOn 4 December 1912, the Albanian Prime Minister, Ismail Qemali and his government, formed the Albanian National Army. Its first Chief in Command was Lieutenant Colonel Ali Shefqet Shkupi \nBy 1923, the Albanian Armed Forces fielded 10,691 active troops, including military police forces. At that time, Albania did not have a navy.\nIn 1927, the Albanian Armed Forces numbered approximately 8,000. These troops were organised into three groups, based in Tirana, Shkod\u00ebr to the north and Berat to the south. Each group was organised into three battalions of 500. A guards battalion of 350 was organized in Tirana. Four frontier battalions of mountaineers were held on reserve, as well as tanks and armoured cars. Additionally, a cadet school, a machine-gun school, and a bombing school were housed in the capital. Italian involvement in the Albanian Armed Forces was significant, with an Italian Colonel attached to each of the three main troop groups and an Italian officer attached to each battalion and battery and to each medical, veterinary, and transportation unit. In 1927 alone, the Albanian military ordered 20,000 rifles, 40 mountain guns, 120 machine guns, and other supplies from Italy.\nRoyal Albanian Army.\nThe Royal Albanian Army () was the army of King Zogu from 1928 until 1939. Its commander-in-chief was himself; its commander General Xhemal Aranitasi; its chief of staff was General Gustav von Myrdacz. The army was mainly financed by Italy. On 7 April 1939, Italian troops invaded the country, and captured it in six days after weak resistance by the overwhelmed Albanian army.\nCold War.\nAfter the Second World War, Albania became a Soviet-aligned country. The ranks and structure of the Albanian Armed Forces were organised based on Soviet concepts, thus increasing the political control of the State-Party over the Armed Forces. One of the defining characteristics of civilian-military relations during this period was the effort of the civilian leadership to ensure the loyalty of the military to the communist system's values and institutions.\nLike all other branches of the state, the military was subjugated to Communist Party control. All high-ranking military officers and most of the lower and middle ranks were members of the Communist Party\u2014and had loyalties to it. The system was re-enforced by the establishment of Party cells within the military and extensive communist political education alongside soldiers' military training, by the political commissars. To further increase its political control, the Albanian Communist Party enlarged the conscription system, thus enlisting in the Armed Forces personnel dedicated to the military career from the Albanian rural areas.\nThe State and Party went even further, beginning on 1 May 1966, military ranks were abolished following the example of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, heavily influenced by Maoism during the years of the Cultural Revolution, and thus adopting strategic concepts related to forms of guerrilla war (Vietnam War doctrine). The military was still organised during this period into basic structural forms, but the role of the military commander was insignificant with respect to the commanding role of the political commissars. In 1991 the rank system was reestablished under President Ramiz Alia.\nDuring all these years, Sigurimi which was the Albanian secret service during the period and was formed upon the KGB structure, was responsible for the execution, imprisonment, and deportation of more than 600 officers from the Armed Forces, by completely neutralising the Armed Forces ability to start a coup d'\u00e9tat. Initially the communist purge concentrated on military personnel who had graduated from the Western Military Academies (mainly from Italy 1927\u20131939), and was extended later to the officers graduated from the Soviet Union (after Albania abandoned the Warsaw Pact in 1968). As the communist regime collapsed in Albania during 1990, there was a real fear that the armed forces might intervene to halt the collapse of communism by force. In the event, the armed forces stood by as the regime of which they had been a part disintegrated.\nDuring the 1980s, Albania had reduced the number of infantry brigades from eight to four. It had shifted to fully manned units from its prior reliance on the mobilisation of reserve soldiers to flesh out a larger number of units manned at a lower level. Each brigade had three infantry battalions and one lightly equipped artillery battalion. Armoured forces consisted of one tank brigade. Artillery forces were increased from one to three regiments during the 1980s, and six battalions of coastal artillery were maintained at strategic points along the Adriatic Sea littoral.\nPost 1991.\nIn 1992, the Library of Congress estimated that the ground forces had about 35,000 men, or about three-quarters of all armed forces personnel. Because the strength of the ground forces was sufficient to man only about two divisions, brigades of approximately 3,000 soldiers became the largest army formation. In 1991 four infantry brigades constituted the bulk of combat units in the ground forces.\nDuring the civilian riots in 1997, the political attempts by the government to use the Armed Forces to crush the rebellion were soon demonstrated to be a failure, following a total disintegration of the Armed Forces and the looting of the military facilities by the civilian population.\nAlbania sheltered many thousands of Kosovar refugees during the 1999 conflict, and allowed NATO to provide logistical assistance for Kosovo Force (KFOR) troops through Communications Zone West headquartered in Durr\u00ebs. Albania was part of the International Stabilization Force (SFOR) serving in Bosnia (then EU mission \"ALTHEA\"), and Albanian peacekeepers are part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, ISAF and the international stabilization force in Iraq. Albania has been a steadfast supporter of U.S. policy in Iraq, and one of only four nations to contribute troops to the combat phase of Operation Enduring Freedom.\nIncreasing the military budget was one of the most important conditions for NATO integration. Military spending has generally been lower than 1.5% since 1996 only to peak in 2009 at 2% and fall again to 1.5%.\nThere was an incident in 2002 in Albania where it was discovered, in a cluster of mountain bunkers, 16 tons of primitive, undocumented chemical weapon agents that Albania had forgotten about.\nIn December 2006, the Armed Forces adopted a new structure based on the Joint warfare concept. It had three main Commands: the \"Joint Forces Command\", the \"Joint Support Command\" and the \"Training and Doctrine Command\". The Albanian Joint Forces Command (AJFC) consists of the Rapid Reaction Brigade, the Commando Regiment, the Navy Brigade, the Air Brigade and the Area Support Brigade. The Albanian Joint Support Command provides support and logistical functions to all AAF units. The Albanian Training and Doctrine Command was established as the main educational and training provider for the Albanian Armed Forces. The final number of personnel will be 13,800 (including 2,000 civilians). However this new structure lasted a little more than 3 years and in April 2010 returned to its classic and current form.\nIn March 2008 the problem of massive amounts of excess ammunition stockpiled in Albania became known to the public through the tragic consequences of the explosion of an ammunition depot (the 2008 Tirana explosions).\nThe Albanian Land Force or Albanian Army consists of the Rapid Reaction Brigade, a Commando Regiment, and the Area Support Brigade. Part of the structure of the Albanian Commando Regiment is the Special Operations Battalion (BOS). The Albanian Army is mostly supported by the United States, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, the United Kingdom, Greece, Turkey, Switzerland, Denmark and Belgium.\nThe Albanian Navy performs mainly Coast Guard duties, and recently the Albanian parliament has approved some amendments to the articles of the actual Law on the Coast Guard in Albania, in order to improve the necessary legal framework due to efforts at European Union-NATO integration. Since February 2008, Albania participates officially in NATO's Operation Active Endeavor in the Mediterranean. Albania became a full member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on 1 April 2009. It hosts an international fair on security and defense called the Albanian Military Exhibition (ALMEX) where different security industries can present their products and services for the regional market.\nModernisation.\nAfter several major re-equipment programs, in 2001 the Albanian Armed Forces launched a 10-year reform program to become technologically advanced and fully professional by 2011. The new armed forces consists of about 14,500 troops including 2,000 civilians, trained to NATO standards. The same radical reform is being implemented on surplus equipment, including airplanes, tanks, helicopters, artillery equipment, navy vessels, SALW and ammunition. Albania started an ambitious destruction program. However, Albania is still dealing with a huge amount of surplus and obsolete ammunition, a direct result of the country's long isolation and ethnic tensions in the area. The Albanian Ministry of Defense estimates such quantity up to 85,000 tons, but it is expected to increase up to 104,000 tons due to the ongoing downsizing process of the AAF.\nIn 2004 U.S. President George W. Bush authorised the use of Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program funds for projects in Albania, marking the first time such funds were reauthorised for use outside the former Soviet Union. With this funding the U.S. assisted the Government of Albania with the destruction of a stockpile of chemical warfare agents left over from the communist regime (Category 1, Total amount 16.7 tons). The final cost of the project was US$48 million and was officially completed on 10 July 2007.\nOn 3 April 2006, the final contract for the delivery of 12 \"B\u00f6lkow-Blom MBB\" BO-105 lightweight twin-engine multi-role helicopters to the Republic of Albania was signed in Tirana between the Albanian Ministry of Defence and Eurocopter \"Deutschland GmbH\". According to the Albanian Government, six of the BO-105 helicopters are designated for the Albanian Air Brigade, four for the Ministry of Interior and the remaining two for the Albanian Ministry of Health.\nAlbania has recently acquired four Eurocopter AS532 Cougar helicopters and has two more EC 145 on order as of 2015. Also, since 2008 four Damen Stan 4207 patrol vessels have been commissioned in the Navy, three of them have been constructed in Albania.\nOn 16 July 2014, The Albanian Defence Minister declared that within 2014 the Albanian Motorised Infantry Battalion will be fully combat ready and also equipped with modern NATO equipment. This will be the first unit in the Albanian Armed Forces to not have the AK 47 in its inventory. Instead the M4 carbine will act as its standard battle rifle.\nIn August 2018, the Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, announced via Facebook that NATO would be investing in the base, saying \"NATO will invest more than 50 million euros ($58 million) for the first phase of the project alone, to modernise the Ku\u00e7ov\u00eb Air Base.\"\nThe process of modernization of the Albanian Armed Forces is based on the short-term, middle-term and long-term objectives and priorities of their restructuring and development aiming at achieving the increase of the operational capacities. The modernization programme started before the country's North Atlantic Treaty Organization membership (on 1 April 2009) with the purchase of armaments produced by the NATO countries. It also started a programme for the disposal and alienation of surplus ammunition inherited from the communist regime for 50 years.\nGround Forces.\nThe modernization of the Land Forces began around 2006, starting with Special Forces such as the BFS (then known as the Batalioni i Operacioneve Speciale, BOS) and the Commandos. Seeing their involvement in NATO peacekeeping operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the need arose for more modern armaments given that until then these branches used old Soviet or Chinese era armaments. In 2007, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) reached agreement with the German company Heckler &amp; Koch for the purchase of several weapons in limited quantities for special forces, including HK416, two variants of H&amp;K G36, HK417, MP7, and variants of H&amp;K USP. Some of them were only for evaluation purposes. In 2009 the Beretta ARX160 was issued in much larger quantities thus becoming the standard assault rifle for the BFS over the HK416 and HK G-36. In 2015, the Colt M4A1 joined ARX160 as standard use alongside it. For the 3 infantry battalions, the modernization started in 2013, initially introducing the as standard handgun the Beretta Px4, as a light machine gun H&amp;K MG4 and H&amp;K MG5 as a General-purpose machine gun.&lt;br&gt;\nIn 2015 other weapons were introduced over all ground units. The 2nd Infantry Battalion (B2K) was equipped with Colt M4A1. The Military Police was equipped with the Beretta ARX160 and added 4 new Iveco LMV vehicles. The Sako TRG-22 and TGR-44 were distributed to all sniper units, while the Benelli M4 Super 90 to the BFS and MP for Close-quarters combat.&lt;br&gt;\nThe following year the Italian Government offered an aid package of 5,000 Beretta AR70/90 units, which at the time were in the process of being withdrawn and replaced in favor of the Beretta ARX160 over Italian Army. This package fitted the needs of the Albanian Armed Forces (AAF) as the process of replacing the old Soviet 7.62\u00d739mm ammunition with 5.56\u00d745mm, a task-requirement by Standardization Agreement (STANAG) of NATO allies since Albania's accession in 2009. The process that was expected to last within 10 years, but the aid package helped completing the process 4 years earlier and without additional costs. After the process of replacing the AK47 variants (many of which were locally produced under the name ASh-78 and ASh-82) with the AR70/90 was ended, the rifle became the standard weapon and most used over most Land Forces branches.&lt;br&gt;\nIn 2017 the Combat Support Battalion (Batalioni Mb\u00ebshtetjes s\u00eb Luftimit, BML) was equipped with Hirtenberger M6 60mm and Hirtenberger M8 81mm mortars by the Austrian company Hirtenberger Defense Systems. Thus removing from use the Chinese made mortars from the communist period. In March of the same year came the first 77 HMMWV M1114 of an aid package totaling 250 armored vehicles. They are obtained from Excess Defense Articles (EDA) through the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, a United States program to support NATO partners and allies. The vehicles were immediately put at the service of B1K. In 2019 came the second part of the package of 250 vehicles and it consisted of 36 International MaxxPro and 1 MaxxPro Wrecker recovery vehicle. These vehicles joined the previous 3 MaxxPro bringing the total number of MRAPs used by Special Forces to 40. Following the 2024-2033 Armed Forces Long Term Development Plan, structural changes were made. Namely the 1st and 3rd Infantry Battalions are now increased to Regiment size and are renamed to Northern and Southern Infantry Regiment respectively. The Special Forces Battalion and the Commando Battalion are merged under same command named Special Operations Regiment. Combat Support Battalion was also transformed to Combat Support Regiment with plans to equip it with 105mm and 155mm howitzer for an Artillery Battalion on its component. The Infantry Regiments and Special Operations Regiment will be equipped with C-UAS, V-ShoRAD and M-RAD capabilities. The Northern and Southern Infantry Regiments will each have a maneuver company equipped with IFVs.\nNaval Forces.\nIn 2007, was signed a contracts with the Damen Group for the or completing of the Albanian Naval Forces with Patrol vessels to be used to perform a number of tasks and duties, including coastal patrols, search and rescue, control and monitoring of maritime traffic, marine environment protection. The contract envisaged the construction of 4 vessels of the Damen Stan 4207 class, which the first of them would be built in Netherlands and 3 others in the Pasha Liman naval base in Albania. The first patrol vessel, named Iliria P-132, was built and delivered to the Albanian Coast Guard in August 2008. Enabling thus the following construction of 3 other patrol vessels in Pasha Liman Base by Albanian carpenters assisted by the experts of Damen Group. The second patrol vessel Oriku P-133 will be commissioned in September 2011, the third ship, Lisus P-133, will be operational in 2012 and fourth Butrint P-134 in 2013.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40208", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40208", "title": "Transport in Albania", "text": " \nTransport in Albania consists of transport by land, water and air, which are predominantly under the supervision of the Ministry of Infrastructure of Albania. The development and improvement of the transport in the country remains among the most important priorities of the Government of Albania.\nIt has experienced significant changes and major growth and expansion in recent years, especially after the fall of communism in the country. Improvements to the road infrastructure, urban transport, and air travel have all led to a vast improvement in transportation. These upgrades have played a key role in supporting Albania's economy, which in the past decade has come to rely heavily on the construction industry.\nHistory.\nSince antiquity, the area of modern Albania served as a crossroad of important caravan routes such as the Roman Via Egnatia linking the Adriatic with Byzantium (later Constantinople). The Italian fascist regime of Mussolini carried out a project of road constructions in Albania in the 1930s, yet auto-mobility was limited at the time. The total length of Albania's roads more than doubled in the first three decades after World War II, and by the 1980s almost all of the country's remote mountain areas were connected, either by dirt or paved roads, with the capital city of Tirana, and ports on the Adriatic and Ionian Sea.\nAfter 1947, a significant infrastructure undertaking was the construction of the country's rail network as Albania was considered the only country in Europe not to have standard rail service. By 1987, 677\u00a0km of railway were constructed in total linking the main urban and industrial centers for the first time since the end of World War II. Train transport was the main public transportation method until 1990. After the collapse of Communism, the network fell into disregard, operating with second-hand carriages in a constant precarious state.\nCentral government funding of local road maintenance effectively ended in 1991, and the breakdown of repair vehicles because of a lack of spare parts threatened to close access to some remote areas. A group of Greek construction companies signed a protocol with the Albanian government in July 1990 to build a 200 kilometer road across the southern part of the country, extending from the Albanian-Greek border to Durr\u00ebs. The project was scheduled to last four years and cost US$500 million. Despite the poor quality of Albania's roads, most of the country's freight was conveyed over them in a fleet of about 15,000 trucks. According to official figures, in 1987 Albania's roadways carried about 66 percent of the country's total freight tonnage.\nUp until 1991, the total number of cars in Albania was between 5000 and 7000. In 1991, the Albanian government lifted the decades-old ban on private-vehicle ownership. As a result, car imports numbered about 1,500 per month. Traffic in the capital remained light, but traffic lights and other control devices were urgently needed to deal with the multiplying number of privately owned cars. Albanian entrepreneurs also imported used Greek buses and started carrying passengers on intercity routes that did not exist or had been poorly serviced during the communist era.\nThe population is known for owning a large fleet of German cars. In particular, Mercedes-Benz vehicles are widely preferred not only for their status symbol, but also for their durability on rural roads where half of the population resides, and the cheap price for buying used ones. Mercedes-Benz cars were owned by Enver Hoxha and reportedly favored by his officials, giving the brand a foothold even before private ownership of cars was legalized. By 2004 the number of cars in the capital Tirana had increased to over 300,000 and air pollution became a pressing concern. These are mostly 1990s and early 2000s diesel cars, while it is widely believed that the fuel used in Albania contains larger amounts of sulfur and lead than in the European Union. Albania is probably one of the few countries in Europe where vehicles imported from the United States, and from left hand traffic jurisdictions (for example the United Kingdom) can be found on the streets without any modifications brought from expats living abroad.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nThe most important and biggest international airport of the country is the Tirana International Airport N\u00ebn\u00eb Tereza (TIA), in Tirana, the country's capital. The total number of passengers for the country was 1,997,044 in 2015 and 2,200,449 in 2016. From January to October 2017, the airport served 2,224,833 passengers and handled 1,857 tons of goods.\nIn 2005, an American-German consortium was granted a 20-year concession over TIA and Albanian airspace. Despite the considerable modernization of the airport, prices are among the highest in Europe because of the monopoly over Albanian airspace, and limited carrier choices. As a result, low-cost carriers are discouraged from entering the Albanian market, while neighboring countries offer much lower prices from their primary and secondary airports.\nFollowing a period of intensive negotiations, the Albanian government managed to reduce the concession period by 5 years until 2020, thus opening up the possibility for low-cost airlines to enter the Albanian market such as the starting of flights between Tirana and Budapest by Wizz Air in 2017. After reaching an agreement with the Albanian Government to end its monopoly on international flights from Albania, Hochtief AirPort sold the operation of TIA to China Everbright Limited,\nKuk\u00ebs Airport was opened in 2008, making this the second civilian airport in Albania but has since not been operational. The airport was bought by an Albanian company and is planned to become operational by 2021 offering low cost flights catered to the Kukes diaspora in the UK and serve as a gateway to the Albanian Alps.\nIn 2018, Air Albania, the country's current flag carrier was formed by a consortium made up of Turkish Airlines, Albanian Civil Aviation Authority, and several Albanian companies with a test flight to Istanbul. As of 2019, the airline offers service to destinations in Italy and Turkey.\nIn 2018, the Albanian government announced the construction of Vlor\u00eb International Airport, the third civilian airport in Albania near Akerni on the Vjose-Narte Protected Area. In 2019, a new project was unveiled including the construction of a marina and agritourism area. The construction works on the ground for the airport started in 2021, and are expected to finish by 2025.\nRoad.\nThe overwhelming majority of roads in the country are owned and maintained by state and local governments. In recent years, a major road construction spree took place on the main state roads of Albania, involving the construction of new roadways, putting of contemporary signs, planting of trees, and related greening projects. Works on most highways are completed, though they remained unfinished between 2011 and 2013 as per lack of funds.\nAfter the fall of communism in 1991, Albania began to revamp its primitive road infrastructure by building the first highway in the country, SH2 connecting Tirane with Durr\u00ebs. Since the 2000s, main roadways have drastically improved, though lacking standards in design and road safety.\nAt present, major cities are linked with either new single/dual carriageways or well maintained roads. There is a dual carriageway connecting the port city of Durr\u00ebs with Tirana, Vlor\u00eb, and partially Kuk\u00ebs. There are three official motorway segments in Albania: Kashar-Thuman\u00eb-Milot-Rr\u00ebshen-Kalimash-Kuk\u00ebs-Morin\u00eb (A1), Fier-Vlor\u00eb (A2), and Tirane-Elbasan (A3). Most rural segments continue to remain in bad conditions as their reconstruction has only begun in the late 2000s by the Albanian Development Fund.\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 118\nAll roads are property of http:// (\"Autoriteti Rrugor Shqiptar\", former Drejtoria e P\u00ebrgjithshme e Rrug\u00ebve) and maintained by Nd\u00ebrmarrja Shtet\u00ebrore Rruga-Ura. The government plans to create some toll highways in the near future. Albanian bitumen from Selenic\u00eb in Southern Albania is well known for its quality as it has been used on some European motorways.\nCorridors.\nThe realisation of the Adriatic\u2013Ionian Corridor, that is expected to connect all the region from the northwest to the southwest of the Balkan Peninsula, is considered one of the most important infrastructure projects of Albania. The corridor is planned to follow the routes of the SH1, SH2, SH4 expressways and the A1 motorway nonetheless the country has mostly completed its corridor section and significant constructions are still in progress such as the highway between Thumana and Kashar as well as the bypasses of Gjirokast\u00ebr, Lezh\u00eb, Tepelen\u00eb and Tirana.\nRail.\nTotal: 447\u00a0km\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 120\nStandard gauge: 447\u00a0km gauge (2006)\nRailway links with neighbouring countries:\nWater.\nAlbania's main seaports are Durr\u00ebs, Vlor\u00eb, Sarand\u00eb, and Sh\u00ebngjin. By 1983 there were regular ferry, freight, and passenger services from Durr\u00ebs to Trieste, Italy. In 1988, a ferry service was established between Sarand\u00eb and the Greek island of Corfu. A regular lake ferry linked the Macedonian town of Ohrid with Pogradec. The limited capacity of the wharves at Durr\u00ebs caused severe bottlenecks in the distribution of foreign food aid in 1991. In 2011, the Port of Durr\u00ebs underwent major renovations including the construction of a new passenger terminal. The port is expected to be relocated nearby, and a new luxury yachts marina constructed by Dubai based Emaar company called Durres Yachts and Marina. \nThe Merchant Marine include 24 vessels\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 91\nTotal includes 7 ships of 1,000 gross tonnage (GT) or over, totalling: 13,423 GT/20,837 tonnes deadweight (DWT)\nFerry services within Albania:\nCrude oil ; natural gas (2008)\nPipelines.\nThe construction of 1.2 billion dollar AMBO pipeline was planned to begin in 2007. This would connect the port of Burgas in Bulgaria with the port of Vlora in Albania. It is expected to ship to of crude oil each day. However, the Trans Adriatic Pipeline seems more likely to get started.\nThe Trans Adriatic Pipeline is a pipeline project to transport natural gas from the Caspian Sea, starting from Greece via Albania and the Adriatic Sea to Italy and further to Western Europe.\nTAP's route through Albania is approximately 215 kilometres onshore and 37\u00a0km offshore in the Albanian section of the Adriatic Sea. It starts at Bilisht Qend\u00ebr in the Kor\u00e7a region at the Albanian border with Greece, and arrives at the Adriatic coast 17\u00a0km north-west of Fier, 400 metres inland from the shoreline. \nA compressor station will be built near Fier, and an additional compressor is planned near Bilisht should capacity be expanded to 20 billion cubic metres (bcm). Eight block valve stations and one landfall station will be built along its route.\nIn the mountainous areas, approximately 51\u00a0km of new access roads will be constructed while 41\u00a0km of existing roads will be upgraded, 42 bridges refurbished and three new bridges built. In the summer of 2015, TAP started the construction and rehabilitation of access roads and bridges along the pipeline's route in Albania. The work is expected to be completed during 2016.\nPublic transportation.\n \nPublic transport in Albania is mainly characterized by the use of \"furgons\", the equivalent of minibuses, vans or shuttles identifiable by yellow plates. They are convenient but do not follow fixed schedules, depart when are full, and are not usually equipped with A/C. Prices might be negotiated with the driver before departing. Bus transport is also available.\nTirana, the capital city does not have yet a central bus station. Minibuses and buses drop off and pick up passengers from various fixed places around the city and en route.\nIn anticipation of the construction of the two new Multi-Modal Terminals of Tirana near the Kamza Overpass at the western entrance of Tirana, and at the southeastern entrance of the city near TEG Shopping Center, the Municipality of Tirana has opened three temporary bus terminals to regulate the chaos of public transport between towns in Tirana as follows: \nDriving in Albania.\nDespite the perceived negative connotation to driving in Albania, most vehicles manage not to get into accidents by simply exercising common sense, and following their own way through the chaotic traffic. The law of the strongest fully applies on the Albanian roads. In cities, traffic is slow thus more secure than in rural areas. Expect reckless driving such as hair-raising overtaking even on turns, driving on the wrong side of the road, stopping on highways by the road side, uncontrolled crossing of cars, horse-drawn carts and pedestrians, and complete ignoring of stop signs and right of way at intersections. Albanian drivers are prone to using visual and acoustic aids regularly such as honking, headlight flashing, or high beams at night. Daytime running lamps must be activated outside urban areas. \nIt is strongly recommended to have an up-to-date GPS, as many new roads have been recently added to the Albanian road network. In case the GPS does not work, its good to have an alternative paper or internet-based map. Street names on the ground do not always coincide with maps, as the current address system has only recently been introduced. In the mountains, some roads can be narrow and windy with hairpins/serpentines and some missing guardrails. Drivers are encouraged to check engine liquid levels to avoid overheating in the summer months. Some roads still have few road signs or misleading ones. Its strongly advised to always keep a spare tire.\nAs vehicles more than doubled in recent years, traffic fatalities have increased especially in a country where private car ownership was banned until the early 1990s. Some experts also attribute the increase to the above road structural problems, lack of buckling up, the use of alcohol, excessive speed, and unaccustomed drivers such as expats returning home. In an effort to curb such a phenomenon, mobile police patrols have been deployed, road signage improved, and speed radars installed on major roadways and city intersections.\nRegistered road vehicles as of 2023:\nBiking in Albania.\nPrior to the fall of communism in Albania, most people didn't have private cars. The capital Tirana had dropped dramatically to a 3% bicycle modeshare as of 2014, but has a bikeshare program working to revive bicycling. Today, Shkod\u00ebr is the bicycle capital of Albania, with 30% of people biking as of 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40210", "revid": "11099276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40210", "title": "Telecommunications in Albania", "text": "Telecommunications in Albania include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nHistory.\nUntil 1990, Albania was extremely isolated and controlled, and installation and maintenance of a modern system of international and domestic telecommunications was precluded. Callers previously needed operator assistance even to make domestic long-distance calls.\nAs of 1992, Albania's telephone density was the lowest in Europe, at 1.4 units for every 100 inhabitants. Tirana accounted for about 13,000 of the country's 42,000 direct lines; Durr\u00ebs, the main port city, ranked second with 2,000 lines; the rest were concentrated in Shkod\u00ebr, Elbasan, Vlor\u00eb, Gjirokast\u00ebr, and other towns. At one time, each village had a telephone but during the land redistribution of the early 1990s peasants knocked out service to about 1,000 villages by removing telephone wire for fencing. As of 1992, most of Albania's telephones were obsolete, low-quality East European models, some dating from the 1940s; workers at a Tirana factory assembled a small number of telephones from Italian parts.\nIn the early 1990s, Albania had 240 microwave circuits carrying international calls to Italy and 180 to Greece. The Albanian telephone company had also installed two U-20 Italtel digital exchanges. The exchange in Tirana handled international, national, and local calls; the Durr\u00ebs exchange handled only local calls. Two United States firms handled direct-dial calls from the United States to Tirana.\nAt present the land lines are overloaded, and it is difficult to receive a telephone number. As a result, the number of mobile phones has skyrocketed in the bigger cities.\nRadio and television.\nThe state broadcaster in Albania, Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSh, Albanian Radio and TV), operates national radio and television networks. It has competition from scores of privately owned stations. According to a 2002 survey the broadcaster with the largest audience is TV Klan.\nTelevision is the most influential medium. Many Albanians watch Italian and Greek stations via terrestrial reception.\nThe BBC World Service (103.9\u00a0MHz in the capital, Tirana), Deutsche Welle, Radio France Internationale, and the Voice of America are available.\nInternet.\nProviders with national coverage:\nDefunct providers:\nInternet broadband services were initiated in 2005, but growth has been slow. Internet cafes are popular in Tirana and have started to spread outside the capital.\nEutelsat satellite broadband is being used to provide free public Internet access in rural Albanian post offices, schools, and local government offices.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. However, there are reports that the government and businesses influence and pressure the media. The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40211", "revid": "16718809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40211", "title": "Economy of Albania", "text": "The economy of Albania is a developing mixed economy. Since the early 2000s, the economy transitioned from a centralized to a mixed, free-market economic system. Its largest sectors are service (54.1%), agriculture (21.7%), and industrial (24.2%). The country has natural resources, and the economy is mainly bolstered by agriculture, food processing, lumber, oil, cement, chemicals, mining, basic metals, hydro power, tourism, textile industry, and petroleum extraction. The strongest industries are energy, mining, metallurgy, agriculture, and tourism. Primary industrial exports are clothing and chrome.\nAlbania has an emerging tourism sector. With over 6.4 million tourists visiting Albania in 2019, tourism generates revenue in excess of $2.4 billion annually.\nHistory.\nFollowing the collapse of the communist regime in 1990, Albania experienced a mass exodus of refugees to Italy and Greece. The country attempted to transition to autarky, which eventually succeeded. Attempts at reform began in earnest in early 1993 after real GDP fell by more than 50% from its peak in 1989. The country currently suffers from high organised crime and high corruption rates.\nThe democratically elected government that assumed office in April 1992 launched an ambitious economic reform program to halt economic deterioration and put the country on the path toward a market economy. Key elements included price and exchange system liberalisation, fiscal consolidation, monetary restraint, and a firm income policy. These were complemented by a comprehensive package of structural reforms including privatisation, enterprise, and financial sector reform, and the creation of the legal framework for a market economy and private sector activity. Most agriculture, state housing, and small industry were privatised. This trend continued with the privatisation of transport, services, and small and medium-sized enterprises.\nIn 1995, the government began privatising large state enterprises. After reaching a low point in the early 1990s, the economy slowly expanded again, reaching its 1989 level by the end of the decade.\nMacroeconomic trends.\nThis is a chart of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Albania in US dollars based on Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) from estimates by the International Monetary Fund.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar is exchanged at 49 leks (2007 estimate). Mean wages were $300.83 per month in 2009.\nAlbania is a low-income country by Western European standards, with a GDP per capita lower than all countries in the EU. According to Eurostat, Albania's GDP per capita (expressed in PPS \u2013 Purchasing Power Standards) stood at 35% of the EU average in 2008. The unemployment rate in 2018 was 12.4%.\nThe results of Albania's efforts were initially encouraging. Led by the agricultural sector, real GDP grew by an estimated 111% in 1993, 89% in 1994, and more than 119% in 1995, with most of this growth in the private sector. Annual inflation dropped from 25% in 1991 to zero. The Albanian currency, the lek, stabilised. Albania became less dependent on food aid. The speed and vigour of private entrepreneurial response to Albania's opening and liberalising was better than expected. Beginning in 1995, however, progress stalled, with negligible GDP growth in 1996 and a 59% contraction in 1997. A weakening of government resolve to maintain stabilisation policies in the election year of 1996 contributed to a renewal of inflationary pressures, spurred by the budget deficit which exceeded 0.12%. Inflation approached 0.20% in 1996 and 0.50% in 1997. The collapse of financial pyramid schemes in early 1997 \u2013 which had attracted deposits from a substantial portion of Albania's population \u2013 triggered severe social unrest which led to more than 1,500 deaths, widespread destruction of property, and an 0.08% drop in GDP. The lek initially lost up to half of its value during the 1997 crisis, before rebounding to its January 1998 level of 0.00143 to the dollar. The new government, installed in July 1997, took strong measures to restore public order and to revive economic activity and trade.\nAlbania is currently undergoing an intensive macroeconomic restructuring regime with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The need for reform is profound, encompassing all sectors of the economy. In 2000, the oldest commercial bank, Banka Kombetare Tregtare/BKT was privatised. In 2004, the largest commercial bank in Albania\u2014then the Savings Bank of Albania\u2014was privatised and sold to Raiffeisen Bank of Austria for US$124 million. Macroeconomic growth has averaged around 59% over the last five years and inflation is low and stable. The government has taken measures to curb violent crime, and recently adopted a fiscal reform package aimed at reducing the large gray economy and attracting foreign investment.\nThe economy is bolstered by annual remittances from abroad representing about 15% of GDP, mostly from Albanians residing their weekends in Greece and Italy; this helps offset the towering trade deficit. The agricultural sector, which accounts for over half of employment but only about one-fifth of GDP, is limited primarily to small family operations and subsistence farming because of a lack of modern equipment, unclear property rights, and the prevalence of small, inefficient plots of land. Energy shortages because of a reliance on hydropower, and antiquated and inadequate infrastructure contribute to Albania's poor business environment and lack of success in attracting new foreign investment. The completion of a new thermal power plant near Vlore has helped diversify generation capacity, and plans to improve transmission lines between Albania and Montenegro and Kosovo would help relieve the energy shortages. Also, with help from EU funds, the government is taking steps to improve the poor national road and rail network, a long-standing barrier to sustained economic growth.\nReforms have been taken especially since 2005. In 2009, Albania was the only country in Europe, together with Poland, San Marino, and Liechtenstein, to have economic growth; Albanian GDP real growth was 3.7%. Year after year, the tourism sector has gained a growing share in the country's GDP.\nData published as of July 2012 by the National Institute of Statistics, INSTAT, show the economy contracted by 0.0002% in the first quarter of the year \u2013 a downturn blamed mainly on the eurozone debt crisis.\nThe informal sector makes up a portion of the economy, although its share remains unclear due to its secretive nature.\nAccording to Santander Bank, foreign direct investment in Albania now accounts for 50% of its GDP.\nBank profitability in Albania has dropped significantly in the last six months of 2023. Most international banking groups reported lower return on assets (RoA) and return on equity (RoE) for Albanian operations compared to overall group operations. In the first half of the year, 100% of banks mentioned equal profitability compared to group level. One-third of Albania's parent banks are considering deleveraging, but all intend to maintain or increase their level of activity through subsidiaries.\nChallenges and solutions.\nReforms in Albania are constrained by limited administrative capacity and low income levels, which make the population particularly vulnerable to unemployment, price fluctuation, and other variables that negatively affect income. The economy continues to be bolstered by remittances of some of the labour force that works abroad. These remittances supplement GDP and help offset the large foreign trade surplus. Most agricultural land was privatised in 1992, substantially improving peasant incomes. In 1998, Albania recovered the 0.8% drop in GDP of 1997 and pushed ahead by 79% in 1999. International aid has helped defray the high costs of receiving and returning refugees from the Kosovo conflict. Large-scale investment from outside is still hampered by poor infrastructure; lack of a fully functional banking system; untested or incompletely developed investment, tax, and contract laws; and an enduring mentality that discourages initiative.\nOther recommendations.\nHowever, Forbes also indicated some progress: \"with help from international donors, the government is taking steps to improve the poor national road and rail network, a long-standing barrier to sustained economic growth. Inward FDI has increased significantly in recent years as the government has embarked on an ambitious program to improve the business climate through fiscal and legislative reforms. The government is focused on the simplification of licensing requirements and tax codes, and it entered into a new arrangement with the IMF for additional financial and technical support.\"\nThe International Monetary Fund's January 24, 2017 report also offered some positive reinforcement: \"Economic program remains on track, good progress in implementing structural reforms, Bank of Albania's accommodative monetary policy stance remains appropriate\". The IMF inspectors who visited Tirana provided the following action plan: \"Going forward, the main priorities should be: to continue expanding revenue to strengthen public finances and to ensure debt sustainability, reduce NPLs to strengthen financial stability and support credit recovery and advance structural reforms to improve the business climate. Important progress has been made in these areas, and further efforts are needed to cement these gains. In this regard, strengthening tax administration, broadening the tax base, and introducing a value-based property tax remain important objectives. Improved public financial management will help ensure more efficient public spending and control of arrears. Rapid implementation of the strategy for resolving non-performing loans is needed to strengthen lending to the private sector. Structural reforms to enhance the business environment, address infrastructure gaps, and improve labour skills will be crucial to strengthen competitiveness.\"\nApplication of Albania to the European Union.\nAlbania applied for membership in the European Union in 2009. It is expected such membership would benefit Albania's economy. The country received official candidate status in 2014, but was twice denied full membership. The European Parliament warned Albanian government leaders in early 2017 that the 2017 Albanian parliamentary election must be \"free and fair\" before negotiations could begin to admit the country into the EU. The MEPs also expressed concern about the country's \"selective justice, corruption, the overall length of judicial proceedings and political interference in investigations and court cases\" but the EU Press Release expressed some optimism: \"It is important for Albania to maintain today's reform momentum and we must be ready to support it as much as possible in this process\". In May 2019, European Commissioner Johannes Hahn recommended that the EU open membership talks with Albania.\nAlbania also needs to continue to improve its infrastructure, particularly highways within its borders and connecting the country to its neighbours. Once there is evidence of significant progress on this front, the country's chances of acceptance into the EU should improve. Discussions took place during 2015 to secure funding to do so.\nBy 2016, China became one of the major investors in Albania having purchased drilling rights to the oil fields of Patos-Marinz\u00eb and Ku\u00e7ov\u00eb (from a Canadian company) and Tirana International Airport SHPK. China Everbright and Friedmann Pacific Asset Management will operate the airport until 2025. As of March 2016, China was the country's main trading partner, with 7.7% of the country's total international trade; that is far more than the trade with Greece and Turkey.\nA 2018 analysis of six key categories indicated that Albania continues to experience infrastructure problems that present challenges to businesses and further economic opportunities.\nSectors.\nPrimary sector.\nDuring the communist regime, Albania's agriculture was heavily centralised integrated with agriculture-related industries, and state-run. Today, agriculture in Albania employs 47.8% of the population and about 24.31% of the land is used for agricultural purposes. Agriculture contributes to 18.9% of the country's GDP. The main agricultural products in Albania are tobacco, fruits including oranges, lemons, figs, grapes, vegetables such as olives, wheat, maize, potatoes but also sugar beets, meat, honey, dairy products, and traditional medicine and aromatic plants.\nAlbanian wine is characterised by its unique sweetness and indigenous varieties. It has one of Europe's longest histories of viticulture. Albania produced an estimated 17,500 tonnes of wine in 2009. During communism, the production area expanded to some . Today's Albania region was one of the few places where the vine was naturally grown during the ice age. The oldest found seeds in the region are 40,000 to 60,000 years old. Ancient Roman writer Pliny describes Illyrian wine as \"very sweet or luscious\" and refers to it as \"taking the third rank among all the wines\". Albanian families are traditionally known to grow grapes in their gardens for producing wine and Rakia.\nAlbania produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like melon (41 thousand tons), plum (41 thousand tons), oat (34 thousand tons), sugar beet (27 thousand tons), fig (24 thousand tons), peach (19 thousand tons) and pear (13 thousand tons).\nTertiary sector.\nA significant part of Albania's national income derives from tourism. In 2014, it directly accounted for 6% of GDP, though including indirect contributions pushes the proportion to just over 20%. Albania had around 5.1 million visitors in 2017, mostly from neighbouring countries and the European Union.\nIn 2011, Albania was recommended as a top travel destination, by Lonely Planet. In 2014, Albania was nominated number 4 global touristic destination by \"The New York Times\". The number of tourists has increased by 200% for 2014 as well.\nThe bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic and the Ionian Sea coast. The latter has pristine beaches and is often called the Albanian Riviera. The Albanian coastline has a considerable length of , including many lagoons. The coast is known for its rich variety of ecosystems, such as sandy beaches, capes, coves, covered bays, lagoons, small gravel beaches, and sea caves. Some parts of this seaside are very clean ecologically, which is a rarity in the Mediterranean area.\nThe increase in foreign visitors has been dramatic. Albania had only 500,000 visitors in 2005, while in 2012 had an estimated 4.2\u00a0million \u2013 an increase of 740% in seven years. Several of the country's main cities are situated along the seashores of the Adriatic and Ionian Seas. An important gateway to the Balkan Peninsula, Albania's ever-growing road network provides a juncture to reach its neighbouring countries. Albania is in close proximity to all the major European capitals with short two- or three-hour flights that are available daily. Albania is also known for its history and traditional culture.\nA report from the United States Agency for International Development (USAid)\nin October 2015 indicated that the direct contribution of tourism is becoming a significant part of the country's gross domestic product, a full 4.8% of it in 2013. The total contribution to the GDP was about 17% \"including wider effects from investment and the supply chain\". This is expected to increase in the future.\nAlbania in 2023 hit a record high of 10 million tourists, which showed the country's effort to shift its attention to tourism.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nTransport has undergone significant changes in the past two decades, vastly modernising the infrastructure. Improvements to the road infrastructure, rail, urban, and airport transport have all led to a vast improvement in transportation. These upgrades have played a key role in supporting Albania's economy, which in the past decade has come to rely heavily on the construction industry.\nAlbania's motorway network has been extensively modernised throughout the 2000s and part of it is still under construction. There are a total of 3 major motorways in Albania: the A1, A2, and A3. When all corridors are completed, Albania will have an estimated 759\u00a0 kilometers of highway linking it with all its neighbouring countries. The Tirana International Airport N\u00ebn\u00eb Tereza is the main port of entry for air travellers to the country. The airport is named after the Albanian Roman Catholic nun and missionary Mother Teresa. It has seen a dramatic rise in passenger numbers and aircraft movements since the early 1990s. Today, the Airport handles over 5.2 million passengers per year. In April 2021, Kuk\u00ebs Airport became operational in the north, serving first flights only to Istanbul and Zurich. In 2022, new destinations were announced, including Vienna, Basel/Mulhouse, and Memmingen. Furthermore, Albania plans to build two other airports in the south, which will mainly serve the tourism industry.\nThe busiest and largest seaport is the Port of Durr\u00ebs. As of 2014, the port ranks as one of the largest passenger ports on the Adriatic and Ionian Sea, with an annual passenger volume of approximately 1.5 million. Other seaports include Vlor\u00eb, Sarand\u00eb, and Sh\u00ebngjin. The ports serve an extensive system of ferries connecting numerous islands and coastal cities in addition to ferry lines to several cities in Croatia, Greece, and Italy.\nThe railways in Albania are administered by the national railway company \"Hekurudha Shqiptare\" (HSH). The railway system was extensively promoted by the totalitarian regime of Enver Hoxha, during which time the use of private transport was effectively prohibited. Since the collapse of the former regime, there has been a considerable increase in car ownership and bus usage. Whilst some of the country's roads are still in very poor condition, there have been other developments (such as the construction of a motorway between Tirana and Durr\u00ebs) that have taken much traffic away from the railways.\nEnergy.\nAlbania is one of only two countries in the world (along with Paraguay) whose entire electricity production is dependent on hydroelectric power. In 2021 electricity consumed was 6,51 billion kWh with 5.31 billion kWh produced, the rest imported.\nIn December 2023 work began on a new 400kV interconnecter between Albania and North Macedonia to improve the integration of Albania into the regional power system.\nHydroelectric power stations include the Fierza, Koman, and Vau i Dej\u00ebs plants, as well as the planned Skavica dam, on the Drin river and Banj\u00eb and Moglic\u00eb plants on the Devoll river. The latter two were planned to increase electricity production in Albania by almost 17%.\nIn December 2023 a 140 MW solar park, covering 200 hectares of land at Karavasta, operated by Voltalia SA, began operations.\nAn auction in 2023 awarded 222.48 MW of onshore wind.\nThe Trans Adriatic Pipeline became operational in 2020. Its route through Albania is approximately 215 kilometers onshore and 37\u00a0km offshore in the Albanian section of the Adriatic Sea. It starts at Qend\u00ebr Bilisht in the Kor\u00e7a region at the Albanian border with Greece, and arrives at the Adriatic coast 17\u00a0km north-west of Fier, 400 meters inland from the shoreline. A compressor station is near Fier, and an additional compressor is planned near Bilisht should the capacity be expanded to 20 billion cubic meters (bcm). Eight block valve stations and one landfall station were built along its route, as well as approximately 51\u00a0km of new access roads. There were also 42 bridges refurbished and three new bridges built. The construction of a US$1.2 billion AMBO pipeline was planned to begin in 2007 to ship crude oil between the port of Burgas in Bulgaria and the port of Vlora in Albania, but this project did not advance.\nAlbania has no nuclear power plants. In 2007 the government discussed constructing a nuclear power plant at Durr\u00ebs. In addition to meeting the domestic energy demands, the plan foresaw electricity export to neighbouring Balkan countries and Italy via an underwater cable, which would link the Italian and Albanian electricity networks. In April 2009, Albania and Croatia announced a plan to jointly construct a 1,500\u00a0MWe nuclear power plant on the shores of Lake Skadar (Lake Shkod\u00ebr), near Albania's border with Montenegro. As of 2016, Albania has no plans to build any nuclear power plants in the foreseeable future.\nOil.\nAlbania has the second largest oil deposits in the Balkan peninsula and the largest onshore oil reserves in Europe. Its crude output amounted to more than 1.2 million tonnes in 2013, including 1.06 million by Canada's Bankers Petroleum, 87,063 tonnes from Canada's Stream Oil, and 37,406 tonnes by Albpetrol on its own. Three foreign firms produced the rest. Oil exploitation in Albania began in 1928, in Ku\u00e7ova Oil field and was continuously increasing and one year later in Patos, in sandstone reservoirs. Oil production in Albania was increasing continuously. During the periods 1929\u20131944 and 1945\u20131963 the total production was only from the sandstone reservoirs, while after 1963, it was from the carbonate reservoirs. Up to 1963, the sandstones produced 400,974,649 tons of oil.\nAlbanian oil and gas represents the most promising albeit strictly regulated sectors of the economy. It has attracted foreign investors since the early 1990s marking the beginning of reforms that transformed the public exclusive rights, control, and responsibilities with regard to exploration and exploitation, to the private sector. Oil and gas reserves still remain the property of the Albanian State which enters into agreements and grants rights with regard to evaluation, exploration, production, refining/processing, and transport of the product. In March 2016, affiliates of China's Geo-Jade Petroleum purchased the drilling rights (from a Canadian company) for exploiting the oil fields of Patos-Marinze and Kucova. They paid \u20ac384.6 million, presumably indicating an interest in accelerating the process.\nStatistics.\nMacroeconomic indicators.\nGDP (PPP): $40.822 billion (2021)\nGDP per capita (PPP): $19,368 (2019)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 95\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate: 8.52% (2021)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 34\nInflation: 2.04% (2021)\n\"country comparison to the world: 155\"\nUnemployment: 11.82 (2021)\n\"country comparison to the world: 57\"\nAgriculture.\nProducts: milk, maize, tomatoes, potatoes, watermelons, wheat, grapes, cucumbers, onions, apples\nForeign trade.\nTop export destinations by dollar (2014): Italy ($10.15 billion), Spain ($1680 million), China ($1300 million), Turkey ($920.8 million) and India ($880.5 million).\nTop import items 2014: Refined Petroleum ($547 million), Cars ($198 million), Packaged Medicaments ($129 million), Tanned Equine and Bovine Hides ($97.4 million) and Footwear Parts ($86.2 million).\nTop import origins by dollar (2014): Italy ($100.38 billion), Greece ($41300 million), Turkey ($31500 million), China ($27800 million) and Germany ($23500 million).\nImport partners: Italy 28%, Greece 12%, China 11%, Turkey 9%, Germany 5% (2019)\nRemittances: $600 million (2014 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\nNatural gas\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40212", "revid": "33625371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40212", "title": "Harry Turtledove", "text": "American author (born 1949)\nHarry Norman Turtledove (born June 14, 1949) is an American author who is best known for his work in the genres of alternate history, historical fiction, fantasy, science fiction, and mystery fiction. He is a student of history and completed his PhD in Byzantine history. His dissertation was on the period 565\u2013582. He lives in Southern California.\nIn addition to his birth name, Turtledove writes under a number of pen names: Eric Iverson, H. N. Turteltaub, Dan Chernenko, and Mark Gordian. He began publishing novels in the realm of fantasy starting in 1979 and continues to write in the 2020s.\nEarly life.\nTurtledove was born in Los Angeles, California, on June 14, 1949, and grew up in Gardena, California. His paternal grandparents, who were Romanian Jews, had first emigrated to Winnipeg, Manitoba, before moving to California. He was educated in local public schools during his early life.\nAfter dropping out during his freshman year at California Institute of Technology, Turtledove attended UCLA, where he completed his undergraduate degree and received a PhD in Byzantine history in 1977. His dissertation was entitled \"The Immediate Successors of Justinian: A Study of the Persian Problem and of Continuity and Change in Internal Secular Affairs in the Later Roman Empire During the Reigns of Justin II and Tiberius II Constantine (AD 565\u2013582)\".\nCareer.\nTurtledove published his first two novels, \"Wereblood\" and \"Werenight\", in 1979 under the pseudonym \"Eric G. Iverson\". He later explained that his editor at Belmont Tower did not think that people would believe the author's real name was \"Turtledove\" and came up with something more Nordic. He continued to use \"Iverson\" until 1985. Another early pseudonym was \"Mark Gordian\".\nThat year, he published \"Herbig-Haro\" and \"And So to Bed\" under his real name. In 1998, he began publishing historical novels under the pseudonym \"H. N. Turteltaub\" (\"Turteltaube\" means turtle dove in German). He published three books as \"Dan Chernenko\" (the \"Scepter of Mercy\" series).\nHe has written several works in collaboration, including \"The Two Georges\" with Richard Dreyfuss, \"Death in Vesunna\" with his first wife, Betty Turtledove (pen name: Elaine O'Byrne); \"Household Gods\" with Judith Tarr; and others with Susan Shwartz, S. M. Stirling, and Kevin R. Sandes.\nTurtledove won the Homer Award for Short Story in 1990 for \"Designated Hitter\", the John Esten Cooke Award for Southern Fiction in 1993 for \"The Guns of the South\", and the Hugo Award for Novella in 1994 for \"Down in the Bottomlands\". \"Must and Shall\" was nominated for the 1996 Hugo Award and Nebula Award for Best Novelette and received an honorable mention for the 1995 Sidewise Award for Alternate History. \"The Two Georges\" also received an honorable mention for the 1995 Sidewise Award for Alternate History.\nHis \"Worldwar\" series received a Sidewise Award for Alternate History Honorable Mention in 1996. In 1998, his novel \"How Few Remain\" won the Sidewise Award for Alternate History. He won his second Sidewise Award in 2003 for his novel \"Ruled Britannia\". He won his third Sidewise Award for his short story \"Zigeuner\u201d and his fourth for his short story \"Christmas Truce\".\nTurtledove won the Prometheus Award for Best Novel in 1998 for \"The Gladiator.\" \nOn August 1, 1998, Turtledove was named honorary Kentucky Colonel as guest of honor at Rivercon XXIII in Louisville, Kentucky. His \"The Gladiator\" was the cowinner of the 2008 Prometheus Award.\nTurtledove served as the toastmaster for Chicon 2000, the 58th World Science Fiction Convention.\n\"Publishers Weekly\" dubbed Turtledove \"The Master of Alternate History\". Within the genre, he is known for creating original alternate history scenarios, such as survival of the Byzantine Empire or an alien invasion during the middle of the Second World War. In addition, he has been credited with giving original treatment to alternate themes that had been dealt with by many others, such as the victory of the South in the American Civil War or the victory of Nazi Germany during the Second World War. His novels have been credited with bringing alternate history into the mainstream.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40213", "revid": "637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40213", "title": "Sidewise Award for Alternate History", "text": "Prize for alternative history novels\nThe Sidewise Awards for Alternate History were established in 1995 to recognize the best alternate history stories and novels of the year.\nOverview.\nThe awards take their name from the 1934 short story \"Sidewise in Time\" by Murray Leinster, in which a strange storm causes portions of Earth to swap places with their analogs from other timelines.\nThe awards were created by Steven H Silver, Evelyn C. Leeper, and Robert B. Schmunk. Over the years, the number of judges has fluctuated between three and eight and have included judges in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and South Africa.\nTwo awards are normally presented each year, usually at WorldCon or at NASFiC. The Short-Form award is presented to a work under 60,000 words in length. The Long-Form award is presented to a work or works longer than 60,000 words, which may include a single novel or a multi-volume series. The judges have four times also recognized an individual with a Special Achievement Award in recognition for works published prior to the award's inception or for other contributions to the genre.\nAward winners.\nNote: The Sidewise Awards are announced as for the year of publication rather than by the year of award presentation.\n1995 \u2013 Paul J. McAuley, \"Pasquale's Angel\"\n1996 \u2013 Stephen Baxter, \"Voyage\"\n1997 \u2013 Harry Turtledove, \"How Few Remain\"\n1998 \u2013 Stephen Fry, \"Making History\"\n1999 \u2013 Brendan DuBois, \"Resurrection Day\"\n2000 \u2013 Mary Gentle, \"\"\n2001 \u2013 J. N. Stroyar, \"The Children's War\"\n2002 \u2013 \"(tie)\": Martin J. Gidron (name since changed to Martin Berman-Gorvine), \"The Severed Wing\" and Harry Turtledove, \"Ruled Britannia\"\n2003 \u2013 Murray Davies, \"Collaborator\"\n2004 \u2013 Philip Roth, \"The Plot Against America\"\n2005 \u2013 Ian R. MacLeod, \"The Summer Isles\" \n2006 \u2013 Charles Stross, \"The Family Trade\", \"The Hidden Family\", and \"The Clan Corporate\"\n2007 \u2013 Michael Chabon, \"The Yiddish Policemen's Union\"\n2008 \u2013 Chris Roberson, \"The Dragon's Nine Sons\"\n2009 \u2013 Robert Conroy, \"1942\"\n2010 \u2013 Eric G. Swedin, \"When Angels Wept: A What-If History of the Cuban Missile Crisis\"\n2011 \u2013 Ian R. MacLeod, \"Wake Up and Dream\"\n2012 \u2013 C. J. Sansom, \"Dominion\"\n2013 \u2013 (tie) D. J. Taylor, \"The Windsor Faction\" and Bryce Zabel, \"Surrounded by Enemies: What If Kennedy Survived Dallas?\"\n2014 \u2013 Kristine Kathryn Rusch, \"The Enemy Within\"\n2015 \u2013 Julie Mayhew, \"The Big Lie\"\n2016 \u2013 Ben H. Winters, \"Underground Airlines\"\n2017 \u2013 Bryce Zabel, \"Once There Was a Way\"\n2018 \u2013 Mary Robinette Kowal, \"The Calculating Stars\"\n2019 \u2013 Annalee Newitz, \"The Future of Another Timeline\"\n2020 \u2013 Adrian Tchaikovsky, \"The Doors of Eden\"\n2021 \u2013 Laurent Binet, \"Civilizations\" (translated by Sam Taylor)\n2022 \u2013 B. L. Blanchard, \"The Peacekeeper\"\n2023 \u2013 Francis Spufford, \"Cahokia Jazz\"\n2024 \u2013 Sophie Burnham, \"Sargassa\"\n1995 \u2013 Stephen Baxter, \"Brigantia's Angels\"\n1996 \u2013 Walter Jon Williams, \"Foreign Devils\" (in \"\")\n1997 \u2013 William Sanders, \"The Undiscovered\"\n1998 \u2013 Ian R. MacLeod, \"The Summer Isles\"\n1999 \u2013 Alain Bergeron, \"The Eighth Register\" (translated by Howard Scott)\n2000 \u2013 Ted Chiang, \"Seventy-Two Letters\"\n2001 \u2013 Ken MacLeod, \"The Human Front\"\n2002 \u2013 William Sanders, \"Empire\"\n2003 \u2013 Chris Roberson, \"O One\"\n2004 \u2013 Warren Ellis, \"The Ministry of Space\"\n2005 \u2013 Lois Tilton, \"Pericles the Tyrant\"\n2006 \u2013 Gardner Dozois, \"Counterfactual\"\n2007 \u2013 \"(tie)\": Michael Flynn, \"Quaestiones Super Caelo Et Mundo\" &amp; Kristine Kathryn Rusch, \"Recovering Apollo 8\"\n2008 \u2013 Mary Rosenblum, \"Sacrifice\"\n2009 \u2013 Alastair Reynolds, \"The Fixation\"\n2010 \u2013 Alan Smale, \"A Clash of Eagles\"\n2011 \u2013 Lisa Goldstein, \"Paradise Is a Walled Garden\"\n2012 \u2013 Rick Wilber, \"Something Real\"'\n2013 \u2013 Vylar Kaftan, \"The Weight of the Sunrise\"\n2014 \u2013 Ken Liu, \"The Long Haul: From the Annals of Transportation, The Pacific Monthly, May 2009\"\n2015 \u2013 Bill Crider, \"It Doesn't Matter Anymore\"\n2016 \u2013 \"(tie)\": Daniel M. Bensen, \"Treasure Fleet\" &amp; Adam Rovner, \"What If the Jewish State Had Been Established in East Africa\"\n2017 \u2013 Harry Turtledove, \"Zigeuner\"\n2018 \u2013 Oscar (Xiu) Ramirez and Emmanuel Valtierra, \"Codex Valtierra\"\n2019 \u2013 Harry Turtledove, \"Christmas Truce\"\n2020 \u2013 Matthew Kresal, \"Moonshot\"\n2021 \u2013 Alan Smale, \"Gunpowder Treason\"\n2022 \u2013 \"(tie)\": Eric Choi, \"A Sky and a Heaven\" &amp; Wole Talabi \"A Dream of Electric Mothers\"\n2023 \u2013 Rosemary Claire Smith, \"Apollo in Retrograde\"\n2024 \u2013 L. Briar, \"A Brother's Oath\"\n1995 \u2013 L. Sprague de Camp, lifetime achievement\n1997 \u2013 Robert Sobel, \"For Want of a Nail\"\n1999 \u2013 Randall Garrett, the Lord Darcy series\n2018 \u2013 Eric Flint, for support of writers in the alternate history genre, most notably via the 1632 series\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40214", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40214", "title": "Murray Leinster", "text": "American science fiction writer\nMurray Leinster () was a pen name of William Fitzgerald Jenkins (June 16, 1896 \u2013 June 8, 1975), an American writer of genre fiction, particularly of science fiction. He wrote and published more than 1,500 short stories and articles, 14 movie scripts, and hundreds of radio scripts and television plays.\nWriting career.\nLeinster was born in Norfolk, Virginia, the son of George B. Jenkins and Mary L. Jenkins. His father was an accountant. Although both parents were born in Virginia, the family lived in Manhattan in 1910, according to the 1910 Federal Census. A high school dropout, he nevertheless began a career as a freelance writer before World War I. He was just 20 when his first story, \"The Anti-Climax\", appeared in the July 1916 issue of H. L. Mencken's literary magazine \"The Smart Set\". Over the next two years, Leinster published four more stories and almost a dozen sketches in the magazine; in a September 2022 interview, Leinster's daughter stated that Mencken recommended the use of a pseudonym for non-\"Smart Set\" content.\nDuring World War I, Leinster served with the Committee of Public Information and the United States Army (1917\u20131918). During and after the war, his work began appearing in pulp magazines like \"Argosy\", \"Snappy Stories\", and \"Breezy Stories\". He continued to be published regularly in \"Argosy\" into the 1950s.\nWhen the pulp magazines began to diversify into particular genres in the 1920s, Leinster followed suit, selling jungle stories to \"Danger Trails\", westerns to \"West\" and \"Cowboy Stories\", detective stories to \"Black Mask\" and \"Mystery Stories\", horror stories to \"Weird Tales\", and even romance stories to \"Love Story Magazine\" under the pen name Louisa Carter Lee.\nLeinster's first science fiction story, \"The Runaway Skyscraper\", appeared in the February 22, 1919 issue of \"Argosy\", and was reprinted in the June 1926 issue of Hugo Gernsback's first science fiction magazine, \"Amazing Stories\". In the 1930s, he published several science fiction stories and serials in \"Amazing\" and \"Astounding Stories\" (the first issue of \"Astounding\" included his story \"Tanks\"). His work continued to appear frequently in other genre pulps such as \"Detective Fiction Weekly\" and \"Smashing Western\", as well as \"Collier's Weekly\" beginning in 1936 and \"Esquire\" starting in 1939.\nLeinster was an early writer of parallel universe stories. Four years before Jack Williamson's \"The Legion of Time\" came out, Leinster published his \"Sidewise in Time\" in the June 1934 issue of \"Astounding\". Leinster's vision of extraordinary oscillations in time ('sidewise in time') had a long-term impact on other authors, for example Isaac Asimov's \"Living Space\", \"The Red Queen's Race\", and \"The End of Eternity\".\nLeinster's 1945 novella \"First Contact\" is also credited as one of the first (if not the first) instances of a universal translator in science fiction. In 2000, Leinster's heirs sued Paramount Pictures over the film \"\", claiming that it infringed their trademark in the term. However, the suit was dismissed.\nLeinster was one of the few science fiction writers from the 1930s to survive in the John W. Campbell era of higher writing standards, publishing over three dozen stories in \"Astounding\" and \"Analog\" under Campbell's editorship. The last story by Leinster in \"Analog\" was \"Quarantine World\" in the November 1966 issue, thirty-six years after his appearance in the premier January 1930 issue.\nMurray Leinster's 1946 short story \"A Logic Named Joe\" contains one of the first descriptions of a computer (called a \"logic\") in fiction. In the story, Leinster was decades ahead of his time in imagining the Internet. He envisioned logics in every home, linked through a distributed system of servers (called \"tanks\"), to provide communications, entertainment, data access, and commerce; one character says that \"logics are civilization.\"\nDuring World War II, he served in the United States Office of War Information. After the war, when both his name and the pulps had achieved a wider acceptance, he would use either \"William Fitzgerald\", \"Fitzgerald Jenkins\" or \"Will F. Jenkins\" as names on stories when \"Leinster\" had already sold a piece to a particular issue.\nLeinster was so prolific a writer that Groff Conklin, when reviewing \"\" in March 1955, noted that it was his fourth novel of 1954 and that another would be reviewed in the next month. Leinster continued publishing in the 1950s and 1960s, appearing in \"Galaxy Magazine\" and \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\", as well as \"The Saturday Evening Post\". He won a Hugo Award for his 1956 story \"Exploration Team\".\nLeinster's career also included tie-in fiction based on several science fiction TV series: an episodic 1960 novel, \"Men into Space\", was derived from the series' basic concepts, but Leinster had little knowledge of the series' actual content, and none of the book episodes bear any relationship to the filmed episodes. \"Men Into Space\" was followed, seven years later, by two original novels based on \"The Time Tunnel\" (1967), and three based on \"Land of the Giants\" (1968\u201369).\nOther endeavors.\nLeinster was also an inventor under his real name of William F. Jenkins, best known for the front projection process used in special effects. He appeared in September 1953 on an episode of the educational series \"American Inventory\", in which he discussed the possibility of space travel.\nPseudonym.\n\"Murray\" is a reference to Leinster's mother's maiden name (\"Murry\"), while \"Leinster\" alluded to the connection between his middle name (\"Fitzgerald\") and the Dukes of Leinster.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1921, he married Mary Mandola. They had four daughters.\nBibliography.\nNovels.\nRomance.\nas Louisa Carter Lee\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40215", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40215", "title": "Clyde W. Tombaugh", "text": ""}
{"id": "40216", "revid": "38124872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40216", "title": "John Morton (cardinal)", "text": "English archbishop, administrator, and cardinal (c. 1420\u20131500)\nJohn Morton (c.\u20091420\u00a0\u2013 15 September 1500) was an English cleric, civil lawyer and administrator during the period of the Wars of the Roses. He entered royal service under Henry VI and was a trusted councillor under Edward IV and Henry VII. Edward IV made him Bishop of Ely and under Henry VII he became Lord Chancellor, Archbishop of Canterbury and a cardinal.\nEarly life.\nMorton was born in around 1420 either in Milborne St Andrew or Bere Regis in Dorset. He came from the minor gentry of the time: his father was Richard Morton of Milborne St Andrew and his uncle, William Morton of Cerne, represented Shaftesbury in Parliament in 1437. Morton was educated at the University of Oxford, becoming a Bachelor of Civil Law in 1448, a Bachelor of Civil and Canon Law in 1451 and a Doctor of Civil Law in 1452. He practised as a proctor in the chancellor's court at Oxford from 1448 and in 1451 he was acting as a commissary or deputy and official of the chancellor of the university. In 1452 he became principal of the civil law school and in 1453 he became the principal of Peckwater Inn where he had previously been a fellow. Later in life, Morton was elected as Chancellor of the University of Oxford for life in 1495 and as Chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 1499.\nMorton also practised as an advocate in the Court of Arches, the ecclesiastical court of the Province of Canterbury. As a result of his work as a civil lawyer Morton came to the notice of Thomas Bourchier, who became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1454, and on 26 September 1456 he entered royal service, being appointed as chancellor of the infant Edward, Prince of Wales.\nMorton was ordained as an acolyte and subdeacon on 17 December 1457, as a deacon on 17 February 1458 and as a priest on 10 March 1458. He had already obtained his first benefices, as rector of Shellingford in Berkshire (23 January 1453) and rector of Maiden Newton in Dorset (21 March 1457). In 1458 he was granted a papal dispensation to hold three benefices at the same time. In May 1458 he was made a subdean and prebend of Lincoln Cathedral, in November 1458 a prebend of Salisbury, and by 1461 he was also rector of Bloxworth in Dorset and archdeacon of Norwich.\nIn 1459 the Duke of York, the Earl of Salisbury, and Salisbury's eldest son, the Earl of Warwick, rose in rebellion against Henry VI but they fled after the Rout of Ludford Bridge. Morton was one of a number of lawyers involved in drawing up the act of attainder against the Yorkist lords passed by the parliament which met in Coventry in November 1459. After the defeat of the Lancastrian forces at the Battle of Towton on 29 March 1461, Morton was captured at Cockermouth along with the Earl of Wiltshire. They were brought to Edward IV in Newcastle where Wiltshire was beheaded while Morton was sent to the Tower of London.\nMorton was included in the act of attainder passed by Edward IV's first parliament in November 1461 and he lost all the benefices which he had accumulated. However, he escaped and joined Queen Margaret of Anjou in France, being appointed Keeper of the Privy Seal to Henry VI and assisting in the negotiations leading to the Treaty of Tours on 28 June 1462. He accompanied the queen when, with French and Scottish support, she made incursions into Northumberland in 1462 and 1463. After these attempts to restore Henry VI failed, Morton returned to France with the queen and shared the exile of the small Lancastrian court at the Chateau of Koeur near Saint-Mihiel in Lorraine. In 1469 he was admitted to study theology at the University of Louvain.\nService under Edward IV.\nFollowing the final defeat of the Lancastrian cause at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May 1471, Morton was granted a pardon by Edward IV and resumed his career in royal service. By 29 September 1471 (Michaelmas) he was appointed as a Master in Chancery and on 16 March 1472 he was granted the office of Master of the Rolls. Besides being the keeper of the rolls of the Chancery, the parchment rolls which formed the official records of the government of England, the Master of the Rolls was by this time a judicial official, second only to the Lord Chancellor in the Court of Chancery. He also acted as the keeper of the Great Seal during a vacancy in the office of Lord Chancellor or during the Lord Chancellor's temporary absence.\nIn 1474 Morton became in addition Dean of the Arches, the judge presiding in the Court of Arches. He also began once again to accumulate benefices, being made Rector of St Dunstan-in-the-East in London in 1472 (exchanged in 1474 for appointments as Rector of South Molton in Devon and master of St Bartholomew's Hospital in Bristol), a prebend of St Paul's in London in 1473, archdeacon of Chester (1474), Winchester (1475), Huntingdon (1475), Berkshire (1476), Norfolk (1477) and Leicester (1478) and a prebend of Wells (1476), York (1476) and Exeter (1476).\nCivil lawyers were also in demand for diplomatic missions and Morton left England in early January 1474 together with Lord Duras on an embassy to Burgundy. He did not return until early June. In December 1474 he was despatched on another embassy to Burgundy along with Sir Thomas Montgomery and the king's secretary, William Hatclyf. They were also commissioned to seek alliances against France with the Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick III, and Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary. After Edward IV invaded France in the middle of 1475, Morton was involved in negotiating the Treaty of Picquigny (29 August 1475) by which Louis XI undertook to pay Edward IV 75,000 crowns within fifteen days, and 50,000 crowns yearly thereafter as long as they both lived, in exchange for the withdrawal of the English army. Along with other members of the English court, Morton was rewarded by Louis XI with an annual pension, in his case of 600 crowns.\nOn 16 February 1477 Edward IV sent Morton and Sir John Donne as ambassadors to Louis XI to seek the extension of the truce under the Treaty of Picquigny. When Louis XI sent ambassadors to England in July 1477 to continue negotiations, Morton was one of those appointed to meet them. By a treaty made on 21 July 1477 the truce was extended for the lives of the kings and for a year after the death of whichever of them died first. On 21 January 1479 Edward IV instructed Morton and others to begin negotiations with the French ambassador, Charles de Martigny, Bishop of Elne, with a view to extending the truce between the two nations to last for one hundred and one years and to pay the pension of 50,000 crowns yearly throughout that period to Edward and his successors. In February 1479 the bishop signed agreements to that effect drawn up by Morton.\nIn the meanwhile, Morton had been consecrated by Archbishop Bourchier as Bishop of Ely in the chapel at Lambeth on 31 January 1479 and he vacated the other ecclesiastical offices which he had accumulated. It was during this period that Morton was mentioned by the visiting Italian observer, Dominic Mancini, as being, along with Archbishop Thomas Rotherham and William, Lord Hastings, \"of no small influence\" with the king. Mancini wrote that \"these men being in age mature, and instructed by long experience of public affairs, helped more than other councillors to form the king's policy, and besides carried it out\".\nAs Bishop of Ely, Morton initiated various building works, including rebuilding the Bishop's Palace at Hatfield in Hertfordshire which had been in the possession of the Bishops of Ely since 1109. Morton rebuilt it in about 1480 as a stately manor house, all in brick. He was also responsible for the construction of Morton's Leam, a cut or ditch twelve miles in length, forty feet broad and four feet deep, from Stanground near Peterborough to Guyhirn, by which water was channelled from the River Nene to Wisbech. Morton had a tower built to monitor the works.\nExile under Richard III.\nEdward IV died unexpectedly on 9 April 1483 and Morton was involved in making arrangements for the coronation of his elder son as Edward V. However, on 13 June he was arrested at a council meeting along with Lord Hastings and Archbishop Rotherham. They were accused of treason by the king's uncle, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and Hastings was beheaded. Morton and Rotherham were imprisoned in the Tower of London. Gloucester was crowned as Richard III on 6 July 1483. Rotherham was soon restored to favour but Morton was committed to the custody of Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, who sent him to his castle in Wales, Brecon Castle. Morton was involved in the failed uprising known as Buckingham's rebellion but he subsequently escaped to Flanders from where he continued to coordinate opposition to Richard III. In particular, when Richard III was seeking the return of Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, from Brittany, Morton sent Christopher Urswick to alert him, and Henry was able to escape over the border into France.\nMorton was included in the Acts of Attainder passed by Richard III's first (and only) parliament which met at Westminster in January 1484 and he once again lost all his temporal possessions. He was granted an unsolicited pardon on 11 December 1484 but he nevertheless refused to return to England. He is known to have been in Rome by 31 January 1485, when he signed the register of the Santo Spirito fraternity, and he was still there in April, when he secured a papal brief for the reform of Peterhouse, and probably on 7 May, when a papal indulgence was secured, the proceeds of which were to go to the repair of the dykes of the Isle of Ely and Ely Cathedral, damaged in recent floods. His real mission, however, may have been to secure papal dispensation for Richmond's intended marriage to Edward IV's eldest daughter, Elizabeth of York, which was necessary because both were descended from John of Gaunt.\nService under Henry VII.\nHenry VII summoned Morton back to England immediately after his victory at the Battle of Bosworth and he was probably present at Henry's coronation at Westminster on 30 October 1485. On 6 March 1486 he was made Lord Chancellor. This was a judicial office, presiding over the equitable jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery which continued to expand during his tenure. He was Henry VII's most trusted adviser, being present at nearly every meeting of the king's council for which records survive. The overall direction of policy in domestic and international affairs remained in the king's hands, advised by his councillors, but Morton and other royal clerks carried out the administrative work of putting his decisions into effect.\nIn the seventeenth century Francis Bacon attributed to Morton the device known as Morton's fork, whereby those who were lavish in their manner of living were told by the tax commissioners that they could obviously afford to give more to the king while those who were frugal were likewise told that they should contribute more because they must have put aside savings. However, this was Bacon's invention. It is true that the king's councillors, in particular Morton and Reginald Bray, were blamed by the Cornish rebels in 1497 for the level of taxation, but it was only after the deaths of Morton in 1500 and Bray in 1503 that Henry's financial exactions, in particular his imposition of bonds on many of his subjects and his exploitation of his prerogative rights, became more burdensome. The historian Polydore Vergil wrote that Morton and Bray were the two councillors who could reprove Henry VII when necessary and that it became obvious after their deaths that they had been responsible, not for aggravating royal harshness, but for restraining it.\nCardinal Bourchier died at Knole on 30 March 1486 and Henry VII prevailed upon the monks of Canterbury to elect Morton as his successor as Archbishop of Canterbury. The pope signified his agreement to this appointment by a bull dated 6 October and Morton was enthroned on 21 January 1487. After much pressure from Henry VII, he was made a cardinal on 20 September 1493. With the support of the papacy, Morton pursued reform of religious houses such as the Abbey of St Albans and the Cluniac house of St Andrew's, Northampton. He was not accused of personal aggrandisement but he sought to defend the traditional prerogatives of the Archbishop of Canterbury and he defended the jurisdiction of the archbishop's courts over wills where the testator had substantial goods in more than one diocese.\nIn 1489, Morton stood as godfather to the king's eldest daughter, Princess Margaret, to whom Morton gave two gilt flagons and a holy water basin with a gold bejeweled aspergillum as christening gifts.\nAs he had done when he was Bishop of Ely, Morton engaged in various building works while he was Archbishop of Canterbury. Cardinal Bourchier had left the manor of Knole to the see of Canterbury in 1480 and Morton carried out repairs and improvements of what was to be one of his favourite residences as archbishop. At Lambeth Palace, which was his principal residence, he built the brick gatehouse, called Morton's Tower. He also rebuilt or added to his residences at Croydon, Maidstone, Charing, Ford (near Reculver), Allington (modern Aldington) and the palace at Canterbury. Morton's crowning achievement as archbishop in terms of building works was the completion of the central crossing tower of Canterbury Cathedral, known as Bell Harry Tower. This was initially built as a simple lantern tower, like that at York, but in around 1494 it was decided to add an extra fifty feet to the tower and the exterior stonework bears Morton's rebus \u2013 a falcon or 'mort' perched on a cask or 'tun' \u2013 as evidence of his involvement.\nMorton's legacy.\nMorton died at Knole on 15 September 1500. A London chronicler said that he was:a man worthi of memory for his many greate Actes and specially for his greate wisdom, which contynued to the tyme of his Discease, passyng the yeres of iiijxx and odde; in our tyme was no man lyke to be compared wt him in all thynges; Albeit that he lyved not wtoute the greate Disdayn and greate haterede of the Comons of this land The mention of the hatred of the commons was perhaps a reference to the fact that, as mentioned above in relation to the Cornish rebellion, he was blamed for the heavy burden of taxation. The Spanish ambassador, De Puebla, wrote on 27 December 1500 that \"the Cardinal of England is dead, and has left no statesman behind who can be compared to him\". John Haryngton, the proctor of the English Cistercians, and therefore an opponent of Morton's attempt to extend his jurisdiction to include exempt religious houses, including the Cistercians, said that he saw in him \"nothing but the qualities of a good judge\" and that in his opinion he was:a man of great learning and profound wisdom, devoted to the service of God, concerned for the public welfare rather than for his own advantage, immersing himself profitably in both religious and secular affairs, and not shrinking from the heat and burden of the day.Morton left money in his will to pay for the maintenance of twenty poor scholars at Oxford University and ten poor scholars at Cambridge University for twenty years. He made provision for masses to be said for the salvation of his soul for twenty years and he left 1,000 marks to be distributed as alms for the poor. His closeness to the royal family is demonstrated by the bequests of his best portable breviary to Henry VII, his best psalter to the queen, an image of the Blessed Virgin in gold to the king's mother, Lady Margaret Beaufort, and a gold goblet and \u00a340 to the king's eldest daughter, Princess Margaret, whom he described as his \"beloved god-daughter\". In addition, he left a year's wages to his lay servants. He died in possession of extensive estates which were mainly left to his relatives but he left lands in the park of Mote, near Maidstone, and the mill adjacent to this park, to the cathedral of Canterbury.\nMorton asked that he be buried under a plain marble slab before the statue of the Virgin known as Our Lady of Undercroft in Canterbury Cathedral. After the pavement became cracked and broken, parts of his body were taken away and his skull is now in the keeping of Stonyhurst College.\nThe books that are known to have belonged to Morton are mainly works of canon and civil law although they include Seneca's letters and works on oratory and rhetoric. Giovanni Gigli, a humanist and papal collector, dedicated to him a short tract on the canonization of saints. A chaplain in his household, Henry Medwall, wrote the first play to be printed in English, \"Fulgens and Lucrece\", which may have been performed before the members of the court at Lambeth in 1497. In 1500 Morton financed the printing by Richard Pynson of the Salisbury or Sarum missal. This was the second edition of the Sarum missal to have been printed in England and it includes the first music printed in England.\nSir Thomas More served as a page in Morton's household between the ages of 12 and 14, that is, from around 1490 to 1492, and he included a pen portrait of Morton in his \"Utopia\". Almost a century after Morton's death a theory arose that he had actually written More's \"History of King Richard III\" but More's authorship of this work is not now questioned. Morton may have been one of More's sources of information for the \"History\" but More had access to many sources, both oral and written, and he invented many details himself.\nArmorials.\nJames Bentham wrote in 1771 concerning the arms of Bishop Morton:\n\"The Arms given him in \"Anglia Sacra\", p. 673, are not sufficiently explicit; they should be thus blasoned: \"Quarterly gules and ermine on the 1st and 4th a goat's head erased argent\". And this agrees with his arms carved various times on the noble Tower of Wisbeche Church, and as they were formerly in a window of Linton Church in Cambridgeshire, as I have it in a manuscript of church notes taken above a century ago. However these accord not with those for our bishop in his own cathedral twice, viz. in the east window of the north aisle of the presbytery, and in another window of the same aisle, where they are still remaining, and are thus blasoned: \"Quarterly gules and ermine, on the 1st and 4th three goat's heads erased argent, attired or\".\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1972 BBC television series \"The Shadow of the Tower\", which focused on the reign of Henry VII, Morton was played by Denis Carey. In the Netflix/Canal series \"Borgia\", Morton appears in one scene in season 2, episode 4, and is portrayed by David Gant. In the Starz miniseries \"The White Princess\", Morton is portrayed by Kenneth Cranham.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40217", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40217", "title": "Niccol\u00f2 de Romanis", "text": "Italian cardinal and Papal legate\nNiccol\u00f2 de Romanis (died 1218) was an Italian cardinal and Papal legate. He was Bishop of Frascati from either 1204 or 1205 and Grand penitentiary. He was closely associated with Pope Honorius III as administrator and diplomat. Dean of the College of Cardinals from 1211.\nLegate to England.\nIn 1207, Pope Innocent III placed the kingdom of England under an Interdict as the result of actions taken by King John (1199\u20131215) culminating in a debate over the appointment for a successor to the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Interdict would stand until 1213 when John finally accepted Innocent's choice of Stephen Langton as Archbishop of Canterbury. Nicholas acted as Innocent's main negotiator throughout the Interdict, arriving in September 1213 in order to settle its lifting.\nHe deposed the corrupt Roger Norreys at Evesham Abbey, and finally at Penwortham Abbey. He also intervened at Bardney Abbey to depose the abbot, and put out Ralph de Arundel, abbot of Westminster.\nHe attempted to mediate between John and his barons, taking up the issue of sheriffs, and trying to fulfil his papal brief to calm factions.\nAt Oxford.\nDuring the time the Interdict was in effect, a scholar at Oxford was accused in 1209 of raping a woman. When the burghers couldn't find the scholar, they hanged three of his friends in retaliation for his crime. The school at Oxford protested by abandoning the city and scattering to other schools throughout England, possibly setting up a facility in Cambridge.\nOn 1 October 1213, while Nicholas de Romanis was working to bring about the end of the Interdict, the citizens of Oxford sent him a letter asking him to resolve their problems with the scholars who had taught there. de Romanis agreed to help, visiting the city twice, in November 1213 and May 1214. On 20 June 1214 de Romanis's actions resulted in the issuance of the Charter for the University of Oxford.\nAmong other items, the citizens agreed to charge fixed rates for student housing and food, an annual payment to the school, the right of the school to judge anyone associated with the school and the creation of a Chancellor for the University."}
{"id": "40221", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40221", "title": "Richard J. Daley", "text": "Mayor of Chicago from 1955 to 1976\nRichard Joseph Daley (May 15, 1902 \u2013 December 20, 1976) was an American politician who served as the mayor of Chicago from 1955, and the chairman of the Cook County Democratic Party from 1953, until his death. He has been called \"the last of the big city bosses\" who controlled and mobilized American cities. He was the patriarch of a powerful Chicago political family. His son Richard M. Daley went on to serve as mayor of Chicago, and another son, William M. Daley, served as United States Secretary of Commerce and White House Chief of Staff.\nDaley was Chicago's third consecutive mayor from the working-class, heavily Irish American South Side neighborhood of Bridgeport, where he lived his entire life. He is remembered for doing much to save Chicago from the declines that other Rust Belt cities, such as Cleveland, Buffalo, and Detroit, experienced during the same period. He had a strong base of support in Chicago's Irish Catholic community and was treated by national politicians such as Lyndon B. Johnson as a pre-eminent Irish American, with special connections to the Kennedy family. Daley played a major role in the history of the Democratic Party, especially with his support of John F. Kennedy in the presidential election of 1960 and of Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election of 1968. He was the longest-serving mayor in Chicago history until his record was broken by his son Richard M. Daley in 2011. He has been ranked by some historians as among the ten best mayors in American history. A 1994 survey of experts on Chicago politics assessed him as one of the ten best mayors in the city's history (up to that time).\nDaley's legacy is complicated by criticisms of machine politics or Chicago-style politics. His response to the Chicago riots that followed the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and his handling of the notorious 1968 Democratic National Convention held in his city are seen as failures. During his tenure, he also had enemies within the Democratic Party. In addition, many members of Daley's administration were charged with and convicted of corruption, although Daley himself was never charged with any crime.\nEarly life.\nRichard J. Daley was born in Bridgeport, a working-class neighborhood of Chicago. He was the only child of Michael and Lillian (Dunne) Daley, whose families had both arrived from the Old Parish area, near Dungarvan, County Waterford, Ireland, during the Great Famine. Richard's father was a sheet metal worker with a reserved demeanor. Michael's father, James E. Daley, was a butcher born in New York City, while his mother, Delia Gallagher Daley, was an Irish immigrant. Richard's mother was outgoing and outspoken. Before women obtained the right to vote in 1920, Lillian Daley was an active suffragette, participating in marches and often bringing her son to them. She hoped her son's life would be more professionally successful than that of his parents. Before his mother's death, Daley had won the Democratic nomination for Cook County sheriff. Lillian wanted more than this for her son, telling a friend, \"I didn't raise my son to be a policeman.\" Daley would later state that his wellsprings were his religion, his family, his neighborhood, the Democratic Party, and his love of the city.\nEducation.\nDaley attended the elementary school of his parish, Nativity of Our Lord, and De La Salle Institute (where he learned clerical skills) and took night classes at DePaul University College of Law to earn a Bachelor of Laws in 1933. As a young man, Daley's jobs included selling newspapers and making deliveries for a door-to-door peddler; he worked in Chicago's Union stock yards to pay his law school expenses. He spent his free time as a member of the Hamburg Athletic Club, an athletic, social, street gang and political organization near his home. Hamburg and similar clubs were funded, at least in part, by local Democratic politicians. Daley made his mark there, not in sports, but in organization as the club manager. At age 22, he was elected president of the club and served in that office until 1939. Although he practiced law with partner William J. Lynch, he dedicated the majority of his time to his political career.\nPolitical career.\nEarly career.\nDaley's career in politics began when he became a Democratic precinct captain. Having served as secretary for previous County Treasurers Joseph B. McDonough, Thomas D. Nash, Robert M. Sweitzer, and Joseph L. Gill, he was appointed the Chief Deputy Comptroller of Cook County on December 17, 1936, to replace Michael J. O'Connor, who had died on December 9.\nDaley's first elective office was in the Illinois House of Representatives, to which he was elected for the 9th district on November 3, 1936, alongside Democratic incumbents William J. Gormley and Peter P. Jezierny. Despite being a lifelong Democrat, he was elected to the office as a Republican. This was a matter of political opportunism and the peculiar setup for legislative elections in Illinois at the time, which allowed Daley to take the place on the ballot of the recently deceased Republican candidate David Shanahan. Daley's name was not printed on the ballot due to the closeness of Shanahan's death to the election, but he was able to defeat Shanahan's friend Robert E. Rodgers.\nAfter his election, Daley quickly moved back to the Democratic side of the aisle. After the death of incumbent Democratic Senator Patrick J. Carroll in 1938, Daley was elected to the Illinois Senate. That year Gormley and Jezierny were successfully reelected with Republican William S. Finucane taking the third spot. In 1939, Illinois State Senator William \"Botchy\" Connors remarked of Daley: \"You couldn't give that guy a nickel, that's how honest he is.\" Daley served as Minority Leader of the Illinois Senate from 1941 through 1946. He suffered his only political defeat in 1946, when he lost a bid to become Cook County sheriff.\nIn the late 1940s, Daley became Democratic Ward Committeeman of the 11th Ward, a post he retained until his death. He was appointed by Governor Adlai Stevenson II as head of the Illinois Department of Finance, serving in that role from 1949 through 1950, the year he made a successful run for Cook County Clerk. Daley held that position until being elected Chicago's mayor.\nDaley became chairman of the Central Committee of the Cook County Democratic Party, i.e., boss of the political machine, in 1953. Holding this position along with the mayoralty in later years enhanced Daley's power. A recorded phone conversation that Daley had with President Lyndon Johnson on January 27, 1968, revealed that despite his Irish Catholic background, Daley also privately had at times tense relations with the Kennedy family and that he had declined an offer to vote against President Harry Truman when he was serving as a delegate at the 1948 Democratic National Convention.\nEarly mayoralty.\nDaley was first elected mayor, Chicago's 48th, in 1955. He was reelected to that office five times and had been mayor for 21 years at the time of his death. During his administration, Daley dominated the political arena of the city and, to a lesser extent, that of the entire state. Officially, Chicago has a \"weak-mayor\" system, in which most of the power is vested in the city council. However, Daley's post as de facto leader of the Chicago Democratic Party allowed him to rule the city with an iron hand and gave him great influence over the city's ward organizations, which in turn allowed him a considerable voice in Democratic primary contests\u2014in most cases, the real contest in the Democratic stronghold of Chicago.\nIn 1959 and 1960, Daley served as president of the United States Conference of Mayors.\nDaley contributed to John F. Kennedy's narrow, 8,000 vote victory in Illinois in 1960.\nMajor construction during Daley's terms in office resulted in O'Hare International Airport, the Sears Tower, McCormick Place, the University of Illinois at Chicago, numerous expressways and subway construction projects, and other major Chicago landmarks. O'Hare was a particular point of pride for Daley, with he and his staff regularly devising occasions to celebrate it. It occasioned one of Daley's numerous clashes with community organizer Saul Alinsky. His black-neighborhood Woodlawn Organization threatened a mass \"piss in\" at the airport (a crowding of its toilets) to press demands for open employment.\nDaley's construction of a modern Chicago rested on the commitment to racial segregation. Housing, highways, and schools were built to serve as barriers between white and black neighborhoods. To revitalize downtown Chicago Daley worked together with business leaders to push out poor black residents and replace them with middle class whites. To prevent black people from moving into white neighborhoods, Daley oversaw the building of public housing in the form of high-rise towers like the Robert Taylor Homes that he placed within Chicago's black ghettos. Many were located along a single street in the ghetto of Chicago's South Side, which became known as the \"State Street Corridor\" and had the densest concentration of public housing in the nation. Daley was also responsible for routing the Dan Ryan Expressway along the neighborhood's traditional racial divide, so that it separated the State Street Corridor from the white neighborhoods of the South Side. Until the late 1960s, in municipal elections Daley nevertheless enjoyed 70 percent support within the black community. Like other ethnic groups in Chicago, black voters offered party loyalty and votes for political patronage.\nFrom late 1965 to early 1967 Mayor Daley was confronted by the Chicago Freedom Movement to improve conditions in the black ghettos. On the one hand, the Chicago civil rights movement formed to fight for better schools. On the other hand, it advocated open housing in Chicago. The campaign, that became known as the Chicago Freedom Movement, was led by Martin Luther King Jr., who tried to employ the tactics of peaceful marches like he had in the South. Daley, with the help of black political leaders who did not want to break with Daley's political machine and the local press, avoided violent confrontations. In mid-August 1966 the \"Summit Agreement\" was achieved through a series of meetings. Among other things it brought about the creation of the \"Leadership Council for Metropolitan Open Communities\". While this is a contentious issue, the Chicago Freedom Movement is widely considered a failure or at best a draw.\nDaley discouraged motion picture and television filming on location in Chicago, after an episode of \"M Squad\" (aired on January 30, 1959) depicted an officer of CPD taking bribes. This policy lasted until the end of his term and would be reversed under later mayor Jane Byrne, when \"The Blues Brothers\" was filmed in Chicago. However during his time in office, movies including \"Cooley High\", and others were filmed in Chicago.\n1968 and later career.\nThe year 1968 was a momentous year for Daley. On January 27, Daley informed President Johnson that Robert F. Kennedy had met him and asked for his support in the upcoming Democratic primaries, which he declined. He also got the President to accept an offer to either stay in the Democratic primaries or be nominated as Hubert Humphrey's Vice President at the Democratic National Convention. Daley and Johnson were also going to use Kennedy's run for president to help this plan and feed Kennedy's ego by making him think there was a \"revolution\" in the party as well. In April, many castigated Daley for his sharp rhetoric in the aftermath of rioting that took place after King's assassination. Displeased with what he saw as an over-cautious police response to the rioting, Daley chastised police superintendent James B. Conlisk and subsequently related that conversation at a City Hall press conference as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I said to him very emphatically and very definitely that an order be issued by him immediately to shoot to kill any arsonist or anyone with a Molotov cocktail in his hand, because they're potential murderers, and to shoot to maim or cripple anyone looting.\nThis statement generated significant controversy. Jesse Jackson, for example, called it \"a fascist's response\". Daley later backed away from his words in an address to the City Council, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the established policy of the police department \u2013 fully supported by this administration \u2013 that only the minimum force necessary be used by policemen in carrying out their duties.\nLater that month, Daley asserted,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There wasn't any shoot-to-kill order. That was a fabrication.\nRobert Kennedy was also assassinated in June 1968, thus hurting Daley's earlier plan to make Johnson, who withdrew his re-election bid in March, Vice President.\nIn August, the 1968 Democratic National Convention was held in Chicago. Intended to showcase Daley's achievements to national Democrats and the news media, the proceedings during the convention instead garnered notoriety for the mayor and city, descending into verbal outbursts between participants, and a circus for the media. With the nation divided by the Vietnam War and with the assassinations of King and Kennedy earlier that year serving as backdrop, the city became a battleground for anti-war protesters who vowed to shut down the convention. In some cases, confrontations between protesters and police turned violent, with images of the chaos broadcast on national television. Later, anti-war activists Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin, and three other members of the \"Chicago Seven\" were convicted of crossing state lines with the intent of inciting a riot as a result of these confrontations, though the convictions were overturned on appeal.\nAt the convention itself, Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff went off-script during his speech nominating George McGovern, saying, \"And with George McGovern as President of the United States, we wouldn't have to have Gestapo tactics in the streets of Chicago. And with George McGovern as president, we wouldn't have to have a National Guard.\" Ribicoff, with his voice shaking, then said: \"How hard it is to speak the truth, when we know the problems that are facing this nation\", for which some in the crowd booed Ribicoff. Ribicoff also tried to introduce a motion to shut down the convention and move it to another city. Many conventioneers applauded Ribicoff's remarks, but an indignant Daley tried to shout down the speaker. As television cameras focused on Daley, lip-readers later said they observed him shouting, \"Fuck you, you Jew son of a bitch, you lousy motherfucker, go home!\" Defenders of the mayor later stated that he was calling Ribicoff a faker, a charge denied by Daley and refuted by Mike Royko's reporting. A federal commission, led by local attorney and party activist Dan Walker, investigated the events surrounding the convention and described them as a \"police riot\". Daley defended his police force with the following statement, which was also a slip of the tongue: \"The confrontation was not caused by the police. The confrontation was caused by those who charged the police. Gentlemen, let's get this thing straight, once and for all. The policeman is not here to create disorder. The policeman is here to preserve disorder.\"\nPublic opinion polls conducted after the convention demonstrated that the majority of Americans supported Daley's tactics. Daley was historically re-elected for the fifth time in 1971. However, many have argued this was due to a lack of formidable opposition rather than Daley's own popularity. Democratic nominee McGovern threw Daley out of the 1972 Democratic National Convention, replacing his delegation with one led by Jesse Jackson. This event arguably marked a downturn in Daley's power and influence within the Democratic Party but given his public standing, McGovern later made amends by putting Daley loyalist (and Kennedy in-law) Sargent Shriver on his ticket. In January 1973, former Illinois Racing Board Chairman William S. Miller testified that Daley had \"induced\" him to bribe Illinois Governor Otto Kerner.\nIn the 1970 special election deciding whether or not Illinois would adopt its then-proposed state constitution, Daley came out in support of its adoption late in the campaign. His support may have ultimately been critical in influencing Illinois voters in their decision to ultimately adopt the proposed constitution. Daley was a strong proponent of Illinois having home rule for local government, and this constitution enshrined the ability for local governments to become home rule units.\nDaley was reelected mayor for a (then-record) sixth term in 1975.\nDeath and funeral.\nShortly after 2:00\u00a0p.m. on December 20, 1976, Daley collapsed on the city's Near North Side while on his way to lunch. He was rushed to the office of his private physician at 900 North Michigan Avenue. It was confirmed that Daley had suffered a massive heart attack and he was pronounced dead at 2:55\u00a0p.m.; he was 74 years old.\nDaley's funeral took place on December 22 at Nativity of Our Lord Catholic Church, Chicago, the church that he had attended since his childhood. Attending his funeral were Jimmy Carter (the U.S. president-elect) and vice president Nelson Rockefeller. Daley is buried in Holy Sepulchre Cemetery in Worth Township, southwest of Chicago.\nAfter a several-days-long dispute over who would become Chicago's acting mayor, a deal was brokered that resulted in Michael A. Bilandic being appointed acting mayor by the city council. Similtaneously, George W. Dunne (the president of the Cook County Board of Commissioners) was chosen to be Daley's successor as chair of the Cook County Democratic Party.\nPersonal life and family.\nDaley met Eleanor \"Sis\" Guilfoyle at a local ball game. He courted \"Sis\" for six years, during which time he finished law school and was established in his legal profession. They were married on June 17, 1936, and lived in a modest brick bungalow at 3536 South Lowe Avenue in the heavily Irish and Polish neighborhood of Bridgeport, a few blocks from his birthplace. They had three daughters and four sons, in that order. Their eldest son, Richard M. Daley, was elected mayor of Chicago in 1989, and served in that position until his retirement in 2011. The youngest son, William M. Daley, served as White House Chief of Staff under President Barack Obama and as US Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton. Another son, John P. Daley, is a member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners. The other progeny has stayed out of public life. Michael Daley is a partner in the law firm Daley &amp; George, and Mary Carol (Daley) Vanecko, who died in 2025, was a teacher, as were Patricia (Daley) Martino, who died in 2024, and Eleanor, who died in 1998.\n \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Quotations related to at Wikiquote\"\nSpeaking style.\nDaley, who never lost his blue-collar Chicago accent, was known for often mangling his syntax and other verbal gaffes. Daley made one of his most memorable verbal missteps in 1968, while defending what the news media reported as police misconduct during that year's violent Democratic convention, stating, \"Gentlemen, get the thing straight once and for all \u2013 the policeman isn't there to create disorder, the policeman is there to \"preserve\" disorder.\" Daley's reputation for misspeaking was such that his press secretary Earl Bush would tell reporters, \"Write what he means, not what he says.\"\nLegacy.\nA 1993 survey of historians, political scientists and urban experts conducted by Melvin G. Holli of the University of Illinois at Chicago saw Daley ranked as the fifth best American big-city mayor to serve between the years 1820 and 1993. The survey also saw Daley ranked the best big-city mayor to serve in office post-1960. A 1994 survey of experts on Chicago politics saw Daley ranked as one of the ten best mayors in the city's history (up to that time).\nOn the 50th anniversary of Daley's first 1955 swearing-in, several dozen Daley biographers and associates met at the Chicago Historical Society. Historian Michael Beschloss called Daley \"the pre-eminent mayor of the 20th century\". Robert Remini pointed out that while other cities were in fiscal crisis in the 1960s and 1970s, \"Chicago always had a double-A bond rating.\" According to Chicago folksinger Steve Goodman, \"no man could inspire more love, more hate\".\nDaley, through his political patronage and role as a political boss, helped advance the political careers of multiple Chicagoans. Notable prot\u00e9g\u00e9s included Michael A. Bilandic, Jane Byrne, Neil Hartigan, and Edward Hanrahan.\nDaley's twenty-one-year tenure as mayor is memorialized in the following public buildings:\nJournalists Adam Cohen and Elizabeth Taylor argue that Daley's politics may have saved Chicago from the same fate that cities like Detroit, Kansas City, St. Louis and Cleveland endured, which suffered from suburbanization, crime and white flight. \"But for every middle-class neighborhood he saved, there was a poor neighborhood in which living conditions worsened. For every downtown skyscraper that kept jobs and tax dollars in the city, there was a housing project tower that confined poor people in an overcrowded ghetto\".\nDaley was known by many Chicagoans as \"Da Mare\" (\"The Mayor\"), \"Hizzoner\" (\"His Honor\"), and \"The Man on Five\" (his office was on the fifth floor of City Hall). Since Daley's death and the subsequent election of son Richard as mayor in 1989, the first Mayor Daley has become known as \"Boss Daley\", \"Old Man Daley\", or \"Daley Senior\" to residents of Chicago.\nDuring the civil rights era, some black Chicagoans referred to Daley as \"Pharaoh\", comparing him to the oppressive and unrelenting figure in the Book of Exodus. These claims were supported by Daley's role in the assassination of Fred Hampton and his anti-MLK stance.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40222", "revid": "30898617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40222", "title": "Richard M. Daley", "text": "Mayor of Chicago from 1989 to 2011\nRichard Michael Daley (born April 24, 1942) is an American politician who served as the 54th mayor of Chicago, Illinois, from 1989 to 2011. Daley was elected mayor in 1989 and was reelected five times until declining to run for a seventh term. At 22 years, his was the longest tenure in Chicago mayoral history, surpassing the 21-year mayoralty of his father, Richard J. Daley.\nAs Mayor, Daley took over the Chicago Public Schools, developed tourism, oversaw the construction of Millennium Park, increased environmental efforts and the rapid development of the city's central business district downtown and adjacent near North, South and West sides. He also approved expansion of city workers' benefits to their partners regardless of gender, and advocated for gun control.\nDaley received criticism when family, personal friends, and political allies disproportionately benefited from city contracting. He took office in a city with regular annual budget surpluses and left the city with massive structural deficits. His budgets ran up the largest deficits in Chicago history. A national leader in privatization, he temporarily reduced budgetary shortfalls by leasing and selling public assets to private corporations, but this practice removed future sources of revenue, contributing to the city's near insolvency at the end of his tenure. A \"tough-on-crime\" politician, Daley oversaw the creation of one of the largest police surveillance systems in the nation, but police brutality was also a recurring issue during his mayorship.\nEarly and personal life.\nRichard M. Daley is the fourth of seven children and eldest son of Richard J. and Eleanor Daley, who later became Mayor and First Lady of Chicago in 1955. Born on April 24, 1942, he grew up in Bridgeport, a historically Irish-American neighborhood located on Chicago's South Side. Daley is a brother of William M. Daley, former White House Chief of Staff and former United States Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton; John P. Daley, a commissioner on the Cook County Board of Commissioners and chairman of the Board's Finance Committee; and Michael Daley, an attorney with Daley &amp; Georges, a law firm founded by their father Richard J. Daley, that specializes in zoning law and is often hired by developers to help get zoning changes through city hall. Daley was married to Margaret \"Maggie\" Corbett until her death on Thanksgiving Day, November 24, 2011 after a decade-long battle with metastatic breast cancer, which had spread to her bones and liver. Maggie Daley Park in the Chicago Loop commemorates her, and her nonprofit After School Matters continues to serve Chicago's young people. They have four children: Nora, Patrick, Elizabeth and Kevin, all born at Mercy Hospital and Medical Center in Chicago. Their second son, Kevin, died at age two of complications from spina bifida in 1981. Daley was raised Roman Catholic.\nDaley graduated from De La Salle Institute high school in Chicago and obtained his bachelor's degree from DePaul University in 1964, having transferred from Providence College in Providence, Rhode Island after two years. In 1962, at age 19, home on Christmas break, Daley was ticketed for running a stop sign at Huron and Rush, and the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" headline was \"Mayor's Son Gets Ticket, Uses No Clout,\" with a subhead reading \"Quiet Boy.\"\nSources conflict on Daley's military record. The only book-length biography of Daley makes no mention of military service. A 1995 profile in the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" stated that Daley served in the United States Marine Corps Reserve from 1961 to 1967, while a 1996 profile in \"People Magazine\" cited 1960 to 1964. A civilian website for Marines and their families found no military record for Daley.\nDaley earned a Juris Doctor degree from DePaul University. He passed the Illinois Bar Examination on his third try. Daley later reflected, \"I flunked the bar exam twice. I had to keep studying harder and harder and harder. I passed it the third time.\" Daley never tried a case.\nEarly political career.\nDaley was elected to his first office as a delegate to the 1969 Illinois Constitutional Convention, which created the current Constitution of Illinois (adopted after voters approved it in a 1970 special election). According to journalist Rick Perlstein, in June 1972, Daley led a mob on behalf of his father's Democratic Party regulars against pro-McGovern reformers meeting in a church in Illinois' Fifth Congressional District. The action was unsuccessful and the reformers' slate (which included Rev. Jesse Jackson) replaced the Daley slate at the Democratic National Convention in Miami Beach, Florida.\nAfter his father died in 1976, Daley succeeded his father as the 11th Ward Democratic committeeman, a party post, until succeeded in the post by his brother John P. Daley in 1980. With John P. Daley holding the post from 1980 to the present, a Daley has held the post of 11th Ward Committeeman for 60 years.\nIllinois State Senate (1972\u20131980).\nAfter Edward Nihill stepped down, Daley, with the support of the Democratic political organization, was elected to the Illinois Senate, serving from 1972 to 1980. State Senator Daley rarely spoke to reporters and didn't hold a news conference for six years. Daley chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee. Daley was named one of Illinois' ten worst state legislators by \"Chicago Magazine\" \"for arrogance, for sharklike qualities, for living off his father's name, and for pulling puppet strings attached to some of the worst members of the Senate.\" He was considered \"too shrewd to be one of the worst, but he controls so many of the worst senators that he belongs on the list to represent all of them.\" After the Spring 1975 state legislative session, Chicago Democrat Dawn Clark Netsch, who served with Daley as Illinois Constitutional Convention delegates and as State Senators, blamed \"dirty little Richie\" for frustrating her good government legislative agenda in the state legislature.\nCook County State's Attorney (1981\u20131989).\nIn 1980, Daley challenged incumbent Republican Bernard Carey for Cook County State's Attorney. Democratic Mayor Jane Byrne endorsed Alderman Edward M. Burke in the Democratic primary, and after Daley prevailed in the primary, endorsed Carey in the general election. Daley prevailed and served from 1981 to 1989. His election over Carey saw him win by merely sixteen thousand votes, one of the narrowest wins for the Cook County State's Attorney election.\nPolice torture reported to Daley, 1982.\nIn February 1982, Andrew Wilson was arrested for the murder of two Chicago police officers. Wilson was taken to Area 2 detective headquarters on the South Side for interrogation under Chicago Police Detective Jon Burge. Dr. John Raba, Medical Director of Cermak Health Services, the prison hospital in the Cook County Hospital system, examined Wilson, determined Wilson had been tortured, and complained in writing to then Chicago Police Superintendent Richard J. Brzeczek:\nI examined Mr. Andrew Wilson on February 15 &amp; 16, 1982. He had multiple bruises, swellings and abrasions on his face and head. His right eye was battered and had a superficial laceration. Andrew Wilson had several linear blisters on his right thigh, right cheek and anterior chest which were consistent with radiator burns. He stated he'd been cuffed to a radiator and pushed into it. He also stated that electrical shocks had been administered to his gums, lips and genitals. All these injuries occurred prior to his arrival at the Jail. There must be a thorough investigation of this alleged brutality.\nBrzeczek forwarded the letter to State's Attorney Daley. Daley never replied, and charges were never brought against any officers. Daley's prosecutors convicted Wilson and his brother Jackie of murder, and Andrew Wilson was sentenced to death. On April 2, 1987, the Illinois Supreme Court overturned the convictions, ruling that Wilson was forced to confess involuntarily after being beaten by police.\nFirst campaign for mayor: 1983 challenge to Jane Byrne.\nIn November 1982, Daley announced his first campaign for mayor. The candidates in the three-way Democratic primary, which included incumbent Mayor Jane Byrne, a former prot\u00e9g\u00e9e of his father, and Congressman Harold Washington, held a series of four televised debates. Daley finished third. Many of Richard J.'s political allies blamed Richard M. for splitting the white vote, enabling Washington to become Chicago's first black mayor.\nSecond campaign for mayor: 1989 victory over Eugene Sawyer.\nOn November 25, 1987, Mayor Washington died in office of a heart attack. On December 2, 1987, the Chicago City Council appointed Alderman Eugene Sawyer as mayor until a special election for the remaining two years of the term could be held in 1989. Daley announced his candidacy on December 6, 1988, saying\nLet's face it: we have a problem in Chicago. The name-calling and politics at City Hall are keeping us from tackling the real issues\u00a0... I may not be the best speaker in town, but I know how to run a government and how to bring people together.\nRahm Emanuel worked for the Daley campaign as a fundraiser, David Axelrod as campaign strategist, William Daley as chief strategist, and Forrest Claypool as a campaign aide. Among four Daley campaign appearances on a Sunday shortly before the primary was a rally of Polish Highlanders at 4808 S. Archer Ave. In a videotaped television newscast, it appeared that Daley said, \"You want a white mayor to sit down with everybody.\" Sawyer said he was \"shocked.\" Daley explained, \"It was my standard stump speech. I'm not maybe the best speaker in town, but I have never used the word [white].\" That Friday, the campaign watchdog group CONDUCT censured Daley and commended Sawyer for his \"rejection of racially inflammatory comments.\"\nDaley defeated Sawyer in the primary. In the 1989 general election, Daley faced Republican candidate Edward Vrdolyak, a former Democratic alderman who had opposed Mayor Washington, and Alderman Timothy C. Evans, the candidate of the newly created Harold Washington Party. Daley won the general election on April 4, 1989. Daley was inaugurated as Mayor of Chicago on April 24, 1989, his 47th birthday, at a ceremony in Orchestra Hall.\nMayor of Chicago (1989\u20132011).\nFirst term (1989\u20131991).\nDaley presided over the most docile City Council since his father. One of the new mayor's first acts was to appropriate the City Council's power to approve city contracts, a right aldermen exercised under former Mayors Washington and Sawyer. Daley's first budget proposal, the 1990 budget, included $3 billion in spending, $50 million more than 1989, featured a $25 million reduction in the property tax levy, extended Mayor Sawyer's hiring freeze, piloted recycling, and privatized the city's tow truck fleet. Daley became the first Chicago Mayor to lead Chicago's Gay and Lesbian Pride Parade, at the 20th annual parade on Sunday, June 26, 1989. On August 22, 1990, Daley told reporters that \"people are getting hurt in drive-by shoot-a-longs.\" In December 1990, Amnesty International issued a report \"Allegations of Police Torture in Chicago, Illinois\" calling for a full inquiry into allegations that some Chicago police officers tortured criminal suspects between 1972 and 1984.\nSecond term (1991\u20131995).\nOn April 2, 1991, Daley was reelected to a second term (his first full, four-year term), with 70.7% of the vote, over African American civil rights attorney and Appellate Judge R. Eugene Pincham. Questioned about the city's rising homicide rate on September 10, 1991, Daley said \"The more killing and homicides you have, the more havoc it prevents.\"\nA 1994 survey of experts on Chicago politics saw Daley assessed as one of the ten best mayors in the city's history (up to that time).\nBrawl at Daley home in Michigan.\nOn the weekend of March 1\u20132, 1992, Daley and his wife arranged for 16-year-old son Patrick to stay with relatives while they attended a family event in New York. Patrick told the relatives he was staying with friends, drove his father's new sports utility vehicle to the Daley second home in Grand Beach, Michigan and threw a party Saturday night without parental consent or adult supervision. Someone asked two Filipino and two white youths to leave, racial epithets were exchanged, and a fistfight broke out. Patrick retrieved Richard J. Daley's shotgun from the house and gave it to his cousin, who was aged 17. A youth was seriously injured when a juvenile struck him in the head with a baseball bat. On Monday a sobbing Mayor Daley read a statement at a City Hall press conference, pausing repeatedly as he tried to maintain his composure,\nI am very disappointed, as any parent would be, after his son held a party in their home while his parents were away. I am more deeply distressed for the welfare of the young man who was injured in this fight.\nPatrick pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of furnishing alcohol to minors and disturbing the peace and was sentenced to six months' probation, 50 hours of community service in Grand Beach, fined $1,950 and ordered to pay restitution to his parents for property damage. His cousin pleaded guilty to aiming a firearm without malice and was fined $1,235. Sixteen other youths were charged with juvenile and adult offenses. The injured youth recovered.\nThird term (1995\u20131999).\nJoseph E. Gardner ran against Daley and lost.\nDaley took control of the Chicago Public Schools system in 1995 and appointed Paul Vallas. When Vallas left the post to run for governor, Daley chose the relatively obscure Arne Duncan, who later became the U.S. Secretary of Education under Barack Obama, to lead the district. On March 19, 1997, the Chicago City Council adopted the Domestic Partners Ordinance, which made employee benefits available to same-sex partners of City employees. Daley said it was an issue of fairness.\nDaley's floor leader in City Council resigns.\nThe first major public corruption scandal of Daley's tenure as mayor involved the circumstances of the resignation of his City Council floor leader, Alderman Patrick Huels, in October 1997. Daley, Huels, and another close friend Michael Tadin grew up within two blocks on S. Emerald Avenue in Bridgeport. Huels attended De La Salle Institute, the same high school attended by Daley, his father, and Michael Bilandic. Huels worked for the city's Public Works Department as a laborer and tree trimmer, then as an administrative assistant in the Environment Department, and then as a City Council investigator. He answered phones for the 11th Ward Democratic organization, and was its secretary for several years. When Mayor Richard J. Daley died, 11th Ward Alderman Bilandic was named acting mayor, and Huels, then 26, replaced Bilandic as alderman. Huels chaired the council's Transportation Committee and became Mayor Richard M. Daley's floor leader. In the summer of 2007, in reaction to ongoing indictments and convictions of aldermen, Daley and Huels shepherded a package of ethics reforms through city council. Huels owned a security firm, SDI Security, Inc. along with his wife and his brother, a Chicago police lieutenant. In the mid-1990s, the firm had about 390 full-time employees and was grossing $7 million a year. Huels was president and a director, and Council Finance Committee Chairman Alderman Edward M. Burke (14th) was secretary. Huels and Burke authorized $633,971 in legal consulting fees from their respective Council committees to attorney Michael A. Pedicone, a long-time officer of SDI. In March 1995 the Internal Revenue Service placed a lien on SDI for $326,951 and in June 1996 for $997,382 for failing to pay payroll taxes, including money withheld from its employees' pay checks.\nIn 1970, after high school, Tadin went to work for Marina Cartage; within a decade, he owned the company, and over the next 15 years expanded it from 20 trucks to 150. Between 1992 and 1997, the city paid Marina Cartage and another Tadin company $49 million for supplying the city with snow removal and other heavy equipment and operators. Tadin earned millions of dollars by buying land cheaply, then leasing or selling it to the city. Marina Cartage used Huels' SDI Security services since 1992. In 1995, with Huels' support, the City Council approved a tax reduction which halved the assessment on a new $4.5 million headquarters and trucking terminal for Marina Cartage at 4450 S. Morgan in Huels' ward, a tax savings of as much as $80,000 per year. In 1996, with Huels' support, the City Council approved a $1.1 million direct grant for the construction of the facility. Weeks later, Tadin created a new company which was used to originate a $1.25 million bailout loan to SDI. Daley said Huels \"did the right thing resigning\" and claimed no knowledge of Huels' business dealings. \"I don't get into people's private lives. I am not into that,\" Daley said. Daley announced an executive order and new ethics legislation, saying:\nThe goal of this executive order is to help address questions about favoritism in city contracting by preventing conflicts of interest, or even the appearance of such conflicts.\u00a0... There should be a level playing field, where no one has an advantage\u2014or a disadvantage\u2014in obtaining city contracts, simply because they know me or anyone else in government.\u00a0... Under the steps I'm taking today and recommending to the City Council, the public can easily learn everything there is to know about a city contract: who is involved, who will benefit and whether the city is paying a fair price. I and every other city official must be prepared to defend every contract on its merits.\nFourth term (1999\u20132003).\nOn February 23, 1999, Daley won reelection to a fourth term with 68.9 percent of the vote over challenger U.S. Congressman Bobby Rush. In August 1999, prompted by police excessive-force incidents in Chicago, New York and other cities, the U.S. affiliate of Amnesty International issued a report \"Race, Rights &amp; Brutality: Portraits of Abuse in the USA,\" that called on federal officials to better document excessive-force cases and to pursue prosecutions of the officers involved. In October 1999, the organization issued a report \"Summary of Amnesty International's concerns on police abuse in Chicago\" which expressed concerns including improper interrogation tactics, excessive force, shootings of unarmed suspects, and the detention and interrogation of children.\nThe Duff family formed a janitorial services company, Windy City Maintenance Inc., one month after Daley's inauguration. Bruce DuMont, president of the Museum of Broadcast Communications, said that Daley recommended that DuMont's wife Kathy Osterman, then director of the Mayor's Office of Special Events, award city contracts to Duff family companies. Daley denied steering contracts to the Duffs, and said he would \"look into\" the allegations, while stopping short of promising to do so, saying \"I don't promise. That's the wrong word to use. You know\u00a0... promising, promising. We do look into it, yes.\" In September 2003, a federal investigation led to indictments of Patricia Green Duff, her sons John M. Duff and James Duff, and others on charges they won nearly $100 million in city contracts through the city's set-aside program by misrepresenting their companies as women- and minority-owned. John M. Duff pleaded guilty to 33 counts of racketeering, fraud and other charges on January 10, 2004. A 1978 state law designed by Illinois Democrats gave the Mayor the power to appoint to fill vacancies in the City Council rather than holding special elections, and by 2002 more than a third of the council's 50 aldermen were initially appointed by Daley. The Council became even more of a rubber stamp than in Richard J. Daley's terms. In the 18 months from January 12, 2000 to June 6, 2001, only 13 votes in the council were divided, less than one a month. 32 aldermen supported the mayor 90-100% of the time and another 14 80-89% of the time.\nFifth term (2003\u20132007).\nOn February 26, 2003, Daley took 78.5% of the vote to prevail over challenger Reverend Paul Jakes Jr. Daley endorsed same-sex marriage, saying on February 18, 2004, he would have \"no problem\" with Cook County issuing marriage licenses to gay couples. \"Time\" magazine in its April 25, 2005 issue named Daley as the best out of five mayors of large cities in the United States, and characterized Daley as having \"imperial\" style and power. In May 2006, in Geneva, Switzerland the United Nations Committee Against Torture released a report which noted the \"limited investigation and lack of prosecution\" into allegations of torture in Areas 2 and 3 of the Chicago Police Department and called on American authorities to \"promptly, thoroughly and impartially\" investigate the allegations, and provide the committee with more information. Daley was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame in 2006 as a Friend of the Community.\nDaley orders demolition of Meigs Field.\nA long-standing agreement between the city and state required the city to maintain and operate Meigs Field, a small, downtown, lakefront airport on Northerly Island used by general aviation aircraft and helicopters, until 2011 or turn it over to the state. On September 12, 1996, the City Council approved Daley's plan to convert the airport into a park, and the state began planning to take over operation of the airport. Fresh off a 2003 re-election mandate, one of Daley's first major acts was ordering the demolition of Meigs Field. On Sunday, March 30, 2003, shortly before midnight, transport trucks carrying construction equipment moved onto Meigs with Chicago Police escort. By early Monday morning, city crews excavated six large X's into the only runway. The city's 50 aldermen, Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich, the Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Homeland Security were not consulted on the plan. The demolition of the runway trapped planes. In the days following, many of those aircraft were able to take off using the taxiway.\n\"To do this any other way would have been needlessly contentious,\" Daley explained at a news conference Monday morning. Daley argued that the airport was a threat to Chicago's high-rise cityscape and its high-profile skyscrapers, such as the Sears Tower and the John Hancock Center. Daley criticized the Federal Aviation Administration, saying \"Now, think of that; Mickey and Minnie have it. I mean, I can't believe that. They get it first before we get it?\", referring to the post-9/11 air space restrictions in place over Orlando, Florida. \"The signature act of Richard Daley's 22 years in office was the midnight bulldozing of Meigs Field,\" according to \"Chicago Tribune\" columnist Eric Zorn. \"He ruined Meigs because he wanted to, because he could,\" \"Chicago Tribune\" columnist John Kass wrote of Daley. \"The issue is Daley's increasingly authoritarian style that brooks no disagreements, legal challenges, negotiations, compromise or any of that messy give-and-take normally associated with democratic government,\" the \"Chicago Tribune\" editorialized. The Federal Aviation Administration cited the city for failure to comply with federal law requiring thirty-day advance notice to the FAA of plans for an airport closure. The city was fined $33,000, the maximum allowable. The city paid the fine and repaid $1 million in misspent federal airport development grants. Daley defended his actions by claiming that the airport was abandoned, in spite of the fact that the Chicago Fire Department had several helicopters based on the field at the time, in addition to the dozens of private aircraft left stranded.\nHired Truck Program scandal.\nThe $40 million-a-year Hired Truck program was the biggest scandal of Daley's first 15 years as mayor. The Hired Truck Program hired private truck companies to do city work. A six-month investigation by the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" resulted in a three-day series of articles in January 2004 that revealed some participating companies were being paid for doing little or no work, had American Mafia connections or were tied to city employees, or paid bribes to get into the program. Between 1996 and 2004, companies in the Hired Truck Program gave more than $800,000 in campaign contributions to various politicians, including Daley, House Speaker Michael Madigan, and Governor Rod Blagojevich; Daley received at least $108,575 and his brother John Daley and his ward organization more than $47,500.\nMark Gyrion, Daley's second cousin, was a superintendent of garages for the city's Water Management Department, and among his duties was deciding when City-owned trucks should be sold for scrap. Gyrion's mother-in-law's firm, Jacz Transportation, participated in the Hired Truck Program, receiving about $1 million between 1998 and 2004. Jacz Transportation bought a truck three days after the city sold it to a Franklin Park dealership and then leased it back to the city. Gyrion was accused of failing to disclose his mother-in-law's role in the Hired Truck Program and the transfer of the truck. Gyrion was fired and Jacz Transportation was one of 13 truck companies suspended from the Hired Truck program. About 35% of the 70 firms in the program were suspended or referred to the city's Inspector General. The program was overhauled in 2004, and phased out in 2005.\nDaley patronage chief among officials convicted of fraud.\nOn July 5, 2006, Robert Sorich, formally, director of the Mayor's Office of Intergovernmental Affairs and, informally, Daley's patronage chief, and Timothy McCarthy, Sorich's aide, were each convicted on two counts of mail fraud connected to rigging blue-collar city jobs and promotions. Sorich's best friend, former Streets and Sanitation official Patrick Slattery was convicted of one count of mail fraud. A former Streets and Sanitation managing deputy commissioner was found guilty of lying to federal agents about political hiring. Sorich, McCarthy and Slattery lived in the Bridgeport neighborhood in 11th Ward, the Daley family's home neighborhood and ward. \"I've never known them to be anything but hard working, and I feel for them at this difficult time,\" Daley said. \"It is fair criticism to say I should have exercised greater oversight to ensure that every worker the city hired, regardless of who recommended them, was qualified and that proper procedures were always followed,\" Daley admitted a few days later. Weeks later, David Axelrod, a Democratic political consultant whose clients included Daley, defended patronage in an op-ed in the \"Chicago Tribune\".\nDaley son concealed city contracting.\nMayor Daley's son Patrick R. Daley was an MBA student at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business working as an unpaid intern at Cardinal Growth, a Chicago venture capital firm, when he profited from two Cardinal Growth ventures formed to win city contracts while concealing his role. Patrick's cousin, and Mayor Daley's nephew, is Robert G. Vanecko. In June 2003, Patrick and Vanecko formed a Delaware company, MSS Investors LLC, and invested $65,000 each. MSS Investors LLC in turn purchased a 5% stake in Municipal Sewer Services, a Cardinal Growth venture. Patrick and Vanecko failed to disclose their ownership stake in Municipal Sewer Services as required by city ethics ordinances. Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc. was one of the largest black-owned contractors in the Hired Truck program. Municipal Sewer Services partnered with Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc. in their bid for City sewer-inspection contracts. Five months after Patrick and Vanecko became owners, Municipal Sewer Services' city contract was extended by $3 million, the first of two no-bid contract extensions, totaled an additional 23 months and $4 million. Patrick and Vanecko cashed out their initial investment after about a year as the federal investigation into the Hired Truck program advanced. Patrick and Vanecko got a $13,114 \"tax distribution\" in December 2004. Patrick, then 29 and a recent University of Chicago MBA graduate, enlisted in the US Army. The day after the Mayor's son's and nephew's hidden involvement in the city contract was disclosed by the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", Daley spoke at a Chicago police recruit graduation ceremony, then left for Fort Bragg, North Carolina to see his son deployed. Before departing, Mayor Daley read a statement to reporters, his voice cracking, fighting back tears,\nI did not know about [Patrick's] involvement in this company. As an adult, he made that decision. It was a lapse in judgement for him to get involved with this company. I wish he hadn't done it. I know the expectations for elected officials, their families, are very high\u2014rightfully so\u2014especially for me.\u00a0... Patrick is a very good son. I love him. Maggie and I are very proud of him. I hope you respect I have nothing more to say on this.\nMayor Daley also said he didn't know if there were other city contracts involving the younger Daley. The city's Inspector General and federal authorities began investigations in December 2007. Patrick and Vanecko hired criminal defense attorneys. Municipal Sewer Services LLC folded in April 2008. In January 2011, Anthony Duffy, the president of Municipal Sewer Services, was charged with three counts of mail fraud in conjunction with minority-contracting and Jesse Brunt and his company, Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc., were indicted on three counts of mail fraud. Patrick and Vanecko were not charged.\nIn 2005, Concourse Communications, another Cardinal Growth venture, signed a city contract for airport Wi-Fi service at city-owned O'Hare and Midway airports. For years, the Daley administration maintained that Patrick had no financial stake in the deal. Concourse disclosed its investors to the city, as required, but Patrick was not reported. Patrick lined up investors for Concourse. On June 27, 2006, nine months after Concourse signed the contract, Concourse was sold at a 33% profit to Boingo Wireless Inc. for $45 million. On June 30, 2006, Patrick received the first of five payments totaling $708,999. On December 3, 2007, shortly after Patrick received the last of those payments, Mayor Daley's press secretary, Jacquelyn Heard said Patrick Daley \"has no financial interest with the Wi-Fi contract at O'Hare.\" The \"Chicago Sun-Times\" editorialized, \"...\u00a0the conflict of interest was blatant.\"\nPark Grill contracting scandal.\n In 2003, an operating company included over 80 investors, including some of Mayor Daley's friends and neighbors won, under controversial circumstances, a lucrative contract to operate the Park Grill, the only restaurant in the new Millennium Park. In 2005 Daley criticized the deal, saying that the city wanted to renegotiate the pact. The \"Chicago Sun-Times\" dubbed the Park Grill the \"Clout Cafe\" and included the contract award process in a year-end review of 2005 Daley administration scandals. The contract was never renegotiated, and after Daley announced he would not seek a seventh term, the owners of the Park Grill sought to sell. Deposed in August 2013 in Mayor Rahm Emanuel's administration's lawsuit to renegotiate the contract, former Mayor Daley responded \"I don't recall\" 139 times.\nLong-term leases of public infrastructure.\nIn January 2006, Skyway Concession Company, a joint venture between the Australian Macquarie Infrastructure Group and Spanish Cintra Concesiones de Infraestructuras de Transporte S.A., paid the City $1.83 billion for rights to operate the Chicago Skyway and collect tolls for 99 years. The deal was the first of its kind in the U.S. In December 2006, Morgan Stanley paid Chicago $563 million for a 99-year lease of the city's parking garages. \"I'm the one who started talking about leasing public assets. No other city has done this in America,\" Daley recalled in 2009. Pulitzer Prize-winning commentator George F. Will wrote of the deals in \"The Washington Post\",\nUnfortunately, Daley's theory\u2014that it can be better to get a sum X immediately, rather than getting over many years a sum Y that is substantially larger than X\u2014assumes something that cannot be assumed. It assumes that governments will prudently husband sudden surges of revenue from the lease or sale of assets.\nSixth term (2007\u20132011).\nOn February 6, 2008, the Chicago City Council approved, by a 41\u20136 vote, an increase in the city's real estate transfer tax to fund the Chicago Transit Authority. Presiding over the meeting, Daley harshly chastized the dissenting aldermen. On March 15, 2010, Daley appointed two aldermen on the same day, bringing to 19 the number of alderman initially appointed by Daley.\nMore long-term leases of public infrastructure.\nIn September 2008, Chicago accepted a $2.52 billion bid on a 99-year lease of Midway International Airport to a group of private investors, but the deal fell through due to the collapse of credit markets during the 2008 financial crisis. In 2008, as Chicago struggled to close a growing budget deficit, the city agreed to a 75-year, $1.16 billion deal to lease its parking meter system to an operating company created by Morgan Stanley. Daley said the \"agreement is very good news for the taxpayers of Chicago because it will provide more than $1 billion in net proceeds that can be used during this very difficult economy.\" The agreement quadrupled rates, in the first year alone, while the hours which people have to pay for parking were broadened from 9 a.m. \u2013 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. \u2013 9 p.m., and from Monday through Saturday to every day of the week. Additionally, the city agreed to compensate the new owners for loss of revenue any time any road with parking meters is closed by the city for anything from maintenance work to street festivals. In three years, the proceeds from the lease were all but spent.\nFailed Olympic bid.\nIn 2007, Daley entered into ten-year contracts with the city's labor unions to preclude labor unrest as Chicago launched a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics. For months in 2009, Daley promoted the economic benefits of the proposal to the city and its corporate community. Many thought the games would be a capstone of Daley's career. On October 2, 2009, in a major disappointment for Daley, Chicago was the first of four finalists to be eliminated during selection ceremonies in Copenhagen. According to a March 2011 report from the city's Office of the Inspector General,\nBy signing a 10-year (contract) with the Teamsters (and with over 30 other unions representing city employees), the current administration and City Council unduly hamstrung not only the current management of city government, but the next six years of management as well, a period that extends well beyond the elected terms of the incoming administration and City Council.\nGun control.\n\"If it was up to me, no one except law enforcement officers would own a handgun. But I understand that's impractical,\" Daley told attendees at a conference of gun control advocates in Washington, D.C. in 1998, during his third term. Daley was a member of the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition, an organization formed in 2006 and co-chaired by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Boston Mayor Thomas Menino. On January 17, 2006, during Daley's fifth term, at a joint press conference with Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich calling for a statewide ban on semi-automatic assault weapons, Daley said, \"If we are really to make the progress that we want, we have to keep the most dangerous weapons that are right here off of our streets.\"\nThe US Supreme Court took up \"McDonald v. Chicago\", 561 U.S. 3025, 130 S.Ct. 3020 (2010), which challenged handgun bans in the Chicago and in the neighboring suburb of Oak Park. In May 2010, Daley held a press conference to address gun control and a pending possible adverse decision in \"McDonald v. Chicago\". After Mick Dumke, a reporter for the \"Chicago Reader\", questioned the effectiveness of the city's handgun ban, Daley picked up a rifle with a bayonet from a display table of confiscated weapons and told him, \"If I put this up your butt, you'll find out how effective it is. Let me put a round up your, you know.\" The remark was voted \"the stoopidest thing that Mayor Richard Daley the Younger has ever said\" in an online poll by the \"Chicago Tribune\".\nOn June 28, 2010, the US Supreme Court held, in a 5\u20134 decision in \"McDonald v. Chicago\", that the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was incorporated under the Fourteenth Amendment, thus protecting the right of an individual to \"keep and bear arms\" from local governments, and all but declared Mayor Jane Byrne's 1982 handgun ban unconstitutional. That afternoon, at a press conference concerning the gun ban, Daley said,\nWe'll publicly propose a new ordinance very soon\u00a0... As a city we must continue to stand up\u00a0... and fight for a ban on assault weapons\u00a0... as well as a crackdown on gun shops\u00a0... We are a country of laws not a nation of guns.\nDaley called a special meeting of the city council for four days later, and the Council approved a gun control ordinance revised to include city firearms licenses.\nDaley budget deficits and fund draw-downs.\nDaley came into office in a city with revenue-generating assets, manageable debt and flush pension funds, but he left behind a city with a structural deficit that Mayor-elect Rahm Emanuel estimated at $1.2 billion when under-funded pension funds were included. The Daley administration's expenditures exceeded revenues by hundreds of millions of dollars a year. In August 2010, Fitch Ratings downgraded the city's bond credit rating, citing the administration's use of reserve funds for general operating expenses and under-funding of its pension funds, and noted that the city faced rising fixed operating costs yet lacked plans for new revenue. Wall Street analysts noted that the Daley administration began drawing on the city's reserves as early as 2006, before the Great Recession. \"While there had been sound economic growth in years prior to 2008, there were still sizable fund balance drawdowns in both 2006 and 2007,\" Fitch wrote. The city's budgets continued to increase even after the recession began, to more than $6 billion a year, and, when under-funded city employee pension funds were included, the city's annual deficit exceeded $1 billion. In January 2011, Moody's Investors Service downgraded to a \"negative\" outlook some of the revenue bonds issued for the $15 billion O'Hare Modernization Program and related infrastructure projects, citing the city's plan to postpone repayment of interest and principal on some construction bonds.\nIn his annual budget address in City Council Chambers on October 15, 2008, Daley proposed a 2009 budget totaling $5.97 billion, including not filling 1,350 vacancies on the 38,000 employee city payroll and $150 million in new revenue from a then-obscure parking meter lease deal to help erase a $469 million budget shortfall. The Daley administration employed an in-house staff of more than 50 public relations officers across City departments at a cost of $4.7 million, and millions more on seven private public relations firms. \"It's worth it\", Daley said. On the first day of City Council hearings on Daley's 2009 budget proposal, several aldermen questioned the administration's public relations spending. On November 4, 2008, Jacquelyn Heard, the mayor's press secretary, said the city would halt spending on 10 public relations contracts that could have paid as much as $5 million each.\nIn his annual budget address on October 21, 2009, Daley projected a deficit for 2009 of more than $520 million. Daley proposed a 2010 budget totaling $6.14 billion, including spending $370 million from the $1.15 billion proceeds from the parking meter lease. In his annual budget address on October 13, 2010, Daley projected a deficit for 2010 of $655 million, the largest in city history. Daley proposed a 2011 budget totaling $6.15 billion, including spending all but $76 million of what remained of the parking meter lease proceeds, and received a standing ovation from aldermen.\nDaley declines to run for seventh term.\nDaley's approval rating was at an all-time low of 35% by late 2009. On September 7, 2010, Daley announced that he would not seek a seventh term. \"I've always believed that every person, especially public officials, must understand when it's time to move on. For me, that time is now,\" Daley said. On December 26, 2010, Daley surpassed his father as Chicago's longest-serving mayor. Daley chaired his final city council meeting on Wednesday morning, May 11, 2011. His term ended on May 16, 2011, and he was succeeded by Rahm Emanuel.\nApproval ratings.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLegacy.\nDaley was supported by Chicago's traditionally Republican business community. He came under criticism for focusing city resources on the development of businesses downtown, the North, Near South, and Near West Sides, while neglecting neighborhoods in the other areas of the city; in particular the needs of low-income residents. According to \"Chicago Tribune\" columnist Steve Chapman, \"Daley lasted 22 years in office partly because he resolved to ingratiate himself with black Chicagoans. He appointed blacks to high positions, stressed his commitment to provide services to all neighborhoods, tore down public housing projects, and pushed reform of the minority-dominated public schools.\" Daley focused on Chicago as a tourist destination as opposed to a manufacturing base, improved and expanded parkland, added flower planters along many primary streets, and oversaw the creation of Millennium Park on what had previously been an abandoned train yard. He spearheaded the conversion of Navy Pier into a popular tourist destination. Daley supported immigration reform, and green building initiatives, for which he was presented with an Honor Award from the National Building Museum in 2009 as a \"visionary in sustainability.\" Chicago avoided some of the most severe economic contractions of other Midwest cities along the Great Lakes such as Detroit and Cleveland.\nPost-mayoral career.\nDays after leaving office, the University of Chicago appointed Daley a \"distinguished senior fellow\" at the Harris School of Public Policy. The five-year, part-time appointment includes responsibility for coordinating a guest lecture series. Weeks after leaving office, Daley joined the international law firm Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, one of the law firms to which he had awarded no-bid legal work as mayor. Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP had negotiated the city's much-criticized long-term lease of its parking meters, parking garages, and the Chicago Skyway. Daley joined an exclusive speakers bureau, the Harry Walker Agency, that pays tens of thousands of dollars an appearance. Daley was on the board of directors of The Coca-Cola Company from 2011 to 2019. Daley is a managing principal of Tur Partners LLC, an investment firm, where Daley's son, Patrick Daley, is a principal. \"The National Law Journal\" included Daley in its 2013 list of \"The 100 Most Influential Lawyers in America,\" based on \"his political connections \u2014 the best in Chicago.\" In 2022, Daley's daughter Nora became chair of the Illinois Arts Council.\nIn June 2022, Daley was hospitalized at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago for a \"neurological\" illness.\nRecognition.\nIn 1999, Daley received the Arbor Day Foundation's Lifetime Stewardship Award.\nIn 2002, Daley received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member and Pulitzer Prize-winning author Frank McCourt. He was the Host of the 2004 International Achievement Summit in Chicago.\nIn 2017, Daley received the ULI Chicago Lifetime Achievement Award.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40224", "revid": "2635078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40224", "title": "Wrigley Field", "text": "Baseball stadium in Chicago, Illinois, US\n Red\n}} at Addison\nWrigley Field is a ballpark on the North Side of Chicago, Illinois, United States. It is the home ballpark of Major League Baseball's Chicago Cubs, one of the city's two MLB franchises. It first opened in 1914 as Weeghman Park for Charles Weeghman's Chicago Whales of the Federal League, which folded after the 1915 baseball season. The Cubs played their first home game at the park on April 20, 1916, defeating the Cincinnati Reds 7\u20136 in 11 innings. Chewing gum magnate William Wrigley Jr. of the Wrigley Company acquired the Cubs in 1921. It was named Cubs Park from 1920 to 1926, before changing its name to Wrigley Field in 1927. The stadium currently seats 41,649 people.\nIn the North Side community area of Lakeview in the Wrigleyville neighborhood, Wrigley Field is on an irregular block bounded by Clark and Addison streets to the west and south, and Waveland and Sheffield avenues to the north and east. Wrigley Field is nicknamed \"The Friendly Confines\", a phrase popularized by Hall of Fame shortstop and first baseman Ernie Banks. The oldest park in the National League, it is the second-oldest in the majors after Fenway Park (1912), and the only remaining Federal League park. The park was designated a National Historic Landmark in 2020.\nWrigley Field is well-known for its ivy-covered brick outfield wall, distinctive wind patterns off Lake Michigan, the red marquee over the main entrance, and the hand-turned scoreboard. The stadium is situated in a primarily residential neighborhood without parking lots, and spectators have views from the rooftops behind the outfield. Additionally, it was the last Major League Baseball (MLB) park to have lights installed for night games, in 1988. From 1921 to 1970, the stadium was also home to the Chicago Bears of the National Football League, and from 1931 to 1939, it was the home of the Chicago Cardinals (now the Arizona Cardinals) of the National Football League. The elevation of its playing field is above sea level.\nHistory.\nBaseball executive Charles Weeghman hired his architect Zachary Taylor Davis to design the park, which was ready for baseball by the home opener on April 23, 1914. The original tenants, the Chicago Whales (also called the Chi-Feds), came in second in the Federal League rankings in 1914, and won the league championship in 1915.\nLater in 1915, Weeghman's Federal League folded. The resourceful Weeghman formed a syndicate including chewing gum manufacturer William Wrigley Jr. to buy the Chicago Cubs from Charles P. Taft for about $500,000. Weeghman immediately moved the Cubs from the dilapidated West Side Grounds to his two-year-old park.\nIn 1918, Wrigley acquired the controlling interest in the club. In November 1926, he renamed the park Wrigley Field. In 1927, an upper deck was added, and in 1937, Bill Veeck, the son of the club president, planted ivy vines against the outfield walls after being inspired by the ivy planted at Perry Stadium, Indianapolis.\nIn June 2024, Wrigley Field announced a multiyear partnership with Invenergy, and their community solar company, Reactivate, to launch clean and renewable energy systems at the park. The agreement was to establish the stadium as an \"anchor\" for community solar projects in Wrigleyville, marking the ballpark's first ever use of renewable energy.\nRenovation.\nThe Ricketts family aggressively pursued a Wrigley Field renovation since buying the team and the stadium in 2009. During the annual Cubs Convention in January 2013, the family revealed the \"1060 Project,\" which called for a $575-million, privately funded rehabilitation of the stadium to be completed over the course of five years. The planned proposal was vast and included, among other things, improvements to the stadium's fa\u00e7ade, infrastructure, restrooms, concourses, suites, and press box, moving the bullpens and clubhouses, and the addition of restaurants, patio areas, batting tunnels, a jumbotron, and an adjacent hotel, plaza, and office-retail complex.\nAfter months of negotiations between the team, local Alderman Tom Tunney, and then-Mayor Rahm Emanuel, the plan obtained the endorsements of both the city's Landmarks Commission and Plan Commission before receiving final approval by the Chicago City Council in July 2013. To help fund the project, the team planned to more than double the amount of advertising signage in and around the stadium to about , including additional signage to be placed beyond the outfield walls \u2013 a move that was opposed by many owners of the rooftop clubs surrounding the stadium, who worried that such signage would obstruct their sightlines. Before work on the project began, the team wanted the rooftop owners to agree not to pursue legal action challenging the construction and continued to negotiate privately with them \u2013 offering to reduce the size and number of signs to be built to gain their assent. The team could not come to terms with the rooftop owners, who had a lease agreement with the team until 2023 in exchange for paying 17% of the gross revenues. In May 2014, the Cubs announced they would pursue the original 2013 plan to modify the park. Over the course of the next three years, the Ricketts family began to purchase many of the rooftop locations.\n\"1060 Project\" Renovation.\nPhase one of the \"1060 Project\" began on September 29, 2014. During the offseason, the bleachers in both outfields were expanded and the stadium's footprint was extended further onto both Waveland and Sheffield Avenues. A Jumbotron scoreboard was added to the left-field bleachers. A video scoreboard was also added in the right-field bleachers, and the parking lots along Clark Street were excavated for underground players' locker rooms and lounges.\nAfter the close of the extended 2015 season, work began on phase two of the project.\nExterior renovations of the park sought to restore design elements present before the 1960s. These details include ornamental muted-green grillwork and red Ludowici terra cotta roofing.\nPhase three of the 1060 Project was completed before the start of the 2017 season. The left- and right-field bullpens were relocated to enclosed areas under the bleachers, the brick walls were extended toward the field, and new seating was added in the vacated bullpen areas. A visiting team \"batting tunnel\" was also added. Partial fa\u00e7ade replacement and concourse restoration were completed along Addison Street, along with structural improvements to the right-field bleachers. The outfield turf was replaced just weeks before the start of the season. The Cubs Plaza building just to the west of Wrigley was finalized, and the \"Park at Wrigley\", the area above Cubs players' dressing rooms, was in use for fans before and during games. Construction of Hotel Zachary along the west side of Clark Street was ongoing.\nThe fourth phase of improvements began at the conclusion of the 2017 season. The dugouts were moved farther down the left- and right-field foul lines to make room for two of the four new luxury clubs. The seating area behind home plate was reconstructed to locate another of the new clubs. The final upper-level club was planned for the 2019 season. The Hotel Zachary, just across Clark Street, was open for business in time for the Cubs' first home game on April 9, 2018.\nNational Historic Landmark.\nNear the start of the renovations, the Ricketts applied for National Historic Landmark status for Wrigley Field in 2013. A similar plan had been successfully pursued by the owners of Fenway Park in Boston. To achieve landmark status, the renovations had to respect and reflect the historic character of the stadium. The benefit to the owners is that landmark status allows them to claim tax credits for the renovation. National landmark status was awarded in 2020, with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior commenting, \"the historical significance of Wrigley Field is interwoven into our nation's story and a key part of what has become America's beloved pastime for over a century\".\nFirsts since renovation.\nOn May 26, 2015, Cubs rookie third baseman Kris Bryant became the first to hit the new left field video screen with his home run. On October 13, the Cubs clinched a playoff series at home in Wrigley Field for the first time in franchise history, with a 6\u20134 victory in game four of the 2015 NLDS. After Anthony Rizzo hit what would be the game-winning and series-winning home run in the sixth inning, Kyle Schwarber's seventh-inning home run ball landed on top of the right-field scoreboard. The ball was left in place, encased in clear plexiglass to protect it from the elements, but was removed in 2016.\n100th anniversary.\nDuring the 2014 season, the Cubs celebrated the centennial of Wrigley Field. Each decade was represented during 10 homestands throughout the season. April 23, the 100th anniversary of the stadium's opening, had the Cubs playing the Arizona Diamondbacks in a throwback game. Each team represented one of the teams that played in the inaugural game at the stadium. The Cubs wore the uniforms of the Chicago Whales (Federals), the original occupants of the stadium, and the Diamondbacks wore uniforms representing the Kansas City Packers, whom the Federals played on April 23, 1914.\nLawsuit.\nOn July 14, 2022, the United States government filed a lawsuit against the Chicago Cubs, operator of the stadium, for alleged violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act, claiming that the stadium did not accommodate spectators with disabilities, primarily those in wheelchairs. The lawsuit states that, during recent renovations, the stadium operator removed the best wheelchair seating, failed to add wheelchair accessibility to premium club rooms, and stuck the wheelchair seats behind railings, which could obstruct the view of those in wheelchairs. The Chicago Cubs, however, released a statement, saying, \"Wrigley Field is now more accessible than it was in its 108-year history\".\nFeatures.\nWrigley Field follows the jewel-box ballpark design that was popular in the early part of the 20th century. The two recessed wall areas, or \"wells\", located both in left and right field, give those areas more length than if the wall were to follow the contour from center field. It is also in those wells, when cross-winds are blowing, that balls have a habit of bouncing in all directions. In addition, there is a long chain-link fence strip running the entire length of the outfield wall, the base of which is about two feet down from the top of the wall and the top of which projects out at an angle, primarily used to keep fans from interfering with balls in play and protecting the ivy, along with preventing falls. Called \"the Basket\" by players and fans alike, the rules of the field state that any ball landing within the basket is ruled a home run, making the distance to hit a home run in Wrigley Field actually shorter than the location of the outfield wall. The basket was installed by the team one month into the 1970 season in order to inhibit field rushes and injuries, where spectators in the bleachers would jump off the wall and onto the field after a win, a new tradition the Cubs wished to curb after several rush attempts during the previous season, and after the 1970 home opener.\nIvy-covered outfield walls.\nThe ballpark's outfield walls are covered by ivy. In the first weeks of the baseball season, the ivy has not leafed out, and all that is visible are the vines. However, as the baseball season progresses further into spring, the ivy grows thick and green, disguising the hard brick surface of the outfield wall. In the autumn, generally during postseason, the ivy turns red.\nIn 1937, the stadium was renovated and P. K. Wrigley discussed beautification with then-Cubs President Bill Veeck, who suggested planting ivy on the outfield walls. The ivy was originally English ivy (\"Hedera helix\"), but was later changed to \"Parthenocissus tricuspidata\", commonly called Boston ivy or Japanese ivy, which can endure the harsh Chicago winters better than the former species. Cuttings from the ivy were sold by local vendors. The Cubs attempted to grow the ivy on the outside of Wrigley Field as well, but the plantings were often stolen, so the Cubs abandoned the plans.\nFollowing a later change in MLB rules, which requires all outfield walls to be padded, Wrigley Field was grandfathered into the rules, meaning it is the only stadium in the league without padded walls because of the ivy. In 2004, the ivy was specifically included in Wrigley Field's Landmark Designation by the Chicago City Council. Although the ivy appears to \"pad\" the bricks, it is of little practical use in this regard. There have been occasions of fielders being injured when slamming into the wall while pursuing a fly ball.\nUnder the ground rules of Wrigley Field, if a baseball gets into the ivy and gets stuck, the batter is awarded a ground rule double. Outfielders often raise their arms up when the ball goes into the ivy, signaling to an umpire to go out and rule on the play. However, if the ball becomes dislodged or the fielder reaches into the vines to try and retrieve it, it is considered in play and the runners can advance.\nDimensions.\nThe distances from home plate to various points in the outfield have remained essentially unchanged since the bleachers were remodeled during the 1937 season. They were originally marked by wooden numbers cut from plywood, painted white, and placed in gaps where the ivy was not allowed to grow. Since the early 1980s, the numbers have been painted directly on the bricks, in yellow. Although the power-alley dimensions are relatively cozy, the foul lines are currently the deepest in the major leagues.\nIt is to the notch in the wall just beyond the left field foul pole. The point where the bleacher wall begins to curve inward in left-center field, one of the two \"wells\", is an unmarked . The front part of the left-center \"well\" is the closest point in the outfield, about . The marked left-center field distance is . It is closer to true center field than its right-center counterpart is. True center field is unmarked and is about . The center field marker, which is to the right of true center field and in the middle of the quarter-circle defining the center field area, is and is the deepest point in the outfield. Right-center field is , the notch of the right-center \"well\" is an unmarked , and the right field foul line is . \nAs of 2004, the backstop is listed in media sources as behind home plate. Although that distance is standard, the relatively small foul ground area in general gives an advantage to batters. The ivy-covered walls in the left and right field corners were reduced from 15 to 11 feet in height prior to the 2015 season as part of phase one of the 1060 project.\u00a0 Around the same time, advertising signs above the corners of the left and right field wall were installed, raising the bleachers by about three feet. It is a widespread misconception that the recently added signage are in-play and a part of the wall, neither of which are correct. The distance from where the front row bleachers are to the field, including the newly placed signs, is still 15 feet.\nRooftop seats.\nWhen Wrigley Field was constructed, the buildings along Waveland and Sheffield avenues gave spectators a view of what was going on inside the ballpark, but did not become popular spectator areas until the 1929 World Series. The 1938 World Series brought paying spectators to the rooftops, however, fans typically sat in lawn chairs and brought their own food and beverages. In the mid-1980s, rooftop owners began to organize more formally as businesses, seeking to extract more revenue by updating the rooftops with bleacher-style grandstands. The Sky Box on Sheffield opened in 1993, originally catering primarily to corporate groups. Today, it is complete with a two-tier roof deck, indoor clubhouse, fully staffed bars on three levels, and an elevator.\nIn 1998, the city started requiring rooftop owners to have a license and began to regulate the venues. In 2003, relations between rooftop owners and the Cubs worsened when the team put up a large screen to block the view of the rooftops, exemplifying what is known as a spite fence. The Cubs then sued most rooftop businesses that year, claiming they were stealing from the team's product and \"unjustly enriching themselves\".\nIn 2004, the building owners agreed to share a portion of their proceeds with the Cubs. Rooftop owners were required to pay the team 17% of their gross revenue in an agreement lasting until 2023. The Cubs obtained permission from the city to expand the ballpark's own bleachers out over the sidewalks and do some additional construction on the open area of the property to the west, bordered by Clark and Waveland, and to close the remnant of Seminary Avenue that also existed on the property. The rooftop seats are now effectively part of the ballpark's seating area, although they are not included in the seating capacity figure.\nIn July 2016, former rooftop owner R. Marc Hamid was convicted on nine counts of mail fraud and illegal bank structuring. Hamid had been underreporting attendance at the Sky Box on Sheffield from 2008 to 2011, and covered up over $1 million in revenue while also avoiding hundreds of thousands of dollars in taxes and royalties that violated the agreement rooftop owners had with the Cubs. In January 2017, he was sentenced to 18 months in federal prison.\nIn 2013, the owners threatened suit when the team announced plans to renovate the stadium and potentially disrupt the sight lines. In May 2014, when the rooftop owners did not agree to a scaled down plan for renovations, the Cubs' owners announced their intentions to implement the original 2013 plan for renovations even if it meant battling the issue in court. Cubs owner Ricketts said Wrigley has \"the worst player facilities in Major League Baseball...I am saying it is the time to invest in Wrigley Field and do the things that our competitors do.\" By the end of the 2016 season, the Ricketts family had acquired ten of the rooftop locations, with a financial stake in an eleventh.\nSome of the rooftops became legendary in their own right. The Lakeview Baseball Club, which sits across Sheffield Avenue (right-field) from the stadium displayed a sign that read \"Eamus Catuli!\" (roughly Latin for \"Let's Go Cubs!\"\u2014\"catuli\" translating to \"whelps\", the nearest Latin equivalent), flanked by a counter indicating the Cubs' long legacy of futility. The counter was labeled \"AC\" for \"Anno Catulorum\", or \"In the Year of the Cubs\". Prior to the team's 2016 championship, it read \"AC0871108\", with the first two digits indicating the number of years since the Cubs' last division championship as of the end of the previous season (2008), the next two digits indicating the number of years since the Cubs won the National League Pennant (1945), and the last three digits indicating the number of years since their last World Series win (1908). After winning the World Series in 2016, the sign was updated to \"AC000000\". As of 2025, the sign says \"AC050909\".\nThe Yard at Wrigley Field.\nIn January 2025, the Cubs announced a new area called \"The Yard at Wrigley Field\", which featuring five semi-private rental areas designed to help fans sample the bleachers featuring an exclusive table with unlimited beer, seltzer, wine and non-alcoholic drinks, as well as a ballpark meal for each guest. The area would be accessible up to 90 minutes before the first pitch until the end of the game. The area has a capacity of 50 guests. \nSeating capacity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnusual wind patterns.\nIn April and May, the wind often comes off Lake Michigan (less than a mile to the east), with a northeast wind \"blowing in\" to knock down potential home runs and turn them into outs. In the summer, however, or on any warm, breezy day, the wind often comes from the south and the southwest, \"blowing out\" with the potential to turn normally harmless fly balls into home runs. A third variety is the cross-wind, which typically runs from the left field corner to the right field corner and causes all sorts of havoc. Depending on the direction of the wind, Wrigley can either be one of the friendliest parks in the major leagues for pitchers or among the worst. This makes Wrigley one of the most unpredictable parks in the Major Leagues. Many Cubs fans check their nearest flag before heading to the park on game days for an indication of what the game might be like. This is less of a factor for night games, however, because the wind does not blow as hard after the sun goes down.\nWith the wind blowing in, pitchers can dominate and no-hitters have resulted. The last two by a Cubs pitcher occurred near the beginning and the end of the 1972 season, by Burt Hooton and Milt Pappas respectively. Not until Cole Hamels of the Philadelphia Phillies no-hit the Cubs in 2015 would another no-hitter be pitched at Wrigley. In the seventh inning of Ken Holtzman's first no-hitter, on August 19, 1969, Hank Aaron of the Atlanta Braves hit a ball that looked headed for the bleachers, but the wind caught it just enough for left fielder Billy Williams to leap up and snare it.\nWith the wind blowing out, some true tape-measure home runs have been hit by well-muscled batters. Sammy Sosa and Dave \"Kong\" Kingman broke windows in the apartment buildings across Waveland Avenue several times, and Glenallen Hill put one on a rooftop. Batters have occasionally slugged it into, or to the side of, the first row or two of the \"upper deck\" of the center field bleachers. Sosa hit the roof of the center field camera booth on the fly during the 2003 NLCS against the Florida Marlins, some away. The longest blast was probably hit by Dave Kingman on a very windy day in 1976, while with the Mets. According to local legend, that day, Kingman launched a bomb that landed on the third porch roof on the east (center field) side of Kenmore Avenue some 550 feet away. No batter has ever hit the center field scoreboard, but it has been struck by a golf ball hit by Sam Snead using a two-iron.\nHand-turned scoreboard.\nThe scoreboard was installed in 1937, when Bill Veeck installed the new bleachers. It has remained in place ever since, and has only seen minor technical and cosmetic modifications. The clock was added in 1941, and a fifth row of scores was added to each side in 1961, with a sixth by 1969. A set of light stands facing onto the scoreboard was added in 1988 with the introduction of night games.\nAlong with Fenway Park's scoreboard and Daikin Park, Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, Coors Field and Oracle Park's out of town scoreboards, Wrigley is one of the last parks to maintain a hand-turned scoreboard. A number turner watches the score changes on a computer and updates the scoreboard by manually replacing the numbers from within the scoreboard. The scoreboard is made of sheet steel. The numbers that are placed into the inning windows are also steel, painted forest green, and numbered with white numerals. The box for the game playing at Wrigley uses yellow numerals for the current inning. The clock, which sits at the top center of the scoreboard, has never lost time in its 84-year existence.\nStanding over the clock are three flagpoles, one for each division in the National League. There are 15 flags, one for each National League team, and their order on the flagpoles reflects the current standings. The entrance to the scoreboard is a trap-door on the bottom. On the reverse of the scoreboard, visible from the CTA elevated trains, is a blue Cubs pennant in white outlined in red neon. The scoreboard was extensively rehabilitated for the 2010 season.\nUnlike the home of the Red Sox, the scoreboard at Wrigley is mounted above the centerfield bleachers, rather than at ground level, making it harder to hit during play. No players have hit the current scoreboard, although at least three have come close: Roberto Clemente to the left side on May 17, 1959; and Bill Nicholson and Eddie Mathews to the right on August 22, 1942, and April 22, 1953, respectively.\nIn 2010, the Cubs considered adding a video screen to the stadium, but the hand-turned scoreboard cannot be moved due to the park's landmark status, which also prohibits even simple facelifts, such as adding two more games on either side (there are 15 teams in both the National and American Leagues) of the 12-game, 24-team scoreboard (reflecting the MLB from 1969 to 1976), so up to three games (one NL, one AL and the interleague) each day cannot be posted. Those games may eventually be part of the auxiliary video board currently on the right field that may also be added in left field. Most Cubs players support the concept of a video board, and work on two additional scoreboards began at the end of the 2014 season.\nOn March 21, 2013, it was announced that Alderman Tom Tunney wanted to demolish the scoreboard to clear the view for nearby residents, who watch games from their rooftops. \"Demolishing the landmark old scoreboard has never been part of any plan discussed or envisioned by the Ricketts family,\" said Dennis Culloton, a spokesman for Cubs chairman Tom Ricketts. To date, there is a third generation scoreboard operator whose grandfather began working in the hand-turned scoreboard at its inception.\nMain entry marquee.\nDirectly over the main entrance to the stadium stands a large, red, art deco-style marquee, with \"Wrigley Field, Home of Chicago Cubs\" painted in white. The marquee was installed in 1934, and was originally painted green with changeable sections to announce upcoming games. By 1939, it was repainted dark blue and the original \"Home of the Cubs\", was replaced with \"Home of Chicago Cubs\". In years when the Bears played there, the sign was reworded accordingly during football season. On March 23, 1960, the Cubs repainted the sign red.\nIn 1982, the two-line announcement board was replaced with an electronic LED message board, and a backlit advertising panel was added below (which is now solid red). The marquee uses red neon lights at night, showing \"Wrigley Field\" in red, with the rest of the sign in darkness. A Budweiser logo was on the lower panel in the early 1980s, around the time when the team added the LED signage. The Chicago Transit Authority Addison street platform that serves Wrigley Field uses an image of the marquee painted on walls to announce the destination. In November 2010, the marquee was painted purple with an Allstate Insurance logo for the Northwestern Wildcats, who played as the home team against the Illinois Fighting Illini in a Big Ten football game.\nIn 2015, a Toyota logo was placed on the lower panel just below the LED sign on the marquee; previously, the area was used for logos of transient corporate sponsors and team initiatives. Toyota, one of the team's \"legacy partners\", began displaying other signage in and around the park in 2016, including branding on all of its parking lots.\nThe marquee was temporarily removed and restored for the 2016 season, including new paint, a new LED display board, and new neon lights. The back of the sign was given a new green paint job as well, which can now be seen from inside the terrace level.\nLights.\nThe Cubs were a holdout against night games for decades, not installing lights at Wrigley until 1988, after baseball officials announced that the park would be prohibited from hosting any future postseason games without lights. Before then, all games at Wrigley were played during the day. Night games are still limited in number by agreement with the city council.\nIn 1942, then-owner Philip K. Wrigley had planned to install lights, but the equipment was instead diverted for the World War II effort. On July 1, 1943, the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League's first midseason All-Star Game was played under temporary lights at Wrigley Field, between two teams composed of South Bend Blue Sox and Rockford Peaches players versus Kenosha Comets and Racine Belles players. It was also the first night game ever played in the ballpark.\nThe 1984 World Series was scheduled to start in the National League park, but MLB actually had a contingency plan to instead start the Series at the American League park in the event that the Cubs won the NLCS against the San Diego Padres. This would have allowed the Wrigley Field-hosted (i.e. daytime) games to be held over the weekend; in return, only one night game (game 3 on Friday) would have been lost. Had the Cubs advanced to the Series instead of the Padres, the Detroit Tigers would have hosted games 1, 2, 6, and 7 (on Tuesday and Wednesday nights), while the Cubs would have hosted games 3, 4, and 5 (on Friday, Saturday and Sunday), with all three games in Chicago starting no later than 1:30\u00a0p.m. CST. Since the Padres wound up winning the 1984 NLCS, these plans proved moot.\nIn the late 1980s, Cubs management insisted that the team was in danger of leaving Wrigley if lights were not installed, and Major League Baseball threatened to make the Cubs play postseason \"home\" games at Busch Stadium in St. Louis. After 5,687 consecutive day games played by the Cubs at Wrigley, the lights were finally lit on August 8, 1988, for a game against the Philadelphia Phillies. However, that game was rained out after 3\u00bd innings, and the first official night game took place the following evening against the New York Mets, whom the Cubs beat 6\u20134.\nOn November 7, 2022 Wrigley Field upgraded to LED field lights.\nStadium usage.\nBaseball.\nWrigley Field's first tenant was the Federal League team, the Chicago Whales, from 1914 to 1915. It has served as the home baseball park for Major League Baseball's Chicago Cubs franchise since 1916.\nFootball.\nThe Chicago Bears of the National Football League played at Wrigley Field for 50 years, from 1921 to 1970 before relocating to Soldier Field. The team had transferred from Decatur, and retained the name \"Staleys\" for the 1921 season. They renamed themselves the Bears in order to identify with the baseball team, then a common practice in the NFL. Wrigley Field once held the record for the most NFL games played in a single stadium, with 365 regular season games, but this record was surpassed in 2003 by Giants Stadium in New Jersey, thanks to its dual-occupancy by the New York Giants and New York Jets. On September 14, 2003, the game played between the Jets and Miami Dolphins was the 366th regular season NFL game at Giants Stadium, breaking Wrigley's regular season record. The 50 seasons the Bears spent at Wrigley Field had been an NFL record until 2006, when Lambeau Field duplicated this feat by hosting the Green Bay Packers for a 50th season and broke it in 2007. Soldier Field also matched the accomplishment when the Bears played there for their 50th season in 2021 and would break the record when the Bears played their 51st season in the venue in 2022.\nInitially, the Bears worked with the stands that were there. Eventually, they acquired a large, portable bleacher section that spanned the right and center field areas and covered most of the existing bleacher seating and part of the right field corner seating. This \"East Stand\" raised Wrigley's football capacity to about 47,000, or a net gain of perhaps 9,000 seats over normal capacity. After the Bears left, this structure would live on for several years as the \"North Stand\" at Soldier Field, until it was replaced by permanent seating.\nThe football field ran north-to-south, i.e. from left field to the foul side of first base. The remodeling of the bleachers made for a very tight fit for the gridiron. In fact, the corner of the south end zone was literally in the visiting baseball team's dugout, which was filled with pads for safety, and required a special ground rule that sliced off that corner of the end zone. The end zone was also shorter than the north, as the south end zone was eight yards, compared to the regulation ten yards. One corner of the north end line ran just inches short of the left field wall. There is a legend that Bears fullback Bronko Nagurski steamrolled through the line head down, and ran all the way through that end zone, smacking his leather-helmeted head on the bricks. He went back to the bench and told then-coach George Halas, \"That last guy gave me quite a lick!\" That kind of incident prompted the Bears to hang some padding in front of the wall.\nThe Bears are second only to the Packers in total NFL championships, and all but one of those (their only Super Bowl championship) came during their tenure at Wrigley. After a half-century, they found themselves compelled to move as the NFL wanted every one of its stadiums to seat at least 50,000 as a result of the then-recent AFL\u2013NFL merger. The Bears held one game at Dyche Stadium (now Ryan Field) on the Northwestern University campus in 1970, but otherwise continued at Wrigley until their transfer to the lakefront ended their five-decade run on the north side.\nOne remnant of the Bears' time at Wrigley was uncovered during the offseason rebuilding of the playing field between 2007 and 2008: the foundations for the goal posts. Five NFL championship games were played at Wrigley Field: 1933, 1937, 1941, 1943, and 1963. Coupled with the Chicago Bears, the Chicago Cardinals (now the Arizona Cardinals) of the NFL called Wrigley Field home from 1931 to 1939. Born on the South Side of Chicago, the Cardinals also played their home games at Normal Park, Comiskey Park, and Soldier Field.\nThe Northwestern Wildcats and the Illinois Fighting Illini played a college football game at Wrigley Field on November 20, 2010. It was the first football game at Wrigley Field since 1970, and the first collegiate football game there since 1938, when the DePaul Blue Demons played its regular games at Wrigley. The field used an east\u2013west field configuration (third base to right field). In order to keep the playing field at regulation size, the safety clearances for each end zone to the walls in the field were considerably less than normal. In particular, the east (right field) end zone came under scrutiny as its end zone was wedged extremely close to the right field wall (as close as one foot in some areas), forcing the goal posts to be hung from the right field wall in order to fit. Despite extra padding provided in these locations, it was decided that all offensive plays for both teams play to the west end zone, where there was more safety clearance. The east end zone could still be used on defensive and special teams touchdowns, as well as defensive safeties; and, in fact, there was one interception run back for an eastbound touchdown. Big Ten Commissioner Jim Delany said that, as late as three days before the game, he had only been apprised that the situation wasn't \"anything other than tight\". When he had a chance to fully vet the situation, however, he concluded that the space surrounding the east end zone was smaller than the minimum of six feet stipulated in NCAA rules, and it would have been too great of a risk to allow offensive plays to be run toward that end zone. The Fighting Illini won the game 48\u201327, taking home the Land of Lincoln Trophy, which was introduced in 2009.\nNorthwestern football returned to Wrigley Field in 2021 and 2023, and hosted two games at Wrigley Field during stadium reconstruction in 2024. They\u2019ll host two more at Wrigley Field in 2025. During the 2017 offseason, the home (third base) dugout and adjacent seating were redesigned to be portable, and the playing field will accommodate a regulation size 120-yard football field that will run east-west, unlike the Bears, when the stadium was north-south. During most of the Bears' run in Wrigley Field, the goal posts were located on the goal line as was NFL rules until 1975, not the end line as it was in college and after 1974, the NFL, which made the deeper end zones relevant. A Northwestern football game had also been scheduled for Wrigley in 2020, but was relocated to Northwestern's Ryan Field due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a makeup, Northwestern relocated their 2021 home game against Purdue to Wrigley Field, which was held in November. The Wildcats also hosted Iowa in November 2023. The Wildcats hosted Ohio State on November 16, 2024 and the Fighting Illini November 30, 2024.\nSoccer.\nThe Chicago Sting of the North American Soccer League (NASL) used Wrigley, along with Comiskey Park, for their home matches during the late 1970s and early 1980s. The Sting hosted the San Diego Sockers at Wrigley on August 25, 1979, when the Bears were using Soldier Field. Unlike the Bears' football layout, the soccer pitch ran east to west, from right field to the foul territory on the third base side. Soccer returned to Wrigley Field in July 2012, when Italian club A.S. Roma defeated Poland's Zaglebie Lubin 4\u20130 in a friendly match with 22,181 spectators. A regular season National Women's Soccer League match between the Chicago Red Stars and Bay FC was played at Wrigley Field on June 8, 2024. They were the first women's teams to play at the stadium since 1943 and broke the league's attendance record with 35,038 spectators; the Red Stars lost 2\u20131.\nHockey.\nOn January 1, 2009, the National Hockey League played its 2009 Winter Classic at Wrigley Field, pitting two \"Original Six\" teams \u2013 the host Chicago Blackhawks and the visiting Detroit Red Wings \u2013 in an outdoor ice hockey game. The rink ran across the field from first base to third base with second base being covered by roughly the center of the rink. The attendance for this game was 40,818. The Red Wings won 6\u20134. Wrigley Field also hosted the 2025 NHL Winter Classic on December 31, 2024 between the Chicago Blackhawks and the St. Louis Blues. The attendance for this game was 40,933. The Blues won 6\u20132. Held in conjunction with this was Wrigley Field's first collegiate ice hockey event, the Frozen Confines.\nConcerts.\nSince 2005, Wrigley Field has been opened on a limited basis to popular concerts, but not without some controversy. Local neighborhood groups have expressed concerns about the impact of concert crowds and noise on the surrounding residential neighborhood, particularly in 2009, when three concerts were added to the schedule, one conflicting with an annual neighborhood festival.\nTraditions and mainstays.\nCorporate sponsorship.\nWrigley Field shares its name with the Wrigley Company, as the park was named for its then-owner William Wrigley Jr., the company's CEO. As early as the 1920s, before the park became officially known as Wrigley Field, the scoreboard was topped by the elf-like \"Doublemint Twins\", posed as a pitcher and a batter. There were also ads painted on the bare right field wall early in the ballpark's history, prior to the 1923 remodeling, which put bleachers there. After that, the Doublemint elves were the only visible in-park advertising. The elves were removed permanently in 1937, when the bleachers and scoreboard were rebuilt. It would be about 44 years before in-park advertising would reappear.\nIronically given the roots of its name, Wrigley Field had been a notable exception to the trend of selling corporate naming rights to sporting venues. The Tribune Company, the owners of the park from 1981 to 2009, chose not to rename the ballpark, utilizing other ways to bring in corporate sponsorship. During the mid-1980s, Anheuser-Busch placed Budweiser and Bud Light advertisements beneath the center field scoreboard. Bud Light became the sponsor of the rebuilt bleachers in 2006.\nIn the early 2000s, following the trend of many ballparks, a green-screen chroma key board was installed behind home plate in the line of sight of the center field camera to allow electronic \"rotating\" advertisements visible only to TV audiences. By 2006, the board was set up to allow advertisements to be both physical and electronic (they can be seen in both live and replay shots).\nIn 2007, the first on-field advertising appeared since the park's early days. Sporting goods firm Under Armour placed its logo on the double-doors between the ivy on the outfield wall in left-center and right-center fields. Advertisements were also placed in the dugouts, originally for Sears department stores, then Walter E. Smithe furniture and currently State Farm insurance.\nFor 2008 and 2009, the Cubs worked out an agreement with the Chicago Board Options Exchange to allow the CBOE to auction some 70 box seat season tickets and award naming rights to them.\nFor the 2009 season, the Cubs announced that the renovated restaurant space in the southeast corner of Wrigley Field, formerly known as the Friendly Confines Cafe, would be renamed the Captain Morgan Club.\nOn October 27, 2009, Thomas S. Ricketts officially took over 95% ownership of the Cubs and Wrigley Field, and 20% ownership of Comcast SportsNet Chicago. The Tribune retained 5% ownership. Ricketts, however, has expressed no interest in selling the naming rights to the park, preferring that it retain the name it has used since 1926.\nOutside venues.\nCorporate sponsorship has not been limited to the park itself. Wrigley Field has a view of the neighborhood buildings across Waveland and Sheffield Avenues. In addition to spectators standing or sitting on the apartment roofs, corporate sponsors have frequently taken advantage of those locations as well. In the earliest days of Weeghman Park, one building across Sheffield Avenue advertised a local hangout known as Bismarck Gardens (later called the Marigold Gardens after World War I). That same building has since advertised for the Torco Oil Company, Southwest Airlines, the Miller Brewing Company, and Gilbert's Craft Sausages.\nA building across from deep right-center field was topped by a neon sign for Baby Ruth candy beginning in the mid-1930s and running for some 40 years. That placement by the Chicago-based Curtiss Candy Company (which is now under Nestl\u00e9), coincidentally positioned in the line of sight of \"Babe Ruth's called shot\", proved fortuitous when games began to be televised in the 1940s\u2014the sign was also in the line of sight of the ground level camera behind and to the left of home plate. The aging sign was eventually removed in the early 1970s.\nAnother long-standing venue for a sign is the sloping roof of a building behind left-center field. Unsuitable for the bleachers that now decorate many of those buildings, that building's angling roof has been painted in the form of a large billboard since at least the 1940s. In recent years, it has borne a bright-red Budweiser sign, and beginning in 2009, an advertisement for Horseshoe Casino. Other buildings have carried signs sponsoring beers, such as Old Style (when it was a Cubs broadcasting sponsor) and Miller, and also WGN-TV, which has telecast Cubs games since April 1948.\nLegacy partners.\nIn January 2013, the Ricketts family launched \"Legacy Partners\", a marketing effort to sell new advertising in and around the renovated Wrigley Field. In conjunction with the new \"W Partners\", the Cubs entered into 10-year agreements with its largest advertisers.\nWin flag.\nBeginning in the days of P.K. Wrigley and the 1937 bleacher/scoreboard reconstruction, a flag with either a \"W\" or an \"L\" has flown from atop the scoreboard masthead, indicating the day's result. In case of a doubleheader that is split, both flags are flown.\nPast Cubs media guides show that the original flags were blue with a white \"W\" and white with a blue \"L\", the latter coincidentally suggesting \"surrender\". In 1978, blue and white lights were mounted atop the scoreboard, to further denote wins and losses.\nThe flags were replaced in the early 1980s, and the color schemes were reversed with the \"win flag\" being white with a blue W, and the \"loss flag\" the opposite. In 1982, the retired number of Ernie Banks was flying on a foul pole, as white with blue numbers, in 1987, the retired number of Billy Williams joined Banks, the two flags were positioned from the foul poles, Banks from left field, and Williams from right field. Later on, the team retired numbers for Ron Santo, Ryne Sandberg, Ferguson Jenkins and Greg Maddux, with Jenkins and Maddux both using the same number (31).\nKeeping with tradition, fans are known to bring win flags to home and away games, displaying them after a Cubs win. Flags are also sold at the ballpark. On April 24, 2008, the Cubs flew an extra white flag displaying \"10,000\" in blue, along with the win flag, as the 10,000th win in team history was achieved on the road the previous night. Alongside the tradition of the \"W\" and \"L\" flags, the song \"Go, Cubs, Go\" is sung after each home win (it was also sung by visiting Cubs fans in game 7 of the 2016 World Series at Progressive Field in Cleveland, where the Cubs clinched their first championship since 1908). Also, following the 2015 addition of the park's Daktronics video screens, the large \"W\" in the \"Wintrust\" logo on the left field video screen is kept on following Cubs' wins.\n\"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\".\nThe tradition of singing \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" at Cubs home games began when Hall of Fame announcer Harry Caray arrived in 1982 (he had sung it the preceding seven years as a broadcaster for the White Sox), and has remained a Wrigley Field staple. After Caray's death, the tradition of a guest conductor began, with former baseball players, other sports stars, actors, and other celebrities invited to sing during the Seventh Inning Stretch. Among the best-known guests have been the actor Bill Murray, former Bears coach Mike Ditka, former Cubs second baseman Ryne Sandberg, former pitcher Mike Krukow, former longtime Cubs first baseman Mark Grace, former Houston Rockets star Tracy McGrady, Chicago Blackhawks forwards Jonathan Toews and Patrick Kane, Chicago Bears quarterback Jay Cutler, comedian Jay Leno, NASCAR driver Jeff Gordon, singers Ozzy Osbourne and Eddie Vedder, former Chicago lead singer Peter Cetera, boxer and actor Mr. T, actor and lifelong Cub fan Gary Sinise, actors Tom Arnold, James Belushi, WWE wrestler/Chicago native CM Punk, Vince Vaughn, actress Melissa McCarthy, and Illinois-native country music singer Brett Eldredge.\nOrgan music.\nWrigley Field was the first Major League ballpark to introduce live organ music on April 26, 1941. The stadium's first organist was Ray Nelson. As of July 2019, organist Gary Pressy, holds the record for 2,653 consecutive games played, never having missed a day's work in 33 years. Today, most major league ballparks have replaced the traditional live organist with canned music programmed by a DJ. Pressy says: \"I don't think it's a dying art, especially at Wrigley Field ... The team respects tradition.\"\nWriting on the Wall.\nDuring the 2016 postseason, someone wrote a message in chalk on the outer brick wall of the stadium along Waveland and Sheffield avenues. This started a chain reaction and more fans began to write their own messages on the wall. The messages were anything from words of support expressed towards the team or just a name. Chalk covered a majority of the wall, to point where fans had to bring step ladders in order to reach upper spaces for their message. The Cubs themselves encouraged the event by supplying chalk and adding extra security. The event gained both local and national attention, receiving coverage from Fox Sports and \"The Boston Globe\".\nIn popular culture.\nWrigley Field had a brief cameo in the 1980 film \"The Blues Brothers\", starring John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd as Jake and Elwood Blues. In the film, Elwood lists 1060 W. Addison as his fake home address on his Illinois driver's license, tricking the police and later the Illinois Nazis listening on police radio into heading for Wrigley Field. The 1984 film \"The Natural\", starring Robert Redford, had a scene set at Wrigley but was actually filmed at All-High Stadium in Buffalo, New York. All other baseball action scenes in that movie were shot in Buffalo, at the since-demolished War Memorial Stadium.\nDuring Cubs games, fans will often stand outside the park on Waveland Avenue, waiting for home run balls hit over the wall and out of the park. However, as a tradition, Cubs fans inside and sometimes even outside the park will promptly throw any home run ball hit by an opposing player back onto the field of play, a ritual depicted in the 1977 stage play \"Bleacher Bums\" and in the 1993 film \"Rookie of the Year\".\nThe ballpark was featured in a scene in the 1986 film \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\", where the outside marquee read \"Save Ferris\". The director, John Hughes, originally wanted to film at Comiskey Park (he was a White Sox fan) but the team was out of town during filming. The 2006 film \"The Break-Up\" used Wrigley Field as the setting for its opening scene. An early 1990s film about Babe Ruth had the obligatory scene in Wrigley Field about the \"called shot\" (the ballpark also doubled as Yankee Stadium for the film). A scoreboard similar to the one existing in 1932 was used, atop an ivy wall (though that did not exist until later in the decade).\nThe ballpark was used for the establishing tryouts scene in \"A League of Their Own\" (1992). This film was a Hollywood account of the 1940s women's baseball league which Cubs owner P.K. Wrigley championed during World War II. Garry Marshall (older brother of the film's director Penny Marshall) has a cameo as \"Walter Harvey\", Wrigley's fictional alter ego. The sign behind the scoreboard was temporarily redone to read \"Harvey Field\", and filming was split between Wrigley and Cantigny Park near Wheaton, Illinois.\nMany television series have made featured scenes set in Wrigley Field, including \"ER\", \"Crime Story\", \"Chicago Hope\", \"Prison Break\", \"Perfect Strangers\", \"My Boys\", \"Chicago Fire\" and \"Mike &amp; Molly\". Also, the animated comedy \"Family Guy\" featured a scene at Wrigley Field that parodied the Steve Bartman incident. In an episode of \"The Simpsons\" titled \"He Loves to Fly and He D'ohs\", upon arriving in Chicago, Homer walks past a number of Chicago landmarks, including Wrigley Field, followed by a generic-looking stadium bearing the name \"Wherever the White Sox play\". In 2007, the band Nine Inch Nails created a promotional audio skit, which involved Wrigley Field being the target of disgruntled war veteran's terrorist attack.\nThe late-1970s comedy stage play \"Bleacher Bums\" was set in the right field bleachers at Wrigley. The video of the play was also set on a stage, with bleachers suggesting Wrigley's layout, rather than in the actual ballpark's bleachers. The tradition of throwing opposition home run balls back was explained by Dennis Franz's character: \"If someone hands you some garbage, you have to throw it back at them!\"\nIn the cartoon series \"Biker Mice from Mars\", the eponymous main characters hide out in the scoreboard of the stadium, which is named Quigley Field.\nA dog park in the Wrightwood Neighbors section of Lincoln Park is named Wiggly Field (1997).\nThe stadium was also featured on the popular Travel Channel television show \"Great Hotels\", starring Samantha Brown. She attended a game during a visit to Chicago.\nChicago folk singer Steve Goodman featured Wrigley Field as the setting for his popular Cubs lament \"A Dying Cub Fan's Last Request\", extolling both the trials of the Cubs and the place Wrigley Field holds in Cub fans' hearts. After his death from leukemia, Goodman's ashes were scattered at Wrigley Field as described in the lyrics.\nThe Statler Brothers' 1981 song \"Don't Wait On Me\" referred to a then-implausible situation: \"When the lights go on at Wrigley Field\". However, after lights were installed, the line was changed to \"When they put a dome on Wrigley Field\" for their 1989 \"Live-Sold Out\" album.\nA few brief shots of Wrigley Field appear in the 1949 movie \"It Happens Every Spring\". It is also seen on the History Channel's show \"Life After People.\"\nThe stadium made a brief appearance in the open for the first episode of \"The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien\", with Conan rushing through the turnstiles while running from New York (where his previous show, \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\", was taped) to Los Angeles (where his new show was taped, until his role as host ended on January 22, 2010) and then running onto the field while being chased by Cubs security. The route O'Brien takes is somewhat misleading, as he is shown running south on Michigan Avenue past the Tribune Tower before arriving at Wrigley Field, which is well north of the Tribune Tower.\nIn the movie \"\", a terrorist turns off all the electricity at the stadium for a few minutes to demonstrate how hackers could penetrate city electrical systems.\nIn the video game Nicktoons MLB, Wrigley Field was one of the real-life ballparks.\nAn overgrown Wrigley Field is shown in the new television series \"Revolution\" (2012).\nIn episode 9 of season 3 of \"The Man in the High Castle\" (2015), Wrigley Field makes a short appearance as the home of a fictional soccer team called the \"Chicago Norsemen\" who, according to a banner, were \"1963 Annual Soccer Champions\".\nWrigley Field was the site of the final task of \"The Amazing Race 29\" finale. One team member was guided by their partner in the press box via one way radio. They were told to place numbers on the hand-turned scoreboard corresponding to their team's final placement at the end of each of the previous eleven episodes, before searching the stadium's seats for their final clue.\nOn the Sonic Youth live album \"Smart Bar Chicago 85\" the band introduces the final song, 'Making The Nature Scene', as being about 'Tripping on Acid at Wrigley Field'.\nIn the 2020 film, \"Greenland\", Wrigley Field is shown still standing despite being severely damaged amidst the ruins of Chicago after the collision of an interstellar comet that collided with Earth.\nWesley Willis, an outsider musician and Chicago folk artist, had a track titled \"Wrigley Field\" on his album \"Greatest Hits Vol. 3\", which he played with his band 'The Dragnews'.\nAccessibility and transportation.\nThe Chicago \"L\" Red Line stop at is less than one block east of Wrigley Field; the stadium was originally built for proximity to the \"L\" tracks. As Addison is frequently crowded after games, many fans use , the next station to the north, still less than a mile from the stadium.\nAdditionally, Purple Line Express trains stop at Sheridan before weekday night games in order to provide an additional connection for passengers traveling from Evanston, Skokie, and northern Chicago. After weekday night games, northbound Purple Line passengers are told to board at Sheridan, while southbound passengers are told to board at Addison.\nAt the conclusion of games, the scoreboard operator raises to the top of the center field scoreboard either a white flag with a blue \"W\" to signify a Cubs victory or a blue flag with a white \"L\" for a loss. This is done to show the outcome of the game to passengers on passing \"L\" trains, and also to anyone passing by the park. The basic flag color was once the exact opposite of the colors used today (the rationale being that white is the traditional color for surrender). In addition to rail service, the CTA provides two bus routes that serve Wrigley Field. CTA bus routes, 22 Clark and 152, Addison provide access to the ballpark. Biking to the field is also a popular alternative. As Halsted, Addison, and Clark streets all have designated biking lanes, getting to the field via bicycle is a widely used way to avoid hectic pre- and postgame traffic. Wrigley Field offers a complimentary bike check program to accommodate them; cyclists may check their bikes as much as 2 hours before games and 1 hour after games at racks off of Waveland Ave.\nParking in the area remains scarce, but that does not seem to bother fans who want to come to this baseball mecca, which drew over three million fans from 2004 until 2011, averaging a near-sellout every day of the season, even with many weekday afternoon games. The little parking that is available can go for as much as $100 per space. To partially alleviate this problem, the Cubs sponsor a parking shuttle service from the nearby DeVry University campus at Belmont and Western as part of their agreement with local neighborhood groups. This was not available during the World Series against the Detroit Tigers in 1945; cars parked as much as a mile away on residential streets and fans walked to Wrigley Field.\nCommemorative stamps.\nIn 2001, a series of commemorative postage stamps on the subject of baseball parks was issued by the U.S. Postal Service. Most of them were engravings taken from old colorized postcards, including the illustration of Wrigley Field. In the case of Wrigley, the scoreboard was cut off to hide the original postcard's banner containing the park's name. The stamp and its sources also show the center field bleachers filled with spectators, a practice that was later discontinued due to the risk to batters, who might lose the flight of a pitch amidst the white shirts. This led to the development of darker backgrounds to the pitcher's mounds.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nclass=\"wikitable succession-box mw-collapsible autocollapse\" style=\"margin: 0 auto 0 auto; font-size:95%;clear:both;\"\nEvents and tenants"}
{"id": "40225", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40225", "title": "George IV", "text": "King of the United Kingdom from 1820 to 1830\nGeorge IV (George Augustus Frederick; 12 August 1762 \u2013 26 June 1830) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and King of Hanover from 29 January 1820 until his death in 1830. At the time of his accession to the throne, he was acting as prince regent for his father, King George III, having done so since 5 February 1811 during his father's final mental illness.\nGeorge IV was the eldest child of King George\u00a0III and Queen Charlotte. He led an extravagant lifestyle that contributed to the fashions of the Regency era. He was a patron of new forms of leisure, style and taste. He commissioned John Nash to build the Royal Pavilion in Brighton and remodel Buckingham Palace, and commissioned Jeffry Wyatville to rebuild Windsor Castle. George's charm and culture earned him the title \"the first gentleman of England\", but his dissolute way of life and poor relationships with his parents and his wife, Caroline of Brunswick, earned him the contempt of the people and dimmed the prestige of the monarchy. He excluded Caroline from his coronation and asked the government to introduce the unpopular Pains and Penalties Bill in an unsuccessful attempt to divorce her.\nGeorge's rule was tarnished by scandal and financial extravagance. His ministers found his behaviour selfish, unreliable and irresponsible, and he was strongly influenced by favourites. During most of George's regency and reign, Lord Liverpool controlled the government as prime minister of the United Kingdom. Liverpool's government presided over Britain's ultimate victory over Napoleon and negotiated a peace settlement with the French. After Liverpool's retirement, George was forced to accept Catholic emancipation despite opposing it. His only legitimate child, Princess Charlotte, predeceased him in 1817, as did his childless younger brother Prince Frederick in 1827, so he was succeeded by another younger brother, William IV.\nEarly life.\nGeorge was born at St James's Palace, London, on 12 August 1762, the first child of King George III and Queen Charlotte. As the eldest son of a British sovereign, he automatically became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay at birth; he was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester a few days later. On 18 September of the same year, he was baptised by Thomas Secker, Archbishop of Canterbury. His godparents were his maternal uncle Adolphus Frederick IV, Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (for whom the Lord Chamberlain, William Cavendish, 4th Duke of Devonshire, stood proxy); his paternal grand-uncle Prince William, Duke of Cumberland; and his grandmother Augusta, Dowager Princess of Wales. George was a talented student and quickly learned to speak French, German and Italian, in addition to his native English.\nAt the age of 18, Prince George was given a separate establishment, and in dramatic contrast to his prosaic, scandal-free father, threw himself with zest into a life of dissipation and wild extravagance involving heavy drinking and numerous mistresses and escapades. He was a witty conversationalist, drunk or sober, and showed good, but grossly expensive, taste in decorating his residences. George turned 21 in 1783, and obtained a grant of \u00a360,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) from Parliament and an annual income of \u00a350,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) from his father. It was far too little for his wants\u2014his stables alone cost \u00a331,000 a year. He then established his residence in Carlton House, where he lived a profligate life. Animosity developed between the Prince and his father, who desired more frugal behaviour on the part of the heir apparent. The King, a political conservative, was also alienated by the Prince's adherence to Charles James Fox and other radically inclined politicians.\nSoon after he reached the age of 21, the prince became infatuated with Maria Fitzherbert. She was a commoner (though granddaughter of a baronet), six years his elder, twice widowed, and a Roman Catholic. Nevertheless, the Prince was determined to marry her. This was in spite of the Act of Settlement 1701, which barred the spouse of a Catholic from succeeding to the throne, and the Royal Marriages Act 1772, which prohibited his marriage without the King's consent.\nThe couple went through a marriage ceremony on 15 December 1785 at Fitzherbert's house in Park Street, Mayfair. Legally the union was void, as the King's consent was not granted (and never even requested). However, Fitzherbert believed that she was the Prince's canonical and true wife, holding the law of the Church to be superior to the law of the State. For political reasons, the union was to remain secret and Fitzherbert promised not to reveal it. But, in spring 1786, covert allusions to the marriage appeared in the press, and several satirical prints depicted the clandestine marriage. \nPrince George was plunged into debt by his exorbitant lifestyle. His father refused to assist him, forcing him to quit Carlton House and live at Fitzherbert's residence. In 1787, the Prince's political allies proposed to relieve his debts with a parliamentary grant. George's relationship with Fitzherbert was suspected, and revelation of the illegal marriage would have scandalised the nation and doomed any parliamentary proposal to aid him. Acting on Prince George's authority, the Whig leader Charles James Fox declared that the story was a calumny. Fitzherbert was not pleased with the public denial of the marriage in such vehement terms and contemplated severing her ties to George. He appeased her by asking another Whig, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, to restate Fox's forceful declaration in more careful words. Parliament, meanwhile, granted the Prince \u00a3161,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) to pay his debts and \u00a360,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) for improvements to Carlton House.\nRegency crisis of 1788.\nIn the summer of 1788, the King's mental health deteriorated, possibly as the result of the hereditary disease porphyria. He nonetheless discharged some of his duties and declared Parliament prorogued from 25 September to 20 November. During the prorogation, he became deranged, posing a threat to his own life, and when Parliament reconvened in November, the King could not deliver the customary speech from the throne during the State Opening of Parliament. Parliament found itself in an untenable position: according to long-established law it could not proceed to any business until the delivery of the King's Speech at a State Opening.\nAlthough arguably barred from doing so, Parliament began debating a regency. In the House of Commons, Charles James Fox declared his opinion that Prince George was automatically entitled to exercise sovereignty during the King's incapacity. A contrasting opinion was held by the prime minister, William Pitt the Younger, who argued that, in the absence of a statute to the contrary, the right to choose a regent belonged to Parliament alone. He even stated that, without parliamentary authority \"the Prince of Wales had no more right\u00a0... to assume the government, than any other individual subject of the country\". Though disagreeing on the principle underlying a regency, Pitt agreed with Fox that the Prince of Wales would be the most convenient choice for a regent.\nThe Prince of Wales, though offended by Pitt's boldness, did not lend his full support to Fox's approach. Prince George's brother Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany, declared that George would not attempt to exercise any power without previously obtaining the consent of Parliament. Following the passage of preliminary resolutions Pitt outlined a formal plan for the regency, suggesting that Prince George's powers be greatly limited. Among other things, George would not be able either to sell the King's property or to grant a peerage to anyone other than a child of the King. Prince George denounced Pitt's scheme by declaring it a \"project for producing weakness, disorder, and insecurity in every branch of the administration of affairs\". In the interests of the nation, both factions agreed to compromise.\nA significant technical impediment to any Regency Bill involved the lack of a speech from the throne, which was necessary before Parliament could proceed to any debates or votes. The speech was normally delivered by the King but could also be delivered by royal representatives known as Lords Commissioners. However, no document could empower the Lords Commissioners to act unless the Great Seal of the Realm was affixed to it. The seal could not be legally affixed without the prior authorisation of the sovereign. Pitt and his fellow ministers ignored the last requirement and instructed the Lord Chancellor to affix the Great Seal without the King's consent, as the act of affixing the Great Seal in itself gave legal force to the bill. The legal fiction was denounced by Edmund Burke as \"forgery, fraud\"; a \"glaring falsehood\" and a \"palpable absurdity\". Prince Frederick described the plan as \"unconstitutional and illegal\". Nevertheless, others in Parliament felt that such a scheme was necessary to preserve an effective government. Consequently, on 3 February 1789, more than two months after it had convened, Parliament was formally opened by an \"illegal\" group of Lords Commissioners. The Regency Bill was introduced, but before it could be passed the King recovered. The King declared retroactively that the instrument authorising the Lords Commissioners to act was valid.\nHorse racing.\nPrince George was an avid horseracing fan and racehorse owner. In 1790, his jockey Samuel Chifney and racehorse Escape were embroiled in a scandal over a perceived reversal of form. The Newmarket stewards did not accept Chifney's explanation and warned the Prince of Wales that if he continued to use Chifney, no gentleman would race against him. In consequence, not wanting to make an example of his jockey, the Prince of Wales sold his stable and ended his connection with the turf. He told Chifney he would be unlikely to return to ownership, \"but if I ever do, Sam Chifney, you shall train and manage them. You shall have your 200 guineas a year all the same. I cannot give it to you for your life, I can only give it to you for my own. You have been a good and honest servant to me.\" Despite pleas from the Jockey Club, the prince never returned to Newmarket.\nMarriage and mistresses.\nPrince George's debts continued to climb, and his father refused to aid him unless he married his cousin Princess Caroline of Brunswick. In 1795, the Prince acquiesced, and they were married on 8 April 1795 at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace. The marriage, however, was disastrous; each party was unsuited to the other. The two were formally separated after the birth of their only child, Princess Charlotte, in 1796, and remained separated thereafter. George remained attached to Maria Fitzherbert for the rest of his life, despite several periods of estrangement.\nGeorge's mistresses included Mary Robinson, an actress whom he paid to leave the stage; Grace Elliott, the divorced wife of a physician; and Frances Villiers, Countess of Jersey, who dominated his life for some years. In later life, his mistresses were Isabella Ingram-Seymour-Conway, Marchioness of Hertford and Elizabeth Conyngham, Marchioness Conyngham.\nGeorge was rumoured to have fathered several illegitimate children. James Ord (born 1786)\u2014who moved to the United States and became a Jesuit priest\u2014was reportedly his son by Fitzherbert. Late in life, George told a friend that he had a son who was a naval officer in the West Indies, whose identity has been tentatively established as Captain Henry A. F. Hervey (1786\u20131824), reportedly George's child by the songwriter Lady Anne Lindsay (later Barnard), a daughter of James Lindsay, 5th Earl of Balcarres. Other reported children include Major George Seymour Crole, the son of theatre manager's daughter Eliza Crole; William Hampshire, the son of publican's daughter Sarah Brown; and Charles \"Beau\" Candy, the son of a Frenchwoman with that surname. Anthony Camp, Director of Research at the Society of Genealogists, has dismissed the claims that George IV was the father of Ord, Hervey, Hampshire and Candy as fictitious.\nThe problem of George's debts, which amounted to the extraordinary sum of \u00a3630,000 in 1795 (equivalent to \u00a3 today), was solved (at least temporarily) by Parliament. Being unwilling to make an outright grant to relieve these debts, it passed the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Prince of Wales Act 1795 (35 Geo. 3. c. 129) which provided him an additional sum of \u00a365,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) per annum. In 1803, a further \u00a360,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 today) was added by the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Annuity to Prince of Wales, etc. Act 1803 (43 Geo. 3. c. 26), and George's debts as at 1795 were finally cleared in 1806, although the debts he had incurred since 1795 remained.\nIn 1804, a dispute arose over the custody of Princess Charlotte, which led to her being placed in the care of the King. It also led to a parliamentary commission of enquiry into Princess Caroline's conduct after her husband accused her of having an illegitimate son. The investigation cleared Caroline of the charge but still revealed her behaviour to have been extraordinarily indiscreet.\nRegency.\nIn late 1810, the King's mental health once again broke down, following the death of his youngest daughter, Princess Amelia. Parliament agreed to follow the precedent of 1788; without the King's consent, the Lord Chancellor affixed the Great Seal of the Realm to letters patent naming Lords Commissioners. The letters patent lacked the Royal Sign Manual, but were sealed by request of resolutions passed by both Houses of Parliament. The Lords Commissioners appointed by the letters patent, in the name of the King, then signified the granting of Royal Assent to a bill that became the Regency Act 1811. Parliament restricted some of the powers of the Prince Regent (as the Prince of Wales became known). The constraints expired one year after the passage of the Act. The Prince of Wales became Prince Regent on 5 February 1811.\nThe Regent let his ministers take full charge of government affairs, playing a far smaller role than his father. The principle that the prime minister was the person supported by a majority in the House of Commons, whether the King personally favoured him or not, became established. His governments, with little help from the Regent, presided over British policy. One of the most important political conflicts facing the country concerned Catholic emancipation, the movement to relieve Roman Catholics of various political disabilities. The Tories, led by Prime Minister Spencer Perceval, were opposed to Catholic emancipation, while the Whigs supported it. At the beginning of the Regency, Prince George was expected to support the Whig leader, Lord Grenville. He did not, however, immediately put Grenville and the Whigs into office. Influenced by his mother, he claimed that a sudden dismissal of the Tory government would exact too great a toll on the health of the King (a steadfast supporter of the Tories), thereby eliminating any chance of a recovery.\nIn 1812, when it appeared highly unlikely that the King would recover, the Prince Regent again failed to appoint a new Whig administration. Instead, he asked the Whigs to join the existing ministry under Perceval. The Whigs, however, refused to co-operate because of disagreements over Catholic emancipation. Grudgingly, Prince George allowed Perceval to continue as prime minister.\nOn 11 May 1812, Perceval was assassinated by John Bellingham. The Prince Regent was prepared to reappoint all the members of the Perceval ministry under a new leader. The House of Commons formally declared its desire for a \"strong and efficient administration\", so George then offered leadership of the government to Lord Wellesley and afterwards to Lord Moira. He doomed the attempts of both to failure, however, by forcing each to construct an all-party ministry at a time when neither party wished to share power with the other. Possibly using the failure of the two peers as a pretext, George immediately reappointed the Perceval administration, with Lord Liverpool as prime minister.\nThe Tories, unlike Whigs such as Lord Grey, sought to continue the vigorous prosecution of the war in Continental Europe against the powerful and aggressive Emperor of the French, Napoleon I. An anti-French alliance, which included Russia, Prussia, Austria, Britain and several smaller countries, defeated Napoleon in 1814. In the subsequent Congress of Vienna, it was decided that the Electorate of Hanover, a state that had shared a monarch with Britain since 1714, would be raised to the Kingdom of Hanover. Napoleon returned from exile in 1815, but was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo by the Duke of Wellington, brother of Lord Wellesley.\nDuring this period George took an active interest in matters of style and taste, and his associates such as the dandy Beau Brummell and the architect John Nash created the Regency style, exemplified by the Regency terraces of Regent's Park and Regent Street. George took up the new idea of the seaside spa and had the Brighton Pavilion developed as a fantastical seaside palace, adapted by Nash in the \"Indian Gothic\" style inspired loosely by the Taj Mahal, with extravagant \"Indian\" and \"Chinese\" interiors.\nReign.\nWhen George III died in 1820, the Prince Regent, then aged 57, ascended the throne as George IV, with no real change in his powers. By the time of his accession, he was obese and possibly addicted to laudanum.\nGeorge IV's relationship with his wife Caroline had deteriorated by the time of his accession. They had lived separately since 1796, and both were having affairs. In 1814, Caroline left the United Kingdom for continental Europe, but she chose to return for her husband's coronation and to publicly assert her rights as queen consort. However, he refused to recognise Caroline as queen, and commanded British ambassadors to ensure that monarchs in foreign courts did the same. By royal command, Caroline's name was omitted from the Book of Common Prayer, the liturgy of the Church of England.\nThe King sought a divorce, but his advisors suggested that any divorce proceedings might involve the publication of details relating to George's own adulterous relationships. Therefore, he requested and ensured the introduction of the Pains and Penalties Bill, under which Parliament could have imposed legal penalties without a trial in a court of law. The bill would have annulled the marriage and stripped Caroline of the title of queen. The bill proved extremely unpopular with the public, and was withdrawn from Parliament. George decided, nonetheless, to exclude his wife from his coronation at Westminster Abbey, on 19 July 1821. Caroline fell ill that day and died on 7 August; during her final illness she often stated that she thought she had been poisoned.\nGeorge's coronation was a magnificent and expensive affair, costing about \u00a3243,000 (approximately \u00a3 in 2023; for comparison, his father's coronation had only cost about \u00a310,000). Despite the enormous cost, it was a popular event. In 1821, George became the first monarch to pay a state visit to Ireland since Richard II of England. The following year he visited Edinburgh for \"one and twenty daft days\". His visit to Scotland, organised by Sir Walter Scott, was the first by a reigning monarch since the mid-17th century.\nGeorge spent most of his later reign in seclusion at Windsor Castle, but he continued to intervene in politics. At first it was believed that he would support Catholic emancipation, as he had proposed a Catholic Emancipation Bill for Ireland in 1797, but his anti-Catholic views became clear in 1813 when he privately canvassed against the ultimately defeated Catholic Relief Bill of 1813. By 1824 he was denouncing Catholic emancipation in public. Having taken the coronation oath on his accession, George now argued that he had sworn to uphold the Protestant faith, and could not support any pro-Catholic measures. The influence of the Crown was so great, and the will of the Tories under Prime Minister Liverpool so strong, that Catholic emancipation seemed hopeless. In 1827, however, Liverpool retired, to be replaced by the pro-emancipation Tory George Canning. When Canning entered office, the King, hitherto content with privately instructing his ministers on the Catholic Question, thought it fit to make a public declaration to the effect that his sentiments on the question were those of his revered father, George III.\nCanning's views on the Catholic Question were not well received by the most conservative Tories, including the Duke of Wellington. As a result, the ministry was forced to include Whigs. Canning died later in that year, leaving Lord Goderich to lead the tenuous Tory\u2013Whig coalition. Goderich left office in 1828, to be succeeded by Wellington, who had by that time accepted that the denial of some measure of relief to Roman Catholics was politically untenable. George was never as friendly with Wellington as he had been with Canning and chose to annoy the Duke by pretending to have fought at Waterloo disguised as a German general. With great difficulty Wellington obtained the King's consent to the introduction of a Catholic Relief Bill on 29 January 1829. Under pressure from his fanatically anti-Catholic brother Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, the King withdrew his approval and in protest the Cabinet resigned \"en masse\" on 4 March. The next day the King, now under intense political pressure, reluctantly agreed to the Bill and the ministry remained in power. Royal assent was finally granted to the Catholic Relief Act on 13 April.\nDeclining health and death.\nGeorge's heavy drinking and indulgent lifestyle had taken their toll on his health by the late 1820s. While still Prince of Wales, he had become obese through his huge banquets and copious consumption of alcohol, making him the target of ridicule on the rare occasions that he appeared in public; by 1797, his weight had reached . By 1824, his corset was made for a waist of . He had gout, arteriosclerosis, peripheral edema (\"dropsy\"), and possibly porphyria. In his last years, he spent whole days in bed and had acute and serious spasms of breathlessness.\nGeorge's last years were marked by increasing physical and mental decay and withdrawal from public affairs. Privately, a senior aide to the King confided to his diary: \"A more contemptible, cowardly, selfish, unfeeling dog does not exist\u00a0... There have been good and wise kings but not many of them\u00a0... and this I believe to be one of the worst.\" By December 1828, like his father, George was almost completely blind from cataracts, and had such severe gout in his right hand and arm that he could no longer sign documents. In mid-1829, David Wilkie reported the King \"was wasting away frightfully day after day\", and had become so obese that he looked \"like a great sausage stuffed into the covering\". George took laudanum to counteract severe bladder pains, which left him in a drugged and mentally impaired state for days on end. He underwent surgery to remove a cataract in September 1829, by which time he was regularly taking over 100 drops of laudanum before state occasions.\nBy the spring of 1830, George's imminent end was apparent. Now largely confined to his bedchambers, having completely lost sight in one eye and describing himself \"as blind as a beetle\", he was forced to approve legislation with a stamp of his signature in the presence of witnesses. His weight was recorded to be . Attacks of breathlessness due to dropsy forced him to sleep upright in a chair, and doctors frequently tapped his abdomen in order to drain excess fluid. Despite his obvious decline, George was admired for clinging doggedly to life. His will to live and still-prodigious appetite astonished observers; in April 1830, the Duke of Wellington wrote that the King had consumed for breakfast \"a Pidgeon and Beef Steak Pye\u00a0... Three parts of a bottle of Mozelle, a Glass of Dry Champagne, two Glasses of Port [and] a Glass of Brandy\", followed by a large dose of laudanum. Writing to Maria Fitzherbert in June, the King's physician, Sir Henry Halford, noted \"His Majesty's constitution is a gigantic one, and his elasticity under the most severe pressure exceeds what I have ever witnessed in thirty-eight years' experience.\" Though George had been under Halford's care since the time of the Regency, the doctor's social ambitions and perceived lack of competence were strongly criticised, with \"The Lancet\" labelling Halford's bulletins on the King's health as \"utterly and entirely destitute of information\", subsequently characterising Halford's treatment of George, which involved administering both opium and laudanum as sedatives, as appearing to lack sense or direction.\nGeorge dictated his will in May and became very devout in his final months, confessing to an archdeacon that he repented of his dissolute life, but hoped mercy would be shown to him as he had always tried to do the best for his subjects. By June, he was unable to lie down, and received the Sacrament on 14 June in the presence of Lady Conyngham, Halford, and a clergyman. While Halford only informed the Cabinet on 24 June that \"the King's cough continues with considerable expectoration\", he privately told his wife that \"things are coming to a conclusion\u00a0... I shall be released about Monday.\"\nAt about three in the morning of 26 June 1830 at Windsor Castle, George awoke and passed a bowel movement\u2014\"a large evacuation mix'd with blood\". He then sent for Halford, allegedly calling to his servants \"Sir Henry! Sir Henry! Fetch him; this is death!\" Accounts of George's final moments and last words vary. According to Halford, following his arrival and that of Sir William Knighton, the King's \"lips grew livid, and he dropped his head on the page's shoulder\u00a0... I was up the stairs in five minutes, and he died but eight minutes afterwards.\" Other accounts state the King placed his hands on his stomach and said \"Surely, this must be death\", or that he called out \"Good God, what is this?\", clasped his page's hand, and said \"my boy, this is death\". George died at 3:15\u00a0am. An autopsy conducted by his physicians revealed George had died from upper gastrointestinal bleeding resulting from the rupture of a blood vessel in his stomach. A large tumour \"the size of an orange\" was found attached to his bladder; his heart was enlarged, had heavily calcified valves and was surrounded by a large fat deposit. The King was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 15 July.\nLegacy.\nGeorge's only legitimate child, Charlotte, had died from post-partum complications in 1817, after delivering a stillborn son. George III's second son, Frederick, Duke of York and Albany, had died childless in 1827, so the throne passed to the third son of George III, William, Duke of Clarence, who reigned as William IV.\nGeorge was described as the \"First Gentleman of England\" on account of his style and manners. He was bright, clever, and knowledgeable, but his laziness and gluttony led him to squander much of his talent. \"The Times\" wrote that he would always prefer \"a girl and a bottle to politics and a sermon\".\nThe Regency period saw a shift in fashion that was largely determined by George. After political opponents put a tax on wig powder, he abandoned wearing a powdered wig in favour of natural hair. He wore darker colours than had been previously fashionable as they helped to disguise his size, favoured pantaloons and trousers over knee breeches because they were looser, and popularised a high collar with neck cloth because it hid his double chin. His visit to Scotland in 1822 led to the revival, if not the creation, of Scottish tartan dress as it is known today.\nDuring the political crisis caused by Catholic emancipation, the Duke of Wellington said that George was \"the worst man he ever fell in with his whole life, the most selfish, the most false, the most ill-natured, the most entirely without one redeeming quality\". However, his eulogy delivered in the House of Lords called George \"the most accomplished man of his age\" and praised his knowledge and talent. Wellington's true feelings were probably somewhere between these two extremes; as he said later, George was \"a magnificent patron of the arts\u00a0... the most extraordinary compound of talent, wit, buffoonery, obstinacy, and good feeling\u2014in short a medley of the most opposite qualities, with a great preponderance of good\u2014that I ever saw in any character in my life.\"\nAfter George's death, \"The Times\" wrote: \"There never was an individual less regretted by his fellow-creatures than this deceased king. What eye has wept for him? What heart has heaved one throb of unmercenary sorrow?\u00a0... If he ever had a friend\u2014a devoted friend in any rank of life\u2014we protest that the name of him or her never reached us\".\nThere are many statues of George IV, a large number of which were erected during his reign. In the United Kingdom, they include a bronze statue of him on horseback by Sir Francis Chantrey in Trafalgar Square.\nIn Edinburgh, \"George IV Bridge\" is a main street linking the Old Town High Street to the north over the ravine of the Cowgate, designed by the architect Thomas Hamilton in 1829 and completed in 1835. King's Cross, now a major transport hub sitting on the border of Camden and Islington in north London, takes its name from a short-lived monument erected to George IV in the early 1830s. A square and a neighbouring park in St Luke's, Islington, are also named after George IV.\nTitles, styles, honours, and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nAt birth, George was entitled to the dignities Prince of Great Britain and Ireland, Electoral Prince of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, Duke of Cornwall, and Duke of Rothesay. Under the Act of Parliament that instituted the regency, the prince's formal title as regent was \"Regent of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland\".\nArms.\nGeorge's coat of arms as the Prince of Wales was the royal arms (with an inescutcheon of Gules plain in the Hanoverian quarter), differenced by a label of three points Argent. The arms included the royal crest and supporters but with the single arched coronet of his rank, all charged on the shoulder with a similar label. His arms followed the change in the royal arms in 1801, when the Hanoverian quarter became an inescutcheon and the French quarter was dropped altogether. The 1816 alteration did not affect him as it only applied to the arms of the King.\nAs king, George's arms were those of his two kingdoms, the United Kingdom and Hanover, superimposed: Quarterly, I and IV Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland); overall an escutcheon tierced in pall reversed (for Hanover), I Gules two lions passant guardant Or (for Brunswick), II Or a semy of hearts Gules a lion rampant Azure (for L\u00fcneburg), III Gules a horse courant Argent (for Westphalia), overall an inescutcheon Gules charged with the crown of Charlemagne Or, the whole escutcheon surmounted by a crown.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40226", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40226", "title": "Rocket sled", "text": "Test platform pushed by rockets along a track\nA rocket sled is a test platform that slides along a track (e.g. set of rails), propelled by rockets. \nA rocket sled differs from a rocket car in not using wheels; at high speeds wheels would spin to pieces due to the extreme centrifugal forces. Apart from rare examples running on snow or ice (such as Max Valier's RAK BOBs of the late 1920s and Harry Bull's BR-1 in 1931), most rocket sleds run on a track. Although some rocket sleds ride on single beams or rails, most use a pair of rails. Standard gauge (1.435\u00a0m / 56.5\u00a0in) is common but sled tracks of narrower or wider gauge also exist. The rail cross-section profile is usually that of a Vignoles rail, commonly used for railroads. Sliding pads, called \"slippers\", are curved around the head of the rails to prevent the sled from flying off the track. Air cushions and magnetic levitation have also been used as alternatives, with potential benefits including reduced sled vibration.\nA rocket sled holds the land-based speed record for a vehicle, at Mach 8.5.\nUsage.\nRocket sleds were used extensively early in the Cold War to accelerate equipment considered too experimental (hazardous) for testing directly in piloted aircraft. The equipment to be tested under high acceleration or high airspeed conditions was installed along with appropriate instrumentation, data recording and telemetry equipment on the sled. The sled was then accelerated according to the experiment's design requirements for data collection along a length of isolated, precisely level and straight test track.\nTesting ejection seat systems and technology prior to their use in experimental or operational aircraft was a common application of the rocket sled at Holloman Air Force Base. Perhaps the most famous, the tracks at Edwards Air Force Base were used to test missiles, supersonic ejection seats, aircraft shapes and the effects of acceleration and deceleration on humans. The rocket sled track at Edwards Air Force Base was dismantled and used to extend the track at Holloman Air Force Base, taking it to almost 10 miles (16 km) in length.\nUnmanned rocket sleds continue to be used to test missile components without requiring costly live missile launches. A world speed record of Mach 8.5 (6,416\u00a0mph / 10,325\u00a0km/h) was achieved by a four-stage rocket sled at Holloman Air Force Base on April 30, 2003, the highest speed ever attained by a land vehicle.\nMurphy's law first received public attention during a press conference about rocket sled testing.\nRocket sled tracks.\nOther former rocket sled tracks include those at the following locations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40228", "revid": "35351935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40228", "title": "Archaeology of Algeria", "text": "The archeology in Algeria is rich in prehistoric memorials of human occupation. Algeria contains many Roman remains and is rich in monuments of Saracenic art.\nMegalithic remains.\nAlgeria has many megalithic remains, of which nearly every known kind has been found in the country. Numerous flints of palaeolithic type have been discovered, notably at Tlemcen and Kolea. Near Djelfa, in the Great Atlas, and at Mechra-Sfa (\"ford of the flat stones\"), a peninsula in the valley of the river Mina not far from Tiaret, are vast numbers of megalithic monuments.\nNotable among the prehistoric cultures of the area is the Capsian culture, whose shell-mounds are found throughout the north.\nFamous sites.\nMadghacen.\nMadghacen is a monument similar to the Qabr-er-Rumia, but older. It was built around 150 B.C. as the burial place of the Numidian kings, and is situated southwest of Constantine. The form is that of a truncated cone, placed on a cylindrical base, in diameter. It is high. The columns encircling the cylindrical portion are stunted and much broader at the base than the top; the capitals are Doric. Many of the columns, 60 in number, have been much damaged. When the sepulchral chamber was opened in 1873 by Bauchetet, a French engineer officer, clear evidence was found that at some remote period the tomb had been rifled and an attempt made to destroy it by fire.\nQabr-er-Rumia.\nThe Qabr-er-Rumia-- best known by its French name, \"Tombeau de la Chr\u00e9tienne\" (\"grave of the Christian lady\"), tradition making it the burial-place of Florinda, \"la Cava Rum\u00eda\", the beautiful and unfortunate daughter of Count Julian\u2014is near Kolea, and is known to be the tomb of the Mauretanian king Juba II and of his wife Cleopatra Selene, daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, queen of Egypt. It is built on a hill above the sea. A circular stone building surmounted by a pyramid rests on a lower platform, square.\nOriginally the monument was about in height, but it has been wantonly damaged. Its height is now : the cylindrical portion , the pyramid The base, in diameter, is ornamented with 60 engaged Ionic columns. The capitals of the columns have disappeared, but their design is preserved among the drawings of James Bruce, the African traveller.\nIn the centre of the tomb are two vaulted chambers, reached by a spiral passage or gallery , about the same height, and . The sepulchral chambers are separated by a short passage, and are cut off from the gallery by stone doors made of a single slab which can be moved up and down by levers, like a portcullis. The larger of the two chambers is long by broad and high. The other chamber is somewhat smaller.\nThe tomb was previously looted, probably in search of treasure. In 1555, Salah Rais, pasha of Algiers, set men to work to pull it down, but the records say that the attempt was given up because big black wasps came from under the stones and stung them to death. At the end of the 18th century, Baba Mahommed tried in vain to batter down the tomb with artillery. In 1866 it was explored by order of the emperor Napoleon III, the work being carried out by Adrien Berbrugger and Oscar Maccarthy.\nThe Jedars.\nThe Jedars (Arabic \"walls\" or \"buildings\") is the name given to a number of sepulchral monuments placed on hill-tops. A rectangular or square podium is in each case surmounted by a pyramid. The tombs date from the 5th to the 7th century of the Christian era, and lie in two distinct groups between Tiaret and Frenda. Frenda, which has largely preserved its old Berber character, has numerous dolmens and prehistoric rock sculptures close by.\nTassili n'Ajjer.\nTassili n'Ajjer is a national park in the Sahara desert, located on a vast plateau in south-east Algeria, covering an area of over . It has one of the most important groupings of prehistoric cave art in the world, and was inducted into UNESCO's World Heritage Site list in 1982.\nTassili n'Ajjer is known in the New Age culture for its Fungoid rock art, the primitive yet elaborate drawings of psychedelic mushrooms that hints on a shamanic consumption of those plants by the native people of this land.\nRecent discoveries.\nIn 2009, when the Place des Martyrs in Algiers was closed to build the subway station, Algerian and French archeologists found a 5th-century (Christian) basilica below layers of concrete.\nIn November 2018, archeologists in Algeria announced the discovery, on the site of Ain Boucherit near S\u00e9tif, of what seems to be stone tools (similar to Oldowans) and cut animal bones dated back to 2.4 million years old. This discovery turned Ain Boucherit into the oldest human site known today, and shook the theory of East Africa being the cradle of humanity."}
{"id": "40229", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40229", "title": "Geography of Algeria", "text": " \nAlgeria comprises of land, more than 80% of which is desert, in North Africa, between Morocco and Tunisia. It is the largest country in Africa. Its Arabic name, Al Jazair (the islands), is believed to derive from the rocky islands along the coastline of the Mediterranean Sea. The northern portion, an area of mountains, valleys, and plateaus between the Mediterranean and the Sahara Desert, forms an integral part of the section of North Africa known as the Maghreb. This area includes Morocco, Tunisia, and the northwestern portion of Libya known historically as Tripolitania.\nSize and boundaries.\nLand boundaries:\"Total:\" \"Border countries:\" Libya , Mali , Mauritania , Morocco , Niger , Tunisia , Western Sahara .\nArea \u2013 comparative: slightly larger than the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Saudi Arabia\nCoastline: \nMaritime claims: \"Territorial sea:\" , \"contiguous zone\": \"; exclusive fishing zone:\" \nGeographic regions.\nThe Tell.\nThe fertile Tell is the country's heartland, containing most of its cities and population. Made up of hills and plains of the narrow coastal region, the several Tell Atlas mountain ranges, and the intermediate valleys and basins, the Tell extends eastward from the Moroccan border to the mountains of the Grande Kabylie and the Bejaia Plain on the east. Its eastern terminus is the Soummam River.\nThe best agricultural areas are the gentle hills extending 100 kilometers westward from Algiers; the Mitidja Plain, which was a malarial swamp before being cleared by the French; and the Bejaia Plain. The alluvial soils in these areas permitted the French to establish magnificent vineyards and citrus groves. By contrast, in the great valley of the Chelif River and other interior valleys and basins, aridity and excessive summer heat have limited the development of agriculture. The Grande Kabylie is a zone of impoverished small farm villages tucked into convoluted mountains.\nThe High Plateaus and the Saharan Atlas.\nStretching from the Moroccan border the Tell Atlas, including the Djebel Babor formation, is the dominant northwestern mountain range. Stretching more than 600 kilometers eastward from the Moroccan border, the high plateau area (often referred to by the French name \"Hautes Plaines\" or \"Hauts Plateaux\") consist of undulating, steppe-like plains lying between the Tell and Saharan Atlas ranges. The elevation averages between in elevation in the west, dropping to in the east. The climate is so dry that these plains are sometimes thought of as part of the Sahara. The plateau area is covered by alluvial debris formed when the mountains eroded. An occasional ridge projects through the alluvial cover to interrupt the monotony of the landscape.\nHigher and more continuous than the Tell Atlas, the Sahara Atlas range is formed of three massifs: the Ksour Range near the Moroccan border, the Amour Range, and the Ouled-Na\u00efl Range south of Algiers. The mountains, which receive more rainfall than those of the High Plateaus, include some good grazing land. Watercourses on the southern slopes of these massifs disappear into the desert but supply the wells of numerous oases along the northern edge of the desert, of which Biskra, Laghouat, and B\u00e9char are the most prominent.\nNortheastern Algeria.\nEastern Algeria consists of a massif area extensively dissected into mountains, plains, and basins. It differs from the western portion of the country in that its prominent topographic features do not parallel the coast. In its southern sector, the steep cliffs and long ridges of the Aur\u00e8s Mountains create an almost impenetrable refuge that has played an important part in the history of the Maghrib since Roman times. Near the northern coast, the Petite Kabylie Mountains are separated from the Grande Kabylie range at the eastward limits of the Tell by the Soummam River. The coast is predominantly mountainous in the far eastern part of the country, but limited plains provide hinterlands for the port cities of Beja\u00efa, Skikda, and Annaba. In the interior of the region, extensive high plains mark the region around S\u00e9tif and Constantine; these plains were developed during the French colonial period as the principal centers of grain cultivation. Near Constantine, salt marshes offer seasonal grazing grounds to seminomadic sheep herders.\nThe Sahara.\nThe Algerian portion of the Sahara extends south of the Saharan Atlas for to the Niger and Mali frontiers. The desert is an otherworldly place, scarcely considered an integral part of the country. Far from being covered wholly by sweeps of sand, however, it is a region of great diversity. Immense areas of sand dunes called areg (sing., erg) occupy about one-quarter of the territory. The largest such region is the Grand Erg Oriental (Great Eastern Erg), where enormous dunes high are spaced about apart. Much of the remainder of the desert is covered by rocky platforms called humud (sing., hamada), and almost the entire southeastern quarter is taken up by the high, complex mass of the Ahaggar and Tassili n'Ajjer highlands, some parts of which reach more than . Surrounding the Ahaggar are sandstone plateaus, cut into deep gorges by ancient rivers, and to the west a desert of pebbles stretches to the Mali frontier.\nThe desert consists of readily distinguishable northern and southern sectors, the northern sector extending southward a little less than half the distance to the Niger and Mali frontiers. The north, less arid than the south, supports most of the few persons who live in the region and contains most of the desert's oases. Sand dunes are the most prominent features of this area's topography, but between the desert areas of the Grand Erg Oriental and the Grand Erg Occidental (Great Western Erg) and extending north to the Atlas Saharien are plateaus, including the Tadema\u00eft and a complex limestone structure called the M'zab where the Mozabite Berbers have settled. The southern zone of the Sahara is almost totally arid and is inhabited only by the Tuareg nomads and, recently, by oil camp workers. Barren rock predominates, but in some parts of Ahaggar and Tassili n'Ajjer alluvial deposits permit garden farming.\nClimate and hydrology.\nNorthern Algeria is in the temperate zone and enjoys a mild, Mediterranean climate. It lies within approximately the same latitudes as southern California and has somewhat similar climatic conditions. Its broken topography, however, provides sharp local contrasts in both prevailing temperatures and incidence of rainfall. Year-to-year variations in climatic conditions are also common. This area, the most inhabited in Algeria, is commonly referred to as the Tell.\nIn the Tell, temperatures in summer average between and in winter drop to . Winters are not cold, but the humidity is high and houses are seldom adequately heated. In eastern Algeria, the average temperatures are somewhat lower, and on the steppes of the High Plateaus winter temperatures hover only a few degrees above freezing. A prominent feature of the climate in this region is the sirocco, a dusty, choking south wind blowing off the desert, sometimes at gale force. This wind also occasionally reaches into the coastal Tell.\nIn Algeria only a relatively small corner of the Sahara lies across the Tropic of Cancer in the torrid zone, but even in winter, midday desert temperatures can be very hot. After sunset, however, the clear, dry air permits rapid loss of heat, and the nights are cool to chilly. Enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded.\nRainfall is fairly abundant along the coastal part of the Tell, ranging from annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east. Precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern Algeria, where it reaches as much as in some years. Farther inland the rainfall is less plentiful. Prevailing winds that are easterly and northeasterly in summer change to westerly and northerly in winter and carry with them a general increase in precipitation from September to December, a decrease in the late winter and spring months, and a near absence of rainfall during the summer months.\nTerrain.\nClearing of land for agricultural use and cutting of timber over the centuries have severely reduced the once bountiful forest wealth. Forest fires have also taken their toll. In the higher and wetter portions of the Tell Atlas, cork oak and Aleppo pine grow in thick soils. At lower levels on thinner soils, drought-resistant shrubs predominate. The grapevine is indigenous to the coastal lowlands, and grasses and scrub cover the High Plateaus. On the Saharan Atlas, little survives of the once extensive forests of Atlas cedar that have been exploited for fuel and timber since antiquity.\nThe forest reserves in Algeria were severely reduced during the colonial period. In 1967 it was calculated that the country's forested area extended over no more than of terrain, of which were overgrown with brushwood and scrub. By contrast, woodlands in 1830 had covered . In the mid-1970s, however, the government embarked on a vast reforestation program to help control erosion, which was estimated to affect of arable land annually. Among projects was one to create a barrage vert (green barrier) more or less following the ridge line of the Saharan Atlas and extending from Morocco to the Tunisian frontier in a zone long and up to wide.\nIn Algeria forest cover is around 1% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,949,000 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 1,667,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,439,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 510,000 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 6% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 80% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 18% private ownership and 2% with ownership listed as other or unknown.\nThe barrage vert consists principally of Aleppo pine, a species that can thrive in areas of scanty rainfall. It is designed to restore a damaged ecological balance and to halt the northern encroachment of the Sahara. By the early 1980s, the desert had already penetrated the hilly gap between the Saharan Atlas and the Aur\u00e8s Mountains as far as the town of Bou Sa\u00e2da, a point well within the High Plateaus region. The barrage vert project was ended in the late 1980s because of lack of funds.\nAlgeria had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.22/10, ranking it 106th globally out of 172 countries.\nStatistics.\nNatural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, uranium, lead, zinc\nNatural hazards: mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes; mudslides and floods in rainy season\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues: air pollution in major cities; soil erosion from overgrazing and other poor farming practices; desertification; dumping of raw sewage, petroleum refining wastes, and other industrial effluents is leading to the pollution of rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean Sea, in particular, becoming polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion, and fertilizer runoff; inadequate supplies of potable water\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\" Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Climate Change-Paris Agreement, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands signed, but not ratified: Nuclear Test Ban\nProtected areas.\nAlgeria has a number of protected areas including National Parks and nature reserves. An example of such a protected area is the Djebel Babor Nature Reserve within the Djebel Babor Mountains; the Djebel Babor is also one of the few relict habitats for the endangered Barbary macaque, \"Macaca sylvanus\".\nThe national parks in Algeria are: Ahaggar, Belezma, Chr\u00e9a, Djurdjura, El Kala, Gouraya, Tassili n'Ajjer, Taza, Th\u00e9niet El Had, and Tlemcen.\nExtreme points.\nElevation extremes:\nPoints that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40231", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40231", "title": "Politics of Algeria", "text": "Politics of Algeria takes place in a framework of a constitutional semi-presidential republic, whereby the President of Algeria is head of state while the Prime Minister of Algeria is the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament, the People's National Assembly and the Council of the Nation.\nSince the early 1990s, a shift from a socialist to a free market economy has been ongoing with official support.\nHistory.\nThe civil war resulted in more than 100,000 deaths since 1991. However, Algerians believe that the national death count was close to 3,000,000. Although the security situation in the country has greatly improved, addressing the underlying issues which brought about the political turmoil of the 1990s remains the government's major task. The government officially lifted the state of emergency declared in 1999.\nConstitution.\nUnder the 1976 Constitution (as modified 1979, and amended in 1988, 1989, and 1996) Algeria is a multi-party state. All parties must be approved by the Ministry of the Interior. To date, Algeria has had more than 40 legal political parties. According to the Constitution, no political association may be formed if it is \"based on differences in religion, language, race, gender, or region.\"\nExecutive branch.\nThe head of state is the President of the republic, who is elected to a five-year term, renewable once (changed by the 2008 Constitution to an infinite mandate but reinstated in 2016). Algeria has universal suffrage. The President is the head of the Council of Ministers and of the High Security Council. He appoints the Prime Minister who also is the head of government. The Prime Minister appoints the Council of Ministers.\nParliament of Algeria.\nPeople's National Assembly.\nThe People's National Assembly has less power relative to the executive branch than many parliaments and has been described as \"rubber-stamping\" laws proposed by the president.\nAs of 2012 there were 462 seats in parliament. In the May 2012 election the government reported a 42.9% turnout, though the BBC reported that correspondents saw \"only a trickle of voters\" at polling places. In that election 44 political parties participated with the ruling National Liberation Front winning more than any other group\u2014220 seats\u2014and an alliance of moderate Islamists coming in second with 66 seats. The Islamists disputed the results.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nIn keeping with its amended Constitution, the Algerian Government espouses participatory democracy and free-market competition. The government has stated that it will continue to open the political process and encourage the creation of political institutions. More than 40 political parties, representing a wide segment of the population, are currently active in Algerian national politics. The most recent legislative election was 2017. President Bouteflika pledged to restructure the state as part of his overall reform efforts. However, no specifics are yet available as to how such reforms would affect political structures and the political process itself.\nIn the 2002 elections, there were 17,951,127 eligible voters, and 8,288,536 of them actually voted which made a turn out of 46.17%. Out of the ballots cast, there were 867,669 void ballots according to the Interior ministry and 7,420,867 which went to the various candidates.\nLegislative elections.\nResults of the 2017 legislative elections:\nAdministrative divisions.\nAlgeria is divided into 58 wilayas (provinces) headed by walis (governors) who report to the Minister of Interior. Each wilaya is further divided into da\u00efras, themselves divided in communes. The wilayas and communes are each governed by an elected assembly.\nMedia.\nAlgeria has more than 30 daily newspapers published in French and Arabic, with a total publication run of more than 1.5 million copies. Although relatively free to write as they choose, in 2001, the government amended the penal code provisions relating to defamation and slander, a step widely viewed as an effort to rein in the press. Government monopoly of newsprint and advertising is seen as another means to influence the press, although it has permitted newspapers to create their own printing distribution networks.\nSee also List of Algerian newspapers.\nInternational organization participation.\nAU, ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, ECA, FAO, G-15, G-20, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, INTOSAI, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAPEC, OAS, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNWTO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO (applicant)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40232", "revid": "43162658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40232", "title": "Steve Goodman", "text": "American folk music singer-songwriter (1948\u20131984)\nSteven Benjamin Goodman (July 25, 1948 \u2013 September 20, 1984) was an American folk and country singer-songwriter from Chicago. He wrote the song \"City of New Orleans\", which was recorded by artists including Arlo Guthrie, John Denver, Willie Nelson, and Judy Collins. In 1985, Goodman received the Grammy songwriter award for best country song. Goodman co-wrote \"You Never Even Called Me by My Name\", which became the best-selling song of country musician David Allan Coe. A lifelong Chicago Cubs fan, Goodman wrote \"Go Cubs Go.\" Goodman died of leukemia in September 1984.\nPersonal life.\nGoodman was born on Chicago's North Side to a middle-class Jewish family. He began writing and performing songs as a teenager. He graduated from Maine East High School in Park Ridge, Illinois, in 1965, where he was a classmate of Hillary Clinton. During high school he began his public singing career by leading the junior choir at Temple Beth Israel in Albany Park. In the fall of 1965, he entered the University of Illinois and pledged the Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity. In college he formed a cover band called The Juicy Fruits, with Goodman on lead guitar, Ron Banyon on rhythm guitar, Steve Hartmann on bass, and Elliot Englehardt on drums. He left college after one year to pursue his musical career. In the early spring of 1967, Goodman went to New York, staying for a month in a Greenwich Village brownstone across the street from the Cafe Wha?, where he performed regularly.\nReturning to Chicago, he intended to restart his education. In 1968 Goodman began performing at the Earl of Old Town and The Dangling Conversation coffeehouse and attracted a following. By 1969, Goodman was a regular performer in Chicago, while attending Lake Forest College. During this time Goodman supported himself by singing advertising jingles. It was during this time he discovered the cause of his continuous fatigue was actually leukemia. This led him to drop out of school again to pursue his music full time.\nIn September 1969 he met Nancy Pruter (sister of R&amp;B writer Robert Pruter), who was attending college and working as a waitress. They were married in February 1970. Though he experienced periods of remission, Goodman never felt that he was living on anything other than borrowed time, and some critics, listeners and friends have said that his music reflects this sentiment. His wife, writing in the liner notes to the posthumous collection \"No Big Surprise\", characterized him this way:\nBasically, Steve was exactly who he appeared to be: an ambitious, well-adjusted man from a loving, middle-class Jewish home in the Chicago suburbs, whose life and talent were directed by the physical pain and time constraints of a fatal disease which he kept at bay, at times, seemingly by willpower alone... Steve wanted to live as normal a life as possible, only he had to live it as fast as he could... He extracted meaning from the mundane.\nCareer.\nHe played the Philadelphia Folk Festival six times between 1970 and 1978. Goodman's songs first appeared on \"Gathering at The Earl of Old Town\", an album produced by Chicago record company Dunwich in 1971. As a close friend of Earl Pionke, the owner of the folk music bar, Goodman performed at The Earl dozens of times, including customary New Year's Eve concerts. He also remained closely involved with Chicago's Old Town School of Folk Music, where he had met and mentored his friend John Prine.\nLater in 1971, Goodman was playing at a Chicago bar called the Quiet Knight as the opening act for Kris Kristofferson. Impressed with Goodman, Kristofferson introduced him to Paul Anka, who brought Goodman to New York to record some demos. This resulted in Goodman signing a contract with Buddah Records.\nAll this time, Goodman had been busy writing many of his most enduring songs, and this avid songwriting led to an important break for him. While at the Quiet Knight, Goodman saw Arlo Guthrie and asked him to let him play a song for him. Guthrie grudgingly agreed on the condition that Goodman buy him a beer first; Guthrie would then listen to Goodman for as long as it took Guthrie to drink the beer. Goodman played \"City of New Orleans\", which Guthrie liked enough that he asked to record it.\nGuthrie's version of Goodman's song, about the Illinois Central's \"City of New Orleans\" train, became a Top 20 hit in 1972 and provided Goodman with enough financial and artistic success to make music a full-time career. The song became an American standard, covered by such musicians as Johnny Cash, Judy Collins, Chet Atkins, Lynn Anderson, and Willie Nelson, whose recorded version earned Goodman a posthumous Grammy for Best Country Song in 1985. A French translation of the song, \"Salut Les Amoureux\", was recorded by Joe Dassin in 1973.\nA Dutch singer, Gerard Cox, heard the French version while on holiday and translated it into Dutch, titled \"'t Is Weer Voorbij Die Mooie Zomer\" (\"And again that beautiful summer has come to an end\"). It reached number one on the Dutch Top 40 in December 1973 and has become a classic which is still played on Dutch radio. Inspired by this version Rudi Carrell, a Dutch TV host and entertainer who was also very successful in Germany, covered the song with German lyrics (\"Wann wird's mal wieder richtig Sommer?\") in 1975. It peaked #18 in the Top 40 and has become a radio classic which gains airplay in rainy summers. A Hebrew version of the song \"Shalom Lach Eretz Nehederet\" was sung by Israeli singer Yehoram Gaon in 1977 and became an immediate hit. Lyrically, the French, Dutch, German and Hebrew versions bear no resemblance to Goodman's original lyrics. \nAccording to Goodman, the song was inspired by a train trip he and his wife took from Chicago to Mattoon, Illinois. According to the liner notes on the Steve Goodman anthology \"No Big Surprise\", \"City of New Orleans\" was written while on the campaign trail with Senator Edmund Muskie.\nIn 1974, singer David Allan Coe achieved considerable success on the country charts with Goodman's and John Prine's \"You Never Even Called Me by My Name\", a song which good-naturedly spoofed stereotypical country music lyrics. Prine refused to take a songwriter's credit for the song, although Goodman bought Prine a jukebox as a gift from his publishing royalties. Goodman's name is mentioned in Coe's recording of the song, in a spoken epilogue in which Goodman and Coe discuss the merits of \"the perfect country and western song\".\nGoodman's success as a recording artist was more limited. Although he was known in folk circles as an excellent and influential songwriter, his albums received more critical than commercial success. One of Goodman's biggest hits was a song he did not write: \"The Dutchman\", written by Michael Peter Smith. He reached a wider audience as the opening act for Steve Martin while Martin was at the height of his stand-up popularity.\nDuring the mid and late seventies, Goodman became a regular guest on Easter Sunday on Vin Scelsa's radio show in New York City. Scelsa's personal recordings of these sessions eventually led to an album of selections from these appearances, \"The Easter Tapes\".\nIn 1977, Goodman performed on Tom Paxton's live album \"New Songs From the Briarpatch\" (Vanguard Records), which contained some of Paxton's topical songs of the 1970s, including \"Talking Watergate\" and \"White Bones of Allende\", as well as a song dedicated to Mississippi John Hurt entitled \"Did You Hear John Hurt?\"\nDuring the fall of 1979, Goodman was hired to write and perform a series of topical songs for National Public Radio. Although Goodman and Jethro Burns recorded eleven songs for the series, only five of them, \"The Ballad of Flight 191\" about a plane crash, \"Daley's Gone\", \"Unemployed\", \"The Twentieth Century is Almost Over\", and \"The Election Year Rag\", were used on the air before the series was cancelled.\nGoodman wrote and performed many humorous songs about Chicago, including three about the Chicago Cubs: \"A Dying Cub Fan's Last Request\", \"When the Cubs Go Marching In\" and \"Go, Cubs, Go\" (which has frequently been played on Cubs broadcasts and at Wrigley Field after Cubs wins). He wrote \"Go, Cubs, Go\" out of spite after then GM Dallas Green called \"A Dying Cub Fan's Last Request\" too depressing. The Cubs songs grew out of his fanatical devotion to the team, which included many clubhouse and on-field visits with Cubs players. He wrote other songs about Chicago, including \"The Lincoln Park Pirates\", about the notorious Lincoln Towing Service, and \"Daley's Gone\", about Mayor Richard J. Daley. Another comic highlight is \"Vegematic\", about a man who falls asleep while watching late-night TV and dreams he ordered many products that he saw on infomercials. He could also write serious songs, most notably \"My Old Man\", a tribute to Goodman's father, Bud Goodman, a used-car salesman and World War II veteran.\nGoodman won his second Grammy, for Best Contemporary Folk Album, in 1988 for \"Unfinished Business\", a posthumous album on his Red Pajamas Records label.\nMany fans become aware of Goodman's work through other artists such as Jimmy Buffett. Buffett has recorded several of Goodman's songs, including \"This Hotel Room\", \"Banana Republics\", and \"California Promises\", as well as songs co-written with Buffett: \"Door Number Three\", \"Woman Goin' Crazy on Caroline Street\", \"Frank and Lola\", \"It's Midnight and I'm not Famous Yet\", and \"Where's the Party?\". Jackie DeShannon covered Goodman's \"Would You Like to Learn to Dance\" on her 1972 album, \"Jackie\".\nGoodman's posthumously released album, \"Santa Ana Winds\", included a tribute to Carl Martin, \"You Better Get It While You Can (The Ballad of Carl Martin)\", celebrating the joy both found in their music, and a refrain of, \"From the cradle to the crypt, Is a mighty short trip. So you better get it while you can\".\nDeath.\nOn September 20, 1984, Goodman died of leukemia at the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle, Washington. He was 36 years old.\nOn October 2, after clinching the National League East division title, the Cubs played their first post-season game since the 1945 World Series. Filling in for Goodman, who had been scheduled to sing \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" before the game, Jimmy Buffett dedicated the song to him. Since the 2000s, at the conclusion of every home game win, the Cubs play \"Go, Cubs, Go\", written by Goodman.\nIn April 1988, some of Goodman's ashes were scattered at Wrigley Field, the home of the Cubs, paralleling lyrics from \"A Dying Cub Fan's Last Request\".\nGoodman was survived by his wife and three daughters.\nLegacy.\nIn 2006, Goodman's daughter, Rosanna, issued \"My Old Man\", an album of a variety of artists covering her father's songs.\nIn 2007 the Chicago Cubs began playing Goodman's 1984 song \"Go, Cubs, Go\" after each home game win. When the Cubs made it to the playoffs, interest in the song and Goodman resulted in several newspaper articles about him. Illinois Lieutenant Governor Pat Quinn declared October 5, 2007, Steve Goodman Day in the state. In 2010, Illinois Representative Mike Quigley introduced a bill renaming the Lakeview post office on Irving Park Road in honor of Goodman. The bill was signed by President Barack Obama on August 3, 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40233", "revid": "35184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40233", "title": "Madness (band)", "text": "British ska band\nMadness are an English ska and pop band from Camden Town, north west London, who formed in 1976. One of the most prominent bands of the late 1970s and early 1980s two-tone ska revival, they continue to perform with six of the seven members of their original line-up. Madness' most successful period was from 1980 to 1986, when the band's songs spent a total of 214 weeks on the UK Singles Chart, holding the record along with English reggae group UB40 for most weeks spent by a group in the UK singles chart during the 1980s.\nMadness have had 16 singles reach the UK top ten, including \"One Step Beyond\", \"Baggy Trousers\" and \"It Must Be Love\"; one UK number-one single, \"House of Fun\"; and two number ones in Ireland, \"House of Fun\" and \"Wings of a Dove\". \"Our House\" was their biggest US hit, reaching number 7 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In 2000, the band received the Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors for Outstanding Song Collection.\nCareer.\n1976\u20131978: Formation.\nThe core of the band formed as the North London Invaders in 1976, and included Mike Barson (Monsieur Barso) on keyboards and vocals, Chris Foreman (Chrissy Boy) on guitar and Lee Thompson (Kix) on saxophone and vocals. They later recruited John Hasler on drums and Cathal Smyth (better known as Chas Smash) on bass guitar. Later in the year, they were joined by lead vocalist Dikran Tulaine.\nThis six-piece line-up lasted until part-way through 1977, when Graham McPherson (better known as Suggs) took over the lead vocals after seeing the band perform in a friend's garden. Tulaine went on to be an actor. Smyth, who left after an argument with Barson, was replaced with Gavin Rodgers, Barson's girlfriend's brother. McPherson was kicked out of the band by Barson for choosing too often to watch Chelsea instead of rehearsing. Thompson left the band after Barson criticised his saxophone playing.\nBy 1978, the band had allowed McPherson to return as a vocalist after he had filled in temporarily for Hasler (who had taken over vocals when McPherson was removed). Thompson returned after patching things up with Barson. Drummer Dan Woodgate (Woody) and bassist Mark Bedford (Bedders) also joined the band, replacing Garry Dovey and Rodgers, respectively, the latter of whom left due to his lack of faith in the band and their organization. After briefly changing their name to Morris and the Minors, the band renamed itself as Madness in 1979, paying homage to one of their favourite songs by ska and reggae artist Prince Buster. The band remained a sextet until late 1979 when Chas Smash rejoined and officially became the seventh member of Madness as a backing vocalist and dancer.\n1979\u20131981: Early success.\nDuring 1979, the band began to attract a live following in London, being regulars at the Dublin Castle in Camden Town. The band's first commercial recording was the Lee Thompson composition \"The Prince\". The song, like the band's name, paid homage to their idol, Prince Buster. The song was released through 2 Tone Records, the label of the Specials founder and keyboardist Jerry Dammers. The song was a surprise hit, peaking in the UK music charts at number 16. Madness toured with fellow 2 Tone bands the Specials and the Selecter, before recording their debut studio album.\nThat debut studio album, \"One Step Beyond...\" was released by Stiff Records. The album included a re-recording of \"The Prince\" and its B-side \"Madness\", and the band's second and third singles: \"One Step Beyond\" and \"My Girl\". The title song was a cover of the B-side of the 1960s Prince Buster hit \"Al Capone\". The \"One Step Beyond...\" album stayed in the British charts for 78 weeks, peaking at number 2. Smyth performed on the album but was not an official member of the band at the time of the album's recording or release. He would formally join Madness a few weeks after \"One Step Beyond...\" was issued in October 1979.\nAfter the release of \"My Girl\", the band felt that they had exhausted the material from \"One Step Beyond...\", and did not want to release any more singles from the album. However, Dave Robinson, head of Stiff Records, disagreed. Eventually, a compromise was made, and the band decided to release an EP featuring one album track and three new tracks. The result was the \"Work Rest and Play\" EP, which was headlined by the song \"Night Boat to Cairo\", from the \"One Step Beyond\" album. The EP reached number 6 in the UK Singles Chart.\nIn 1980, the band's second studio album, \"Absolutely\" reached number 2 in the UK Albums Chart. \"Absolutely\" spawned some of the band's biggest hits, most notably \"Baggy Trousers\", which peaked at number 3 in the UK Singles Chart. \"Embarrassment\" reached number 4 in the charts, and the instrumental song \"The Return of the Los Palmas 7\" climbed to number 7. Although the album reviews were generally less enthusiastic than those of \"One Step Beyond...\", they were mostly positive. Robert Christgau gave the album a favourable B\u2212 grade, but \"Rolling Stone\" awarded the album just one out of five stars. \"Rolling Stone\" was particularly scathing of the ska revival in general, stating that \"\"The Specials\" wasn't very good\" and Madness were simply \"the Blues Brothers with English accents\".\nA drama-documentary film titled \"Take It or Leave It\" was released in 1981, featuring the band members playing themselves in a re-creation of their early days to the then-current period. Live recordings of Madness performances as well as those by other 2 Tone bands were used in the 1981 documentary film and soundtrack album \"Dance Craze\".\n1981\u20131983: Change of direction.\nIn 1981, the band's third studio album, \"7\", reached number 5 in the UK Albums Chart and contained three hit singles: \"Grey Day\" (no. 4, April 1981), \"Shut Up\" (no. 7, September 1981), and \"Cardiac Arrest\" (no. 14, February 1982). In an article in 1979, Chris Foreman explained that the band's music would move with the times, and change styles as time goes on. This was shown to be the case, as unlike the two ska-filled, fast-paced albums that preceded it, \"7\" was something of a change in direction. Suggs' vocal performance changed significantly, and his strong accent from the previous studio albums had been watered down. The album strayed from the ska-influenced sound of \"One Step Beyond...\" and \"Absolutely\" and moved towards a pop sound; a trend that continued with subsequent studio albums.\nNear the end of 1981, Madness released one of their most recognised songs: a cover of Labi Siffre's 1971 hit \"It Must Be Love\". The song climbed to number 4 in the UK, and in 1983, the song peaked at number 33 in the US charts. In 1982, Madness released their only number 1 hit to date, \"House of Fun\"&lt;ref name=\"Sony/ATV\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and also reached number 1 in the album charts with their first compilation, \"Complete Madness\" (1982). In this period, the band starred in a series of commercials in Japan for the Honda City hatchback and Honda Motocompo scooter, in which they sang the original composition \"In the City\" and a modified version of their 1982 single \"Driving in My Car\"; a full version of \"In the City\" was released on \"Complete Madness\".\nIn November 1982, they released their fourth studio album, \"The Rise &amp; Fall\", which was well received in the UK, but did not get an American release. Instead, many of its songs were included on the US compilation \"Madness\" (1983), including \"Our House\", which was their most internationally successful single to date. \"Our House\" reached number 5 in the UK music charts and number 7 in the US charts; it was also performed on \"The Young Ones\". Many reviewers compared \"The Rise &amp; Fall\" to the Kinks' \"The Village Green Preservation Society\" (1968), and it is at times retrospectively considered a concept album. The album also featured \"Primrose Hill\", which was more similar to the Beatles song \"Strawberry Fields Forever\", containing similar psychedelic imagery and a layered arrangement.\n1983\u20131986: Decline and break-up.\nIn 1983, their single \"Wings of a Dove\" peaked at number 2 in the UK charts, followed by \"The Sun and the Rain\" (no. 5, November 1983). Their following studio album, \"Keep Moving\", peaked at number 6 in the UK Albums Chart, and two singles from that album reached the top 20 in the UK Singles Chart. The album received some good reviews, with \"Rolling Stone\" magazine giving the album four out of five stars, applauding the band's changing sound. This was an improvement as the last album reviewed by the magazine, \"Absolutely\", was heavily criticised.\nMike Barson's Departure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Mike Barson has decided to retire from Madness and the wonderful world of\npop music. The mild mannered foundation stone wlll be sorely missed\nby Madness with sadness.\"\n \u2014\"Barson Cops Out\", Press Statement for \"Record Mirror\", January 14 1984.\nAs the musical lynchpin of the band, Barson had became increasingly exhausted by the pressure of being in the band by this time. This sentiment started in late 1982 during the production of \"The Rise and Fall\", during which Barson moved to Amsterdam with his wife. Barson also became very reclusive from the band's public image and started to cover his face in photographs. And while recording \"Keep Moving\", Barson abruptly went on holiday throughout Europe in a camper van with his wife and dog.\nOn October 4th of 1983, the band were rehearsing and discussing a possible television series, which was being written for them by Ben Elton and Richard Curtis. Barson then informed the band that he would not be able to take part because he intended to leave the band, as he was tired of the music business and wanted to spend more time with his wife. Barson agreed to finish recording the album \"Keep Moving;\" he left after playing for the last time with the band at the Lyceum Ballroom on 21 December 1983. \nJames Mackie took Barson's place appearing with Madness on the US television show \"Saturday Night Live\" on 14 April 1984. After leaving the band, Barson returned to the UK for the filming of two music videos as he had played on the tracks, \"Michael Caine\" and \"One Better Day\". Barson finished live performance with the band in 1983, and officially left the band in June 1984, following the release of \"One Better Day\". Paul Carrack took Barson's place whilst the band toured America in early 1984. The six remaining members left Stiff Records and formed their own label, Zarjazz Records, which was a sub-label of Virgin Records.\nPost-Stiff.\nIn 1985, the label released the band's sixth studio album, \"Mad Not Mad\". Barson's usual keyboard parts were filled by an emphasis on synthesisers provided by Steve Nieve of the Attractions. In later years, frontman Suggs has described the album as a \"polished turd\". The album reached number 16 in the UK charts, which is the band's lowest position on the album charts to date. Despite the poor chart showing, the album was listed as number 55 in \"NME\"'s \"All Time 100 Albums\". The singles for the album fared even worse, with \"Yesterday's Men\" peaking at number 18 in the UK charts. The subsequent singles, \"Uncle Sam\" and \"Sweetest Girl\", failed to make the top 20, which was a first for Madness singles.\nThe band then attempted to record a new studio album, and 11 demo tracks were recorded. However, musical differences arose between the band members. The untitled album went unreleased, and in September 1986, the band announced that they were to break up. Barson rejoined the band for a farewell single, \"(Waiting For) The Ghost Train\", but did not appear in the music video. The band officially broke up following the release of the single, which reached a high of number 18 in the UK.\n1987\u20131991: Interim period.\nFollowing the split the previous year, the band's members ventured into different activities, with many of them staying within the music business. However, four members of the band \u2013 Suggs, Carl Smyth, Lee Thompson and Chris Foreman \u2013 regrouped under the name; the Madness. In March 1988, they released their eponymous debut album, \"The Madness\", and released two singles, \"I Pronounce You\", and \"What's That\". Despite initial optimism about their future, their lackluster commercial performances, with the album only charting at No. 65 in the UK for one week and neither of the singles reaching the top 40, caused the band split later that year. Retrospectively, the band members expressed extreme dissatisfaction with the project, with Lee Thompson referring to it as their \"Shitting Bricks\" period\" in the album's liner notes. Woodgate was particularly upset by the project, thinking of it as \"a complete cop out\" at the time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"After The Madness, Suggs, Cathal, Lee and I kind of scattered. Lee and I formed a band, The Nutty Boys, and went off on all sorts of adventures, and released and album, Crunch!. Suggs had a solo career. Cathal was working at Go! Discs as an A&amp;R man - he used to come and see Lee and I, but he never signed us up! Bedders and Woody were in Voice Of The Beehive. I never in my wildest dreams thought that Madness would reform.\"\n\u2014Chris Foreman, \"Wonderful\" Liner Notes\nMeanwhile, Woodgate found success as the drummer for the band Voice of the Beehive, who had several UK hit singles such as \"Don't Call Me Baby\", \"I Say Nothing\", and \"Monsters and Angels\". Mark Bedford also joined the band alongside Woodgate in its formative stages, but left to pursue study graphic design at the London College of Printing. He still remained partially active in the music business, later collaborating with Terry Edwards to form the jazz outfit BUtterfield 8 in 1988, as well as playing bass guitar on Morrissey's second solo album \"Kill Uncle,\" released in 1991. Thompson and Foreman formed a ska band called The Nutty Boys and released an album \"Crunch!\" in 1990. Along with the album having modest critical and commercial success than \"The Madness\", they regularly played the live circuit in London and toured throughout Europe. Some members of Madness, such as Suggs, Carl, Barson, and Bedford, attended their early gigs between 1990 and 1991.\nCarl became more involved in the industry side of the music business, becoming an A&amp;R executive for Go! Discs in 1990. Throughout his tenure, he signed The Stairs, and worked with The Beautiful South, Paul Weller, and The La's. He also developed a close friendship with Morrissey in that time and introduced Boz Boorer to him, who continued to work with Morrissey for the next 3 decades. Morrissey even asked Carl to manage him, but he declined the offer. He instead provided backing vocals on Morrissey's cover of The Jam's song \"That's Entertainment\", which was a B-side for the single \"Sing Your Life\" (1991).\nHowever, Suggs had difficulty figuring out his life as he initially struggled with paranoia and a breakdown after the split. He was very worried on how he would provide for his family, which caused him to start taking ecstasy and seeing a therapist. Eventually, Suggs started pursuing various endeavours, including acting in \"The Press Gang,\" the 1990 indie film \"The Final Frame\", and the 1989 film \"The Tall Guy\". He also tried stand-up comedy for a short period, but he was unsuccessful in that field. He also became a TV presenter on the BSB Power Station, hosting his own show \"Suggs On Saturday\" from 1990 to 1991. Suggs then became the manager and producer for The Farm from 1990 to 1992, producing their 1991 No. 1 album \"Spartacus\", as well their Top 10 UK Hit Singles, \"Groovy Train\" (1990) and \"All Together Now\" (1990). Suggs also collaborated with Morrissey, providing backing vocals on some of his singles such as \"Picadilly Palare\" (1990) and \"Sing Your Life\" (1991).\nThroughout this period, the members of the band still stayed in touch and worked together. Thompson, Bedford, and Foreman started playing together in Terry Edward's All Stars. Mike Barson, who was still retired in Amsterdam, regularly wrote and produced songs with some of his former bandmates, namely Lee Thompson and Suggs, who came to visit him, many of which appeared on subsequent Madness albums and on Suggs' 1995 solo debut album \"The Lone Ranger\". Carl also regularly visited Lee and Chris at Liquidator Studios when they were working on \"Crunch!.\" Following the release of the compilation albums \"It's... Madness\" (1990) and \"It's... Madness Too\" (1991), which both found moderate commercial success, the discussion of the potential release of a greatest hits album emerged, and the entire band started keeping in contact with each other regularly again through Carl, who spawned the idea of promoting the greatest hits album and ultimately initiated their comeback.\n1992\u20132003: Reunion and \"Our House\" musical.\nIn February 1992, \"It Must Be Love\" was re-released and eventually reached number 6 in the UK Singles Chart in March. Following that, the singles compilation album \"Divine Madness\" (1992) was released and peaked at number 1 in the album charts. Madness then announced plans for a reunion concert, Madstock!, which was held at Finsbury Park, London on 8 and 9 August of that year. The original line-up reunited, performing together for the first time since Barson left the band in 1984. Over 75,000 fans attended the weekend festival, and the dancing of the crowd caused some nearby tower blocks to shake perceptibly as they resonated with the frequency of the music.\nAfter the Finsbury Park comeback, a live album was released, and the associated single, \"The Harder They Come\" (a cover of Jimmy Cliff's 1973 song) reached number 44 in the UK, with the album reaching number 22.\nThe band continued to reunite for annual UK Christmas season tours and held three more Madstock! festivals; in 1994, 1996 and 1998. Also in 1998, Madness returned to America for their first tour there since 1984. The live album \"Universal Madness\" was recorded at the Universal Amphitheatre in L.A. and released the following year. In 1999, Madness released their first studio album since 1986, entitled \"Wonderful\". The album reached number 17 in the UK Albums Chart, and the lead single, \"Lovestruck\", gave the band their first new top 10 hit in the UK since 1983. Neither of the two subsequent singles from the album, \"Johnny the Horse\" and \"Drip Fed Fred\" (featuring Ian Dury on vocals), entered the top 40 of the UK chart.\nFrom 28 October 2002 to 16 August 2003, a musical based on Madness songs, \"Our House\", ran at the Cambridge Theatre in London. Madness played a role in the executive production of the show, and Suggs played a role in the production for a period, playing the central character's father. It won an Olivier Award for best new musical of 2003, and the performance was released on DVD on 1 November 2004. There was also a previous musical based on Madness songs, \"One Step Beyond!\", written by Alan Gilbey. The musical had a brief run at the Theatre Royal Stratford East in 1993 and a run at Putney Arts Theatre, London in 2012.\n2004\u20132010: The Dangermen and \"The Liberty of Norton Folgate\".\nIn 2004, the band played a series of low-key concerts as the Dangermen, performing covers of classic reggae and ska songs. A lot of the songs were those played by the band when they were first forming, and the band performed the songs as a celebration of their 25th anniversary.\nThis led to the release of the cover album \"The Dangermen Sessions Vol. 1\" in August 2005 by V2 Records. During the sessions which produced the album, in mid-2005, guitarist Chris Foreman announced his departure, citing \"the petty, time consuming bollocks that goes on in the band\" as his reason for leaving. The band completed the album without him, and on release, it peaked at no. 11 in the UK Albums Chart, which was the band's highest studio album chart position in 21 years. Although two singles were released, neither was a major success in the UK. The more successful of the two, \"Shame &amp; Scandal\", reached number 38, but was more successful in France where it peaked at number 12. \"Girl Why Don't You\" did not chart and the band left the V2 record label shortly after. At this time, Kevin Burdette joined as the band's guitarist for live appearances and also appeared in the videos for both \"Sorry\" and \"NW5\" in early 2007.\nThe six remaining original members of Madness began working on their first original studio album in seven years. In March 2007, the non-LP single \"Sorry\" was released on the band's own record label Lucky 7 Records, peaking in the UK charts at number 23. The single included a version featuring UK hip hop artists Sway DaSafo and Baby Blue.\nThe new Madness song \"NW5\" (then still titled \"NW5 (I Would Give You Everything)\") and a re-recorded version of \"It Must Be Love\" were featured in the German film \"Neues vom Wixxer\". The two songs were released in Germany as a double A-side, and both of them were turned into music videos, which\u00a0\u2013 besides members of the film's cast\u00a0\u2013 featured Suggs, Chas Smash, Woody and stand-in guitarist Burdette. A re-recorded version of \"NW5\" was released as a single on 14 January 2008 in the UK reaching no. 24\u00a0\u2013 this recording featured original Madness guitarist Chris Foreman, who had rejoined the band in time for the 2006 Christmas tour but had not participated in the original recording of the song.\nIn June 2008, Madness played the majority of their new studio album \"The Liberty of Norton Folgate\" at London's Hackney Empire for three nights. The Hackney Empire performances were recorded and sold to fans on USB wristbands as they left the show. Madness played two dates in December 2008, firstly in Manchester on 18 December, and secondly a return gig to The O2 in London on the 19th.\nIn December 2008 the band also announced that for their thirtieth anniversary in 2009, they would be staging a fifth Madstock Festival in London's Victoria Park on 17 July, 11 years after the last Madstock concert. It was originally rumoured that the newly reformed the Specials would make an appearance after finishing their reunion tour. However, this did not occur, although original Specials keyboardist Jerry Dammers\u00a0\u2013 who was not part of the reunion line-up\u00a0\u2013 was announced as a support act with the Spatial AKA Orchestra shortly before the festival. Dammers supported Madness again during their 2009 Christmas tour when he opened each night with a DJ set.\nThrough late March and early April 2009, the band played a series of festival and separate headlining dates across Australia. The lead-up single from their latest studio album, titled \"Dust Devil\", was released on 11 May on Lucky 7 Records. Actors Alfie Allen and Jaime Winstone co-starred in the music video. The single charted at No.\u00a064 on the UK Singles Chart and at No.\u00a01 on the UK Independent charts on 17 May 2009.\nThe new studio album, entitled \"The Liberty of Norton Folgate\", was released a week later, on 18 May 2009. It charted at No.\u00a05 in the UK Albums Chart. The band continued to play various festivals, including Pinkpop, Splendour, and Glastonbury. On 27 September 2009, the band also played a free concert on a closed-off Regent Street in association with Absolute Radio.\nAs in previous years, the band embarked on a Christmas tour of the UK (also playing one concert in Dublin), playing at various medium-sized venues. Mark Bedford took a break from the band and was replaced by Graham Bush for the tour.\nSome members of the band appeared in Catherine Tate's \"Nan's Christmas Carol\". They first posed as carol singers, then played \"Baggy Trousers\" over the credits. On 18 January 2010, Madness released a fourth single, \"Forever Young\", from \"The Liberty of Norton Folgate\". The single failed to chart.\nDuring an interview with RT\u00c9 2fm radio host Dave Fanning on 24 May 2010, drummer Daniel Woodgate stated that the members of the band were in the final stages of preparing songs for the follow-up to \"The Liberty of Norton Folgate\". The band hoped to be able to start recording the album later on in 2010.\nIn September 2010, Madness were awarded the Idol Award at the Q Awards in London. Guitarist Chris Foreman stated in his acceptance speech that Madness were recording a new album.\nMadness toured the UK throughout November and December 2010 with their final show at London's Earl's Court, where they played a new song from their upcoming album. However, two concerts, in Hull and Sheffield, were cancelled due to heavy snowfall, although they were later rescheduled for 5 and 6 February 2011 respectively.\n2011\u20132015: \"Oui Oui, Si Si, Ja Ja, Da Da\".\nIn June 2011, the band performed at Meltdown Festival at the Royal Festival Hall, curated by inspiration Ray Davies of the Kinks, who also introduced the band on stage. The concert served as the premiere of three new songs\u00a0\u2013 \"1978\", \"Can't Keep a Good Thing Down\" and \"Death of a Rude Boy\".\nThe summer of 2012 saw two notable performances. In June, the band performed at the Queen's Diamond Jubilee concert at Buckingham Palace. The band performed \"Our House\" and \"It Must Be Love\" from the roof of the palace with accompanying animations projected onto the palace front. In August, the band was the first to perform at the closing ceremony of the London Olympic Games. Departed bassist Bedford rejoined the band for both performances. In August 2012, Madness released \"Death of a Rude Boy\" as a free teaser track from their new studio album. Madness' tenth studio album \"Oui Oui, Si Si, Ja Ja, Da Da\" was released on 29 October 2012 and entered the UK Albums Chart at no.10. In January 2013 the album re-entered the chart at no. 16 on the back of the airplay success of the single \"Never Knew Your Name\".\nFrom the start of 2013, Bedford increased his performances with the band building to his full-time return to the group, which meant a close to the four years Graham Bush had spent with the band.\nOn 22 March 2013, the band performed outside the BBC Television Centre in a live broadcast for BBC Four. This was followed by \"Goodbye Television Centre\", a celebration of 50 years of the television centre, marking the closure of the building and the last show to be broadcast from it. Following that the band was the closing act to the new year celebration of 2014 in Dublin, Ireland.\nOn 22 March 2014, Suggs confirmed that Madness were writing a new studio album which he stated \"the band plan to record in the summer and release by the end of 2014\".\nIn October 2014, Cathal Smyth, aka Chas Smash, announced that he had left Madness to pursue a solo career. His debut solo studio album, \"A Comfortable Man\", was released on 11 May 2015 by Phoenix Rising Recording Co. Although Smyth's departure was characterized by him and the band at the time as a 'break' to concentrate on his solo career and not necessarily a permanent departure, Smyth has not rejoined Madness in the years since the break was announced. When asked on the matter in 2016, Suggs said \"This band is a very complicated entity. It\u2019s a dysfunctional family, and within that you\u2019re going to get dysfunctionality. But nothing is unresolvable, and the seven of us have always had tolerance and love for each other.\"\n2016\u20132022: \"Can't Touch Us Now\".\nThe band announced their new studio album \"Can't Touch Us Now\" in May 2016. In support of the album, the band played the Pyramid Stage at the Glastonbury Festival in June. Lead single \"Mr. Apples\" was accompanied by a scripted video (first one since 2009) and A-listed by BBC Radio 2. The song \"Herbert\" was released as a taster accompanied by an animation video. Further singles \"Can't Touch Us Now\" and \"Another Version of Me\" were also playlisted by BBC Radio 2. The album itself entered the UK Albums Chart at number 5 in November 2016. The band finished the year on a UK arena tour in December.\nThroughout 2017, the band played at several festivals and concerts worldwide including mainland Europe, Asia, and Australia. In April their first Australian gig at the Fremantle Arts Centre in Western Australia sold out, necessitating a second gig the following night. In August, the band hosted their own \"House of Common Festival\" for the second year on Clapham Common. This was the band's only London gig of the year.\nIn 2018, the band embarked on a summer tour of stately homes in the UK before a Christmas arena tour in December. Madness performed on New Year's Eve through to New Year's Day at \"Madness Rocks Big Ben Live\". The entire performance was shown on BBC One before and after that year's fireworks.\nIn March 2019, Madness announced the release of their group autobiography, \"Before We Was We: Madness by Madness\", to be released on hardback that October. The book includes commentary from all seven members telling the story of their early days and childhoods up until their breakthrough as a group. In May 2021, the book was adapted as a three-part TV documentary on AMC, with the first part free on BT's YouTube channel.\nThe band celebrated 40 years since their debut studio album release with several special live appearances throughout 2019. The band performed at their own \"House of Common\" festival in August and held a special concert with a full orchestra at Kenwood House. In November they played at Electric Ballroom in Camden; forty years to the day since one of their first appearances there. The performance was broadcast on Sky Arts in 2020. The band saw the year out with three concerts at The Roundhouse.\nIn December 2019, the band released a new single, \"Bullingdon Boys (Don't Get Bullied by the Bully Boys)\". The \"NME\" described the song as a 'barbed swipe at Boris Johnson and his Eton cohorts'. In March 2020, Madness were honoured on the Camden 'Music Walk Of Fame' with a stone unveiling, which saw members Suggs, Mike Barson, Mark Bedford, Dan Woodgate, as well as former member Cathal Smyth, in attendance.\nIn April 2021, following some special videos created during the COVID-19 pandemic, Madness announced their first global live stream, titled \"The Get Up!\", to be held the next month. It featured live music and comedy from the group and Charlie Higson, pre-recorded at the London Palladium. During the live stream, the band was accompanied by Roland Gift of Fine Young Cannibals and Paul Weller of the Jam and had a cameo by Queen Elizabeth II, played by Mike Barson. They announced their 2021 tour, The Ladykillers Tour, the next day, to be held alongside Squeeze.\n2023\u2013present: \"Theatre of the Absurd Presents C'est la Vie\".\nIn September 2023, the band announced their thirteenth studio album \"Theatre of the Absurd Presents C'est la Vie\", which was released on 17 November 2023. It was followed by a UK tour with the Lightning Seeds, including stops in Liverpool, Manchester and London.\nThe album was preceded by the single \"C'est La Vie\" and \"Baby Burglar\", a song inspired by the antics of band members in their youth, including breaking into singer-songwriter Lynsey de Paul's house. A new video featured these two singles plus a performances of \"Round We Go\".\nIt would become Madness' first ever number one studio album in the UK. The album also made the album charts in Ireland, Germany and The Netherlands.\nOn 11 December a full version of the \"C'est La Vie\" video was released. Follow by \"Baby Burglar\" on 23 January 2024.\nIn February it was announced that \"Round We Go\" would be released as the official new single. A full video was released on 6 February, followed by a single edit on February 16. On February 23 the song was added to BBC Radio 2's New Music Playlist.\nIn April the enhanced version of \"Theatre Of The Absurd Presents C'est La Vie\" was announced, featuring 5 new songs and 7 unreleased live songs from the December tour, including the band's version of The Specials's \"Friday Night Saturday Morning\". \"No Reason\" \u2013 written by Suggs \u2013 was made available directly.\nOn 17 May \u2013 just before the band would go on their first US tour in 12 years \u2013 \"Hour Of Need\" was released as a single and went straight to the BBC Radio 2 playlist. The release was accompanied by the announcement of the 'Hour Of Need' Award, for which fans could honour an unsung hero in their lives.\nRecently, in August 2025, guitarist Chris Foreman revealed that he had been diagnosed with myeloma, a treatable but incurable form of blood cancer. He first experienced symptoms earlier that year, including severe pain in his upper back and shoulders, which led to an MRI scan and the discovery of a spinal tumour. Following radiotherapy and a spinal tap procedure, Foreman stated that his kidney function\u2014initially at 14%\u2014had \"greatly improved.\" He stated that despite recent recovery, he would not be able to participate in the band's upcoming tours for the rest of the year, but expressed hope of achieving remission and returning to performing in 2026.\nSpinoff acts.\nThe Fink Brothers.\nThe Fink Brothers were a short-lived alter ego created by Madness members Suggs and Chas Smash, working under the aliases Angel and Ratty Fink, using characters from the science fiction comic \"2000 AD\".\nThe Madness.\nThe Madness was a line-up of Madness without bassist Mark Bedford, drummer Daniel Woodgate and keyboardist Mike Barson, active between 1988 and 1989. Formed by Suggs, Chas Smash, Lee Thompson and Chris Foreman in 1988, they distinguished this line-up from the previous Madness line-up only by adding the word \"The\" to the band's name. The band had held a competition to find a new name on BBC Radio 1. They decided on 'The Wasp Factory' after the Iain Banks novel of the same name, but that name had already been taken by another band.\nThe album is notable for featuring guest performers including the Specials' Jerry Dammers, early Madness member John Hasler and Earl Falconer of UB40. It is also the first studio album produced by the band themselves under the alias 'The Three Eyes'. When they first regrouped in early 1987, they also went to meet Barson in Amsterdam to ask if he wanted to come back, but he refused.\n\"The Guinness Book of British Hit Singles\" and many online discographies consider this band to be the same as \"Madness\". Several of the songs on the album (\"4BF\", \"Be Good Boy\", \"Gabriels Horn\", \"In Wonder\") were reworked songs from the cancelled 1986 Madness studio album and had been performed live or demoed in 1986 before the band broke up. Lee Thompson and Chris Foreman also alluded to this view on their sole studio album \"Crunch!\" (1990), which was dedicated to \"the good ship Madness and all who sailed in her (1979 to 1989)\".\nThe Nutty Boys.\nThe Nutty Boys were Lee Thompson and Chris Foreman of Madness. The name \"The Nutty Boys\" was actually the name of their studio album, while the new band was called \"Crunch!\". The posters for their first concert mistakenly listed the band as \"The Nutty Boys\" instead of \"Crunch!\", and the name stuck. While the members of the band Madness were nicknamed \"The Nutty Boys\" as a whole, this section lists only the work released by Thompson and Foreman under \"The Nutty Boys\" name in the early 1990s.\nCrunch!\nCrunch! were also Lee Thompson and Chris Foreman. At this point, the band formally corrected the earlier mistake and officially adopted their original name of \"Crunch\".\nThe Lee Thompson Ska Orchestra.\nThe Lee Thompson Ska Orchestra was formed in 2011 by Thompson, with Mark Bedford on bass and a revolving line-up of musicians, initially playing ska covers before writing original material for their second album.\nCollaborations.\nMadness collaborated with Elvis Costello in 1983 on a version of their song \"Tomorrow's (Just Another Day)\". It was released as a bonus track to the 12\" copy of the single. In later years, Barson stated that Costello's \"Watching the Detectives\" was the main influence on the song \"My Girl\". They were also asked to participate in Live Aid, but declined as they were in a period of turmoil at the time and were very busy rehearsing songs for \"Mad Not Mad\". However, Suggs, Carl, and Lee did participate in Fashion Aid instead.\nFor \"Wonderful\" in 1999, Ian Dury laid down vocals on the track \"Drip Fed Fred\" which was released as the last single from the album. It was Dury's last recording before his death. Ill health prevented Dury from actively promoting the single, although he did appear on the National Lottery Show, for a later performance on \"TFI Friday\", the song was reworked to incorporate Phill Jupitus on vocals. Live, Madness have collaborated with artists including UB40 and Prince Buster, notably at their first Madstock concert. They have also played live frequently with members of the other 2 Tone bands including the Specials. In May 2008, Suggs and Carl performed live with Pet Shop Boys at London's Heaven collaborating on a new arrangement of \"My Girl\", as part of a tribute evening to their former minder Dainton 'The Bear' Connell, called \"Can You Bear It?\". A few days afterwards, Pet Shop Boys posted their own version of the track on their official website.\nIn late 2010, the band collaborated in the \"Cage Against the Machine\" project, in which numerous artists performed John Cage's \"4\u203233\u2033\" for a charity single intended to prevent the winner of \"The X Factor\" claiming the Christmas Number 1. The title refers to the previous year's successful campaign to get Rage Against the Machine's \"Killing in the Name\" to chart above \"X Factor\" winner Joe McElderry.\nLyrical themes.\nFrequent themes in Madness' songs included childhood memories (e.g., \"Baggy Trousers\", and \"Our House\") and petty crime (e.g., \"Shut Up\", and \"Deceives the Eye\"). Although Madness were seen by some as somewhat of a humorous band with catchy, bouncy songs, many of their songs took a darker tone (such as the singles \"Grey Day\" and \"Tomorrow's (Just Another Day)\") and they sometimes tackled what were, at the time, controversial issues in their lyrics. \"Embarrassment\" (from the \"Absolutely\" album) was written by Lee Thompson, and reflected the unfolding turmoil following the news that his teenage sister had become pregnant and was carrying a black man's child. Madness discussed animal testing in the song \"Tomorrow's Dream\". The band criticised the National Health Service (NHS) in \"Mrs. Hutchinson\", which told the story of a woman who, after several misdiagnoses and mistreatment, became terminally ill. The story was based on the experiences of Mike Barson's mother. Madness' final single prior to disbanding, \"(Waiting For) The Ghost Train\", commented on apartheid in South Africa.\nAwards.\nThe band's first notable musical award came in 1983 when Chris Foreman and Cathal Smyth won an Ivor Novello Award for \"Best Song\" for the international hit \"Our House\". Madness received another Ivor Novello Award 17 years later for an \"Outstanding Song Collection\". In 2005, they were awarded the Mojo \"Hall of Fame\" Award, notably for being \"an artist's artist\". In 2007, a campaign took place by fans of Madness for the band to be awarded a Brit Award. Many fans and critics feel they have been overlooked over their past 30 years in the music industry. In July 2009, Madness were awarded the 'Silver Clef' Icon Award. In September 2010, Madness were awarded the 'Idol Award' at the 2010 Q Awards in London.\nMembers.\nMembers of the classic line-up are listed in bold.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTouring members and regular guests\nMembers of North London Invaders only (band changed name to \"Madness\" in 1979)\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40234", "revid": "35122184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40234", "title": "Magnetic mirror", "text": "Type of nuclear fusion reactor\nA magnetic mirror, also known as a magnetic trap or sometimes as a pyrotron, is a type of magnetic confinement fusion device used in fusion power to trap high temperature plasma using magnetic fields. The mirror was one of the earliest major approaches to fusion power, along with the stellarator and z-pinch machines.\nIn a classic magnetic mirror, a configuration of electromagnets is used to create an area with an increasing density of magnetic field lines at either end of a confinement volume. Particles approaching the ends experience an increasing force that eventually causes them to reverse direction and return to the confinement area. This mirror effect will occur only for particles within a limited range of velocities and angles of approach, while those outside the limits will escape, making mirrors inherently \"leaky\".\nAn analysis of early fusion devices by Edward Teller pointed out that the basic mirror concept is inherently unstable. In 1960, Soviet researchers introduced a new \"minimum-B\" configuration to address this, which was then modified by UK researchers into the \"baseball coil\" and by the US to \"yin-yang magnet\" layout. Each of these introductions led to further increases in performance, damping out various instabilities, but requiring ever-larger magnet systems. The tandem mirror concept, developed in the US and Russia at about the same time, offered a way to make energy-positive machines without requiring enormous magnets and power input.\nBy the late 1970s, many of the design problems were considered solved, and Lawrence Livermore Laboratory began the design of the Mirror Fusion Test Facility (MFTF) based on these concepts. The machine was completed in 1986, but by this time, experiments on the smaller Tandem Mirror Experiment revealed new problems. In a round of budget cuts, MFTF was mothballed, and eventually scrapped. A fusion reactor concept called the Bumpy torus made use of a series of magnetic mirrors joined in a ring. It was investigated at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory until 1986. The mirror approach has since seen less development, in favor of the tokamak, but mirror research continues today in countries like Japan and Russia.\nHistory.\nEarly work.\nThe concept of magnetic-mirror plasma confinement was proposed in the early-1950s independently by Gersh Budker at the Kurchatov Institute, Russia and Richard F. Post at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in the US.\nWith the formation of Project Sherwood in 1951, Post began the development of a small device to test the mirror configuration. This consisted of a linear pyrex tube with magnets around the outside. The magnets were arranged in two sets, one set of small magnets spaced evenly along the length of the tube, and another pair of much larger magnets at either end. In 1952 they were able to demonstrate that plasma within the tube was confined for much longer times when the mirror magnets at the end were turned on. At the time, he referred to this device as the \"pyrotron\", but this name did not catch on.\nInstabilities.\nIn a now-famous talk on fusion in 1954, Edward Teller noted that any device with convex magnetic field lines would likely be unstable, a problem today known as the flute instability. The mirror has precisely such a configuration; the magnetic field was highly convex at the ends where the field strength increased. This led to serious concern by Post, but over the next year, his team could find no sign of these problems. In October 1955 he went so far as to state that \"it is now becoming clear that in the case of the mirror machine at least these calculations do not apply in detail.\"\nIn Russia, the first small-scale mirror (\"probkotron\") was built in 1959 at the Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics in Novosibirsk, Russia. They immediately saw the problem Teller had warned about. This led to something of a mystery, as the US teams under Post continued to lack any evidence of such problems. In 1960, Post and Marshall Rosenbluth published a report \"providing evidence for the existence of a stability confined plasma... where the simplest hydromagnetic theory predicts instability.\"\nAt a meeting on plasma physics in Saltzberg in 1961, the Soviet delegation presented considerable data showing the instability, while the US teams continued to show none. An offhand question by Lev Artsimovich settled the matter; when he asked if the charts being produced from the instruments in the US machines were adjusted for a well-known delay in the output of the detectors being used, it suddenly became clear that the apparent 1\u00a0ms stability was, in fact, a 1\u00a0ms delay in the measurements. Artsimovich went so far as to claim \"we now do not have a single experimental fact indicating long and stable confinement of plasma with hot ions within a simple magnetic mirror geometry.\"\nNew geometries.\nThe issue of the potential instabilities had been considered in the field for some time and a number of possible solutions had been introduced. These generally worked by changing the shape of the magnetic field so it was concave everywhere, the so-called \"minimum-B\" configuration.\nAt the same 1961 meeting, Mikhail Ioffe introduced data from a minimum-B experiment. His design used a series of six additional current-carrying bars in the interior of an otherwise typical mirror to bend the plasma into the shape of a twisted bow-tie to produce a minimum-B configuration. They demonstrated that this greatly improved the confinement times to the order of milliseconds. Today this arrangement is known as \"Ioffe bars\".\nA group at the Culham Centre for Fusion Energy noted that Ioffe's arrangement could be improved by combining the original rings and the bars into a single new arrangement similar to the seam on a tennis ball. This concept was picked up in the US where it was renamed after the stitching on a baseball. These \"baseball coils\" had the great advantage that they left the internal volume of the reactor open, allowing easy access for diagnostic instruments. On the downside, the size of the magnet in comparison to the volume of plasma was inconvenient and required very powerful magnets. Post later introduced a further improvement, the \"yin-yang coils\", which used two C-shaped magnets to produce the same field configuration, but in a smaller volume.\nIn the US, major changes to the fusion program were underway. Robert Hirsch and his assistant Stephen O. Dean were excited by the huge performance advance seen in the Soviet tokamaks, which suggested power production was now a real possibility. Hirsch began to change the program from one he derided as a series of uncoordinated science experiments into a planned effort to ultimately reach breakeven. As part of this change, he began to demand that the current systems demonstrate real progress or they would be cancelled. The bumpy torus, levitron and Astron were all abandoned, not without a fight.\nDean met with Livermore's team and made it clear that Astron would likely be cut, and mirrors had to improve or face cutting as well, which would have left the lab with no major fusion projects. In December 1972, Dean met with the mirror team and made a series of demands; their systems would have to demonstrate an nT value of 1012, compared to the current best number on 2XII of 8x109. After considerable concern from the researchers that this would be impossible, Dean backed off to 1011 being demonstrated by the end of 1975.\nDCLC.\nAlthough 2XII was nowhere near the level needed by Dean's demands, it was nevertheless extremely successful in demonstrating that the yin-yang arrangement was workable and suppressed the major instabilities seen in earlier mirrors. But as experiments continued through 1973, the results were not improving as expected. Plans emerged to brute-force the performance through the addition of neutral-beam injection to quickly raise the temperature to reach Dean's conditions. The result was 2XIIB, the B for \"beams\".\nWhile 2XIIB was being set up, in November 1974, Fowler received a letter from Ioffe containing a series of photographs of oscilloscope traces with no other explanation. Fowler realized they demonstrated that injecting warm plasma during the run improved confinement. This appeared to be due to a long-expected but so-far unseen instability known as \"drift-cyclotron loss-cone\", or DCLC. Ioffe's photographs demonstrated that DCLC was being seen in Soviet reactors and that warm plasma appeared to stabilize it.\n2XIIB reactor started real experiments in 1975, and significant DCLC was immediately seen. Annoyingly, the effect grew stronger as they improved the operating conditions with better vacuum and cleaning of the interior. Fowler recognized the performance was identical to that of Ioffe's photographs, and 2XIIB was modified to inject warm plasma during the center of the run. When the results were seen, they were described as \"sunlight was breaking through the clouds and there was the chance that everything would be all right.\"\nQ-enhancement and tandem mirrors.\nIn July 1975, the 2XIIB team presented their results for nT at 7x1010, an order of magnitude better than 2XII and close enough to Dean's requirements. By this time, the Princeton Large Torus had come online and was setting record after record, prompting Hirsch to begin planning for even larger machines for the early 1980s with the explicit goal of hitting breakeven, or \"Q\"=1. This became known as the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR), whose goal was to run on deuterium-tritium fuel and reach \"Q\"=1, while future machines would be \"Q\"&gt;10.\nWith the latest results on 2XIIB, it appeared that a larger yin-yang design would also improve performance. However, calculations showed it would only reach \"Q\"=0.03. Even the most developed versions of the basic concept, with leakage at the absolute lower limit allowed by theory, could only reach \"Q\"=1.2. This made these designs largely useless for power production, and Hirsch demanded that this be improved if the program were to continue. This problem became known as \"Q-enhancement\".\nIn March 1976, the Livermore team decided to organize a working group on the topic of Q-enhancement at the October 1976 international fusion meeting in Germany. Over the July 4th weekend, Fowler and Post came up with the idea of the tandem mirror, a system consisting of two mirrors at either end of a large chamber that held large amounts fusion fuel at lower magnetic pressure. They returned to LLNL on Monday to find the idea had been developed independently by a staff physicist, Grant Logan. They brought further developed versions of these ideas to Germany to find a Soviet researcher proposing exactly the same solution.\nUpon their return from the meeting, Dean met with the team and decided to shut down the Baseball II system and direct its funding to a tandem mirror project. This emerged as the Tandem Mirror Experiment, or TMX. The final design was presented and approved in January 1977. Construction of what was then the largest experiment at Livermore was completed by October 1978. By July 1979, experiments were demonstrating that TMX was operating as expected.\nThermal barriers and MFTF.\nEven before the tandem mirror concept emerged, what was by this time the Department of Energy had agreed to fund the construction of a much larger mirror known as the Mirror Fusion Test Facility (MFTF). At the time, the plan for MFTF was to simply be the largest yin-yang magnet anyone could figure out how to build. With the success of the TMX concept, the design was modified to become MFTF-B, using two of the largest yin-yang magnets anyone could figure out how to build in an enormous tandem configuration. The goal was to meet \"Q\"=5. Through late 1978 when the teams began to actually consider the steps in scaling up the TMX, it became clear that it simply would not hit the required goals. In January 1979, Fowler stopped the work, stating that some improvement would have to be found.\nDuring experiments on the TMX, it was found to everyone's surprise that the law introduced by Lyman Spitzer in the 1950s was not holding; in TMX at least, electrons on any single magnetic line were found to be in a wide variety of speeds, which was entirely unexpected. Further work by John Clauser demonstrated that this was due to the warm plasma injection used to suppress DCLC. Logan took these results and used them to come up with an entirely new way to confine the plasma; with the careful arrangement of these electrons, one could produce a region with a large number of \"cool\" electrons that would attract the positively charged ions. Dave Baldwin then demonstrated this could be enhanced through the neutral beams. Fowler referred to the result as a \"thermal barrier\", as the hotter fuel was repelled from these regions. It appeared it could maintain confinement using much less energy than the pure TMX concept.\nThis result suggested that MFTF would not just meet an arbitrary \"Q\"=5, but make it a real competitor to the tokamaks, which were promising much higher \"Q\" values. Fowler began the design of another version of MFTF, still called MFTF-B, based on the thermal barrier concept. the lab decided they should begin construction, lacking any experimental evidence that the concept worked, in order to get a competitive machine out around the same time as TFTR. While this huge machine was being built, TMX would be modified to test the concept.\nOn 28 January 1980, Fowler and his team presented their results to the DOE. Demonstrating that TMX had worked, and armed with additional data from the Soviets as well as computer simulations, they presented a plan to begin construction on a $226 million MFTF while upgrading TMX to add the thermal barriers in the $14 million TMX-U. The proposal was accepted and construction on both systems began, with TMX shutting down in September 1980 for conversion.\nTMX-U fails, MFTF mothballed.\nTMX-U began experiments in July 1982, by which time parts of Boeing 747-sized MFTF were being installed at Building 431. However, as they attempted to raise the density of the plasma to values that would be needed for MFTF, they found that plasma escaping from the central tank overwhelmed the thermal barriers. There was no obvious reason to believe the same would not occur on the MFTF. If the rates seen in TMX-U were typical, there was no way MFTF would come remotely close to its \"Q\" goals.\nConstruction on MFTF, already budgeted, continued and the system was declared officially complete on 21 February 1986, at a final price of $372 million. While thanking the team for their contributions in building the system, the new director of the DOE, John Clarke, also announced that there would be no funding to run it. Clarke later lamented that the decision to cancel the project was very difficult, \"It would have been so much easier if I had a technical failure to point to.\"\nIt sat unused for a year on the chance that operational funding would be provided. It never was. The machine was scrapped in 1987. The DOE also cut funding for most other mirror programs.\n1986-.\nMagnetic mirror research continued in Russia. One example is the Gas Dynamic Trap, an experimental fusion machine used at the Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics in Akademgorodok (Academic Town) in Novosibirsk (New Siberia), Russia. This machine achieved a 0.6 beta ratio for 5\u2a0910\u22123 seconds, at a low temperature of 1\u00a0keV. Technical challenges included maintaining the non-Maxwellian velocity distribution. This meant that instead of many high energy ions hitting one another, the ion energy diffused into a bell curve. The ions then thermalized, leaving most of the material too cold to fuse. Collisions scattered the charged particles so much that they could not be contained. Lastly, velocity space instabilities contributed to the escape of the plasma.\nIn September 2022, University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison researchers incorporated a spin-off startup company named \"Realta Fusion\" to develop and commercialize tandem mirror reactors to supply industrial process heat with smaller power plants. Their stated goal is a \"lowest capital, least complex path\" to fusion energy. In May 2023, United States Department of Energy granted the company additional funding.\nMagnetic mirrors play an important role in other types of magnetic fusion energy devices such as tokamaks, where the toroidal magnetic field is stronger on the inboard side than on the outboard side. The resulting effects are \"neoclassical\". Magnetic mirrors also occur in nature. Electrons and ions in the magnetosphere, for example, will bounce back and forth between the stronger fields at the poles, leading to the Van Allen radiation belts.\nCentrifugal magnetic mirrors use supersonic rotation to stabilize the mirrors, which helps heat plasma to fusion temperatures.\ncould enable commercial nuclear fusion reactors on Earth and are promising for space propulsion. One concept could achieve 1 to 10 newtons of thrust with 10,000 to 30000 specific impulse, some 30-100x more fuel efficient than chemical propulsion, dramatically decreasing journey times.\nMathematical derivation.\nThe mirror effect can be shown mathematically. Assume adiabatic invariance of the magnetic moment, i.e. that the particle's magnetic moment and total energy do not change. Adiabatic invariance is lost when a particle occupies a null point or zone of no magnetic field. The magnetic moment can be expressed as:\nformula_1\nIt is assumed that \u03bc will remain constant while the particle moves into the denser magnetic field. Mathematically, for this to happen the velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field formula_2 must also rise. Meanwhile the total energy of the particle formula_3 can be expressed as:\nformula_4\nIn regions with no electric field, if the total energy remains constant then the velocity parallel to the magnetic field must drop. If it can go negative then there is a motion repelling the particle from the dense fields.\nMirror ratios.\nMagnetic mirrors themselves have a mirror ratio this is expressed mathematically as:\nformula_5\nAt the same time, particles within the mirror have a pitch angle. This is the angle between the particles' velocity vector and the magnetic field vector. Surprisingly, the particles with the small pitch angle can escape the mirror. These particles are said to be in the loss cone. The reflected particles meet the following criteria:\nformula_6\nWhere formula_7 is the particle velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field and formula_8 is particle velocity parallel to the magnetic field.\nThis result was surprising because it was expected that heavier and faster particles, or those with less electric charge, would be harder to reflect. It was also expected that a smaller magnetic field would reflect fewer particles. However, the gyroradius in those circumstances is also larger, so that the radial component of the magnetic field seen by the particle is also larger. It is true that the minimum volume and magnetic energy is larger for the case of fast particles and weak fields, but the mirror ratio required remains the same.\nAdiabatic invariance.\nThe properties of magnetic mirrors can be derived using the adiabatic invariance of magnetic flux under changes in magnetic field strength. As the field gets stronger, the velocity increases proportionally to the square root of B, and the kinetic energy is proportional to B. This can be thought of as an effective potential binding the particle.\nMagnetic bottles.\nA magnetic bottle is two magnetic mirrors placed close together. For example, two parallel coils separated by a small distance, carrying the same current in the same direction will produce a magnetic bottle between them. Unlike the full mirror machine which typically had many large rings of current surrounding the middle of the magnetic field, the bottle typically has just two rings of current. Particles near either end of the bottle experience a magnetic force towards the center of the region; particles with appropriate speeds spiral repeatedly from one end of the region to the other and back. Magnetic bottles can be used to temporarily trap charged particles. It is easier to trap electrons than ions, because electrons are so much lighter. This technique is used to confine the high energy of plasma in fusion experiments.\nThe Earth's non-uniform magnetic field traps charged particles coming from the Sun in doughnut shaped regions around the Earth called the \"Van Allen radiation belts\", which were discovered in 1958 using data obtained by instruments aboard the Explorer 1 satellite.\nBiconic cusps.\nIf one of the poles in the magnetic bottle is reversed, it becomes a biconic cusp, which can also hold charged particles. Biconic cusps were first studied by Harold Grad at the Courant Institute, studies reveal the presence of different types of particles inside a biconic cusp. The most financed cusp approach is the Compact Fusion Reactor which was supported by Lockheed-Martin starting in 2007.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40236", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40236", "title": "Emma of Normandy", "text": "11th-century Queen of England, Denmark, and Norway\nEmma of Normandy (referred to as \u00c6lfgifu in royal documents; c.\u2009984 \u2013 6 March 1052) was a Norman-born noblewoman who became the English, Danish, and Norwegian Queen through her marriages to the Anglo-Saxon King \u00c6thelred the Unready and the Danish King Cnut the Great. A daughter of the Norman ruler Richard the Fearless and Gunnor, she was Queen of England during her marriage to King \u00c6thelred from 1002 to 1016, except during a brief interruption in 1013\u201314 when the Danish King Sweyn Forkbeard occupied the English throne. \u00c6thelred died in 1016, and Emma married Sweyn's son Cnut. As Cnut's wife, she was Queen of England from their marriage in 1017, Queen of Denmark from 1018, and Queen of Norway from 1028 until Cnut died in 1035.\nAfter Cnut's death, Emma continued to participate in politics during the reigns of her sons by each husband, Harthacnut and Edward the Confessor. In 1035 when her second husband Cnut died and was succeeded by their son Harthacnut, who was in Denmark at the time, Emma was designated to act as his regent until his return, which she did in rivalry with Harold Harefoot. Emma is the central figure within the \"Encomium Emmae Reginae\", a critical source for the history of early-11th-century English politics. As Catherine Karkov notes, Emma is one of the most visually represented early medieval queens.\nMarriage to \u00c6thelred II.\nIn an attempt to pacify Normandy, King \u00c6thelred of England married Emma in 1002. Similarly Richard II, Duke of Normandy, Emma's brother, hoped to improve relations with the English in the wake of recent conflict and a failed kidnapping attempt against him by \u00c6thelred. Viking raids on England were often based in Normandy in the late 10th century, and for \u00c6thelred this marriage was intended to unite against the Viking threat. Upon their marriage, Emma was given the Anglo-Saxon name of \u00c6lfgifu, which was used for formal and official matters, and became Queen of England. She received properties of her own in Winchester, Rutland, Devonshire, Suffolk and Oxfordshire, as well as the city of Exeter.\n\u00c6thelred and Emma had two sons, Edward the Confessor and Alfred \u00c6theling, and a daughter, Goda of England (or Godgifu).\nWhen King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark invaded and conquered England in 1013, Emma and her children were sent to Normandy, where \u00c6thelred soon joined them. They returned to England after Sweyn died in 1014.\nEmma and \u00c6thelred's marriage ended with \u00c6thelred's death in London in 1016. \u00c6thelred's oldest son from his first marriage, \u00c6thelstan \u00c6theling, had been heir apparent until his death in June 1014. Emma's sons had been ranked after all of the sons from \u00c6thelred's first wife, the eldest surviving of whom was Edmund Ironside. Emma attempted to get her older son, Edward, recognized as heir. Although this movement was supported by \u00c6thelred's chief advisor, Eadric Streona, it was opposed by Edmund Ironside, \u00c6thelred's third-oldest son, and his allies, who eventually revolted against his father.\nIn 1015 Cnut the Great, the son of Sweyn Forkbeard, invaded England. He was held out of London until the deaths in 1016 of \u00c6thelred (April) and Edmund (November). Queen Emma attempted to maintain Anglo-Saxon control of London until her marriage to Cnut was arranged. Some scholars believe that the marriage saved her sons' lives, as Cnut tried to rid himself of rival claimants, but spared their lives.\nMarriage to Cnut.\nCnut gained control of most of England after he defeated Edmund Ironside on 18 October 1016, at the Battle of Assandun, after which they agreed to divide the kingdom, Edmund taking Wessex and Cnut the rest of the country. Edmund died shortly afterwards on 30 November, and Cnut became the king of all England. At the time of their marriage in 1017, Emma's sons from her marriage to \u00c6thelred were sent to live in Normandy under the tutelage of her brother. At this time Emma became Queen of England, and later of Denmark and Norway.\nThe \"Encomium Emmae Reginae\" suggests in its second book that Emma and Cnut's marriage, though begun as a political strategy, became an affectionate marriage.\nDuring their marriage, Emma and Cnut had a son, Harthacnut, and a daughter, Gunhilda.\nChildren.\nDuring her two marriages Emma had 5 children:\nConspiracy regarding the death of Alfred.\nIn 1036, Alfred Aetheling and Edward the Confessor, Emma's sons by \u00c6thelred, returned to England from their exile in Normandy in order to visit their mother. During their time in England they were supposed to be protected by Harthacnut. However, Harthacnut was involved with his kingdom in Denmark. Alfred was captured and blinded by holding a hot iron poker to his eyes. He later died from his wounds.\nEdward escaped the attack, and returned to Normandy. He returned after his place on the throne had been secured.\n\"Encomium Emmae Reginae\" places the blame of Alfred's capture, torture and murder completely on Harold Harefoot, thinking he intended to rid himself of two more potential claimants to the English throne by killing Edward and Alfred. Some scholars make the argument that it could have been Godwin, Earl of Wessex, who was travelling with Alfred and Edward as their protector in passage.\nHarthacnut's reign.\nHarthacnut, Emma and Cnut's son, assembled a fleet to invade England in 1039, and when Harold died in March 1040 he was invited to become king. He crossed to England with his fleet and Emma. He was criticised by the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" for his heavy taxation to pay for the fleet and for having Harold's body disinterred and thrown into a ditch. In 1041 he invited his half-brother Edward the Confessor to England. The \"Encomium\" says that Edward was sworn in as king, which probably means that he was recognised as heir as Harthacnut knew that he did not have long to live. He may have been persuaded to make the invitation by Emma, who would have been keen to preserve her position by ensuring that England was still ruled by a son of hers.\nEdward's reign.\nAfter Harthacnut's death in June 1042, Edward the Confessor succeeded to the throne and was crowned in April 1043. During the same year, Edward rode to Winchester along with Earls Leofric, Godwin, and Siward, accused Emma of treason, and deprived her of her lands and titles. However, Edward soon relented, and Emma's lands and titles were restored.\nDeath and burial.\nAfter her death in 1052, Emma was interred alongside Cnut and Harthacnut in the Old Minster, Winchester, before being transferred to the new cathedral built after the Norman Conquest. During the English Civil War (1642\u20131651), her remains were disinterred and scattered about the Cathedral floor by parliamentary forces. The jumbled bones were later re-interred.\nQueenship.\nAs Pauline Stafford noted, Emma is the \"first of the early medieval queens\" to be depicted through contemporary portraiture. To that end, Emma is the central figure within the \"Encomium Emmae Reginae\" (incorrectly titled \"Gesta Cnutonis Regis\" during the later Middle Ages) a critical source for the study of English succession in the 11th century. During the reign of \u00c6thelred, Emma most likely served as little more than a figurehead a physical embodiment of the treaty between the English and her Norman father. However, her influence increased considerably under Cnut. Until 1043, writes Stafford, Emma \"was the richest woman in England ... and held extensive lands in the East Midlands and Wessex.\" Emma's authority was not simply tied to landholdings\u2014which fluctuated greatly from 1036 to 1043\u2014she also wielded significant sway over the ecclesiastical offices of England.\nThe \"Encomium Emm\u00e6 Reginae\" or \"Gesta Cnutonis Regis\".\nThe \"Encomium\" is divided into three parts, the first of which deals with Sweyn Forkbeard and his conquest of England. The second focuses on Cnut and relates the defeat of \"Princes\" \u00c6thelred (never named) and Edmund, Cnut's marriage to Emma (again, without mentioning she had been the wife of \u00c6thelred), and Cnut's kingship. The third addresses the events after Cnut's death; Emma's involvement in the seizing of the royal treasury, and the treachery of Earl Godwin. It begins by addressing Emma, \"May our Lord Jesus Christ preserve you, O Queen, who excel all those of your sex in the amiability of your way of life.\" Emma is \"the most distinguished woman of her time for delightful beauty and wisdom.\"\nScholarly debate.\nThis flattery, writes Elizabeth M. Tyler, is \"part of a deliberate attempt to intervene, on Emma's behalf, in the politics of the Anglo-Danish court,\" a connotation which an 11th-century audience would have understood. This proves to be a direct contrast to earlier evaluations of the text, such as the introduction to the 1998 reprint of Alistair Campbell's 1949 edition in which Simon Keynes remarks: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... While the modern reader who expects the Encomium to provide a portrait of a great and distinguished queen at the height of her power will be disappointed, and might well despair of an author who could suppress, misrepresent, and garble what we know or think to have been the truth.\nFelice Lifshitz, in her seminal study of the \"Encomium\" comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... To Alistair Campbell and to see C.N.L. Brooke the omission was explicable as a matter of 'artistic necessity' and of Emma's personal vanity ... both scholars subscribed to the older view, which afforded the Encomium only literary significance as a panegyric to individual or dynasty, but saw no political import.\nManuscripts.\nPrior to May 2008 only one copy of the \"Encomium\" was believed to exist. However, a late-14th-century manuscript, the Courtenay Compendium, was discovered in the Devon Record Office, where it had languished since the 1960s. According to a report by the UK Arts Council, \"The most significant item [within the text] for British history is the Encomium Emma Reginae ... It is highly probable that the present manuscript represents the most complete witness to the revised version of the Encomium\". The manuscript was put up for auction in December 2008, and purchased for \u00a3600,000 (5.2 million Danish kroner) on behalf of the Royal Library, Denmark. Unlike the \"Liber Vitae,\" the compendium does not contain any images of Emma.\nThe New Minster \"Liber Vitae\", now in the British Library, was completed in 1030, shortly before Cnut's death in 1035. The frontispiece depicts \"King Cnut and Queen Emma presenting a cross to the altar of New Minster, Winchester.\" Stafford in her visual exegesis of the portrait states, \"it is not clear whether we should read it as a representation of a powerful woman or a powerless one.\" In one portrait, each facet of Emma's role as sovereign is displayed; that of a dutiful wife and influential queen.\nIt has been suggested that the poem \"Semiramis\", possibly written in 1017 by Warner of Rouen at the court of Emma's brother, Richard, Duke of Normandy, and dedicated to her brother, Archbishop Robert, is a contemporary satire ridiculing Emma's relation with Cnut.\nEmma is also depicted in a number of later medieval texts, such as the 13th-century \"Life of Edward the Confessor\" (Cambridge University Library MS. Ee.3.59) and a 14th-century roll, \"Genealogy of the English Kings, Genealogical Chronicle of the English Kings\".\nEmma and her sons Edward and Alfred are characters in the anonymous Elizabethan play \"Edmund Ironside\", sometimes considered an early work by William Shakespeare.\nThe Ordeal of Queen Emma.\n The Ordeal of Queen Emma by Fire at Winchester is a legend that seems to have originated in the 13th century. Queen Emma was accused of unchastity with Bishop \u00c6lfwine of Winchester. In order to prove her innocence, she was obliged to undergo the ordeal of walking over nine red-hot ploughshares placed on the pavement of the nave of Winchester Cathedral. Two bishops conducted the barefoot queen to the line of red-hot ploughshares. She walked over the red-hot ploughshares, but, having sought the protection of St Swithun, whose shrine is at Winchester, felt neither the naked iron nor the fire. William Blake did an illustration of the event.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40238", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40238", "title": "Herbert Putnam", "text": "American librarian and 8th Librarian of Congress\nGeorge Herbert Putnam (September 20, 1861 \u2013 August 14, 1955) was an American librarian. He was the eighth (and also the longest-serving) Librarian of Congress from 1899 to 1939. He implemented his vision of a universal collection with strengths in many languages, especially from Europe and Latin America.\nBiography.\nGeorge Herbert Putnam was born in New York City at 107 East Seventeenth Street, the sixth son and tenth child of Victorine and George Palmer Putnam. The father, one-time collector of internal revenue in New York by appointment of Abraham Lincoln, was the founder of a well-known publishing house, known previously as the Putnam Publishing house, but now known as G. P. Putnam's Sons.\nIn 1886, Herbert Putnam married Charlotte Elizabeth Munroe of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and together they had two daughters, Shirley and Brenda Putnam. Brenda Putnam grew up to become a celebrated sculptor in the early 20th century, highly known for her \"children, cherubs, and garden ornaments.\" Throughout Herbert Putnam's career, he was described by his colleagues as maintaining \"an impenetrable dignity\u2026formal manner, invariable gracious and cordial, covered shyness and a deep reserve. He had few intimates, even among his closest colleagues, but he was fond of good company and good conversation\" as well being \"painfully modest, a family man who had an unreciprocated view of his staff as family.\"\nHe died at his home in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, on August 14, 1955.\nEarly career.\nAfter graduating magna cum laude from Harvard University in 1883, Putnam spent the following year at Columbia University Law School. Eventually, however, his interest in administrative work led him to the Minneapolis Athenaeum where he served as librarian in 1887, until it merged into the Minneapolis Public Library in 1888. Putnam was elected city librarian of the Minneapolis Public Library at that time and served while simultaneously being admitted to the Minnesota bar of Law. According to the Honorable Lawrence Lewis of Colorado at a Tribute for Putnam in 1939, Putnam at this time \"modernized antiquated methods, revised the charging records of books on loan, inaugurated a new system of cataloging and classification, opened the alcoves to readers, [and] insisted that 'there are two great problems of library management \u2013 one to get the books for the readers, the other to get the readers to the books.'\" During this time he developed the Putnam Classification System (based in part on work by John Edmands), which would influence his later design of the Library of Congress Classification system.\nIn 1891, Putnam resigned his Minneapolis post due to his mother-in-law's ill health and promptly returned to Boston to be near her. Putnam \"was admitted to the Suffolk bar, and practiced law in Boston until the 18th of February 1895\" when he was appointed Librarian of the Boston Public Library. During his tenure at the Boston Public Library \"there were 9 branches and 12 delivery stations. At the end of his four years, there were 10 branches, 5 minor branches, called 'reading rooms,' and 56 deposit stations\u2026the library grew from a total of 610,375 volumes at the close of 1894 to 716,050 at the close of 1898.\" Another contribution made by Putnam towards the Boston Public Library was the addition of a room devoted to juveniles in the Boston Central Library, \"believed to have been the first room wholly devoted to the service of children in any of the larger libraries of the country.\"\nLibrary of Congress.\nInduction.\nAs the ALA's leading witness during the 1896 Congressional Joint Committee on the Library, Putnam was able to successfully lobby Congress to greatly expand the role of the Library of Congress. This restructuring and expansion of the Library became effective on July 1, 1897. Putnam's activities with the American Library Association led him to join with Justin Winsor and Melvil Dewey as official delegates to the International Conference of Librarians in London in 1897. When Winsor died shortly thereafter, Putnam served the remainder of his term as President of the ALA. When John Russell Young died in January 1899, President William McKinley requested Congress to appoint Putnam. He was officially confirmed December 12, 1899.\nSystemization of a public institution.\nUpon the confirmation of Putnam to his appointed duty of Librarian of Congress, one daunting task Putnam faced from the onset was the sheer volume of materials that had to be reorganized for the newly opened Thomas Jefferson Building \u2013 the newly appointed library for the Library of Congress. However, Putnam was well aware of what needed to be done. \"In October 1899 Putnam requested a $190,000 increase in the budget for fiscal 1901. If Congress consented, the 1899 LC budget would nearly double and that for 1900 would be increased by 60 percent. Declaring that the collections were deficient in many respects, [Putnam] asked for $50,000 to purchase new material, more than twice the 1899 appropriation. In summation, the first task of Putnam's administration was to organize all materials of the Library of Congress so they may be used efficiently by the public.\"\nPutnam's request was granted by the United States Congress, and thus an appropriation bill was passed on April 17, 1900. Although Putnam's administration would need time in order to collect, organize, and disseminate all of the material within the Library of Congress' collection, the task was completed with enormous success. \"By 1924 the first objective had been won with \u2013 \n1) All spaces in the building duly differentiated and equipped for specialized, as well as general, uses. \n2) The specialized material installed in appropriate cases. \n3) A scheme of classification, systematic and elastic, with an appropriate nomenclature. \n4) Adoption of processes of cataloging, including forms of entry, now standardized for American libraries. \n5) Actual application of the classification and cataloging to a large portion of the collection of printed books.\"\nPutnam during this time also introduced a new system of classifying books that continues to this day, known as the Library of Congress Classification. He also established an interlibrary loan system, and expanded the Library of Congress's role and relationships with other libraries, through the provision of centralized services. He was elected an Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1902, and elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1907.\nWar-time service.\nIn July 1916, \"former LC staff member Elizabeth West, director of the Carnegie Library of San Antonio, Texas, suggested to Putnam that the Library of Congress cooperate with other libraries to send books to American soldiers.\"\nInitially, Putnam was not interested in the wholesale distribution of books to American troops simply due to the lack of interest. However, when attention arose that the British War Library Service in London were performing similar duties to their troops, measures were quickly devised by Putnam, the ALA, and Congress to enact such a program to the American military branches. \"Aided by a grant of $320,000 from the Carnegie Corporation, the War Service built thirty-six libraries, completing the majority by February 1918. But with so much invested in buildings, little money remained for books or administration\u2026Putnam took the matter up directly with the War Department and obtained assurances that the government would provide utilities. He appealed to ALA members to donate books and volunteer for service, and by June 1918 the association had purchased 300,000 books, sent 1,349,000 gift books to camps, and distributed 500,000 magazines.\" In the time after World War I, the services of the Library of Congress towards the war effort provided a new outlook for the American public on the possibilities of what a successful library could accomplish. In other words, the contributions made by the Library of Congress in that time gave \"librarians 'a new conception of what a truly national library could be' and added one more item 'to the long list of benefits for which American libraries have to thank the Library and the Librarian, of Congress.\"\nRetirement.\nHerbert Putnam's administration as Librarian of Congress lasted for forty years, from 1899 until 1939. It was clear Putnam was not willing to withdraw completely from the world of librarianship, stating: \"I would willingly surrender the administration, if that course would serve the interest of the library and I could feel assured as to my successor.\" Putnam provided the suggestion of \"Librarian Emeritus\" be developed as his new official title, with an honorarium of one-half of his original salary. On October 1, 1939, Putnam retired as the 8th Librarian of Congress with that title, and he \"continued to contribute to the Library, keeping regular office hours for the next 15 years.\"\nPutnam was awarded American Library Association Honorary Membership in 1940.\nHerbert Putnam was succeeded in 1939 by Archibald MacLeish, who served from 1939 until 1944.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40239", "revid": "51021109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40239", "title": "Geosynchronous orbit", "text": "Orbit keeping the satellite at a fixed longitude above the equator\nA geosynchronous orbit (sometimes abbreviated GSO) is an Earth-centered orbit with an orbital period that matches Earth's rotation on its axis, 23 hours, 56 minutes, and 4 seconds (one sidereal day). The synchronization of rotation and orbital period means that, for an observer on Earth's surface, an object in geosynchronous orbit returns to exactly the same position in the sky after a period of one sidereal day. Over the course of a day, the object's position in the sky may remain still or trace out a path, typically in a figure-8 form, whose precise characteristics depend on the orbit's inclination and eccentricity. A circular geosynchronous orbit has a constant altitude of .\nA special case of geosynchronous orbit is the geostationary orbit (often abbreviated \"GEO\"), which is a circular geosynchronous orbit in Earth's equatorial plane with both inclination and eccentricity equal to 0. A satellite in a geostationary orbit remains in the same position in the sky to observers on the surface.\nCommunications satellites are often given geostationary or close-to-geostationary orbits, so that the satellite antennas that communicate with them do not have to move but can be pointed permanently at the fixed location in the sky where the satellite appears.\nHistory.\nIn 1929, Herman Poto\u010dnik described both geosynchronous orbits in general and the special case of the geostationary Earth orbit in particular as useful orbits for space stations. The first appearance of a geosynchronous orbit in popular literature was in October 1942, in the first Venus Equilateral story by George O. Smith, but Smith did not go into details. British science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke popularised and expanded the concept in a 1945 paper entitled \"Extra-Terrestrial Relays \u2013 Can Rocket Stations Give Worldwide Radio Coverage?\", published in \"Wireless World\" magazine. Clarke acknowledged the connection in his introduction to \"The Complete Venus Equilateral\". The orbit, which Clarke first described as useful for broadcast and relay communications satellites, is sometimes called the Clarke Orbit. Similarly, the collection of artificial satellites in this orbit is known as the Clarke Belt.\nIn technical terminology, the geosynchronous orbits are often referred to as geostationary if they are roughly over the equator, but the terms are used somewhat interchangeably. Specifically, geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO) may be a synonym for \"geosynchronous equatorial orbit\", or \"geostationary Earth orbit\".\nThe first geosynchronous satellite was designed by Harold Rosen while he was working at Hughes Aircraft in 1959. Inspired by Sputnik 1, he wanted to use a geostationary (geosynchronous equatorial) satellite to globalise communications. Telecommunications between the US and Europe was then possible between just 136 people at a time, and reliant on high frequency radios and an undersea cable.\nConventional wisdom at the time was that it would require too much rocket power to place a satellite in a geosynchronous orbit and it would not survive long enough to justify the expense, so early efforts were put towards constellations of satellites in low or medium Earth orbit. The first of these were the passive Echo balloon satellites in 1960, followed by Telstar 1 in 1962. Although these projects had difficulties with signal strength and tracking that could be solved through geosynchronous satellites, the concept was seen as impractical, so Hughes often withheld funds and support.\nBy 1961, Rosen and his team had produced a cylindrical prototype with a diameter of , height of , weighing ; it was light, small enough to be placed into orbit by then-available rocketry, was spin stabilised and used dipole antennas producing a pancake-shaped waveform. In August 1961, they were contracted to begin building the working satellite. They lost Syncom 1 to electronics failure, but Syncom 2 was successfully placed into a geosynchronous orbit in 1963. Although its inclined orbit still required moving antennas, it was able to relay TV transmissions, and allowed for US President John F. Kennedy to phone Nigerian prime minister Abubakar Tafawa Balewa from a ship on August 23, 1963.\nToday there are hundreds of geosynchronous satellites providing remote sensing, navigation and communications.\nAlthough most populated land locations on the planet now have terrestrial communications facilities (microwave, fiber-optic), which often have latency and bandwidth advantages, and telephone access covering 96% of the population and internet access 90% as of 2018, some rural and remote areas in developed countries are still reliant on satellite communications.\nTypes.\nGeostationary orbit.\nA geostationary equatorial orbit (GEO) is a circular geosynchronous orbit in the plane of the Earth's equator with a radius of approximately (measured from the center of the Earth). A satellite in such an orbit is at an altitude of approximately above mean sea level. It maintains the same position relative to the Earth's surface. If one could see a satellite in geostationary orbit, it would appear to hover at the same point in the sky, i.e., not exhibit diurnal motion, while the Sun, Moon, and stars would traverse the skies behind it. Such orbits are useful for telecommunications satellites.\nA perfectly stable geostationary orbit is an ideal that can only be approximated. In practice the satellite drifts out of this orbit because of perturbations such as the solar wind, radiation pressure, variations in the Earth's gravitational field, and the gravitational effect of the Moon and Sun, and thrusters are used to maintain the orbit in a process known as station-keeping.\nEventually, without the use of thrusters, the orbit will become inclined, oscillating between 0\u00b0 and 15\u00b0 every 55 years. At the end of the satellite's lifetime, when fuel approaches depletion, satellite operators may decide to omit these expensive manoeuvres to correct inclination and only control eccentricity. This prolongs the life-time of the satellite as it consumes less fuel over time, but the satellite can then only be used by ground antennas capable of following the N-S movement.\nGeostationary satellites will also tend to drift around one of two stable longitudes of 75\u00b0 and 255\u00b0 without station keeping.\nElliptical and inclined geosynchronous orbits.\nMany objects in geosynchronous orbits have eccentric and/or inclined orbits. Eccentricity makes the orbit elliptical and appear to oscillate E-W in the sky from the viewpoint of a ground station, while inclination tilts the orbit compared to the equator and makes it appear to oscillate N-S from a groundstation. These effects combine to form an analemma (figure-8).\nSatellites in elliptical/eccentric orbits must be tracked by steerable ground stations.\nTundra orbit.\nThe Tundra orbit is an eccentric geosynchronous orbit, which allows the satellite to spend most of its time dwelling over one high latitude location. It sits at an inclination of 63.4\u00b0, which is a frozen orbit, which reduces the need for stationkeeping. At least two satellites are needed to provide continuous coverage over an area. It was used by the Sirius XM Satellite Radio to improve signal strength in the northern US and Canada.\nQuasi-zenith orbit.\nThe Quasi-Zenith Satellite System (QZSS) is a four-satellite system that operates in a geosynchronous orbit at an inclination of 42\u00b0 and a 0.075 eccentricity. Each satellite dwells over Japan, allowing signals to reach receivers in urban canyons, then passes quickly over Australia.\nLaunch.\nGeosynchronous satellites are launched to the east into a prograde orbit that matches the rotation rate of the equator. The smallest inclination that a satellite can be launched into is that of the launch site's latitude, so launching the satellite from close to the equator limits the amount of inclination change needed later. Additionally, launching from close to the equator allows the speed of the Earth's rotation to give the satellite a boost. A launch site should have water or deserts to the east, so any failed rockets do not fall on a populated area.\nMost launch vehicles place geosynchronous satellites directly into a geosynchronous transfer orbit (GTO), an elliptical orbit with an apogee at GSO height and a low perigee. On-board satellite propulsion is then used to raise the perigee, circularise and reach GSO.\nOnce in a viable geostationary orbit, spacecraft can change their longitudinal position by adjusting their semi-major axis such that the new period is shorter or longer than a sidereal day, in order to effect an apparent \"drift\" Eastward or Westward, respectively. Once at the desired longitude, the spacecraft's period is restored to geosynchronous.\nProposed orbits.\nStatite proposal.\nA statite is a hypothetical satellite that uses radiation pressure from the Sun against a solar sail to modify its orbit.\nIt would hold its location over the dark side of the Earth at a latitude of approximately 30 degrees. It would return to the same spot in the sky every 24 hours from an Earth-based viewer's perspective, so be functionally similar to a geosynchronous orbit.\nSpace elevator.\nA further form of geosynchronous orbit is the theoretical space elevator. If a mass orbiting above the geostationary belt is tethered to the earth\u2019s surface, and the mass is accelerated to maintain an orbital period equal to one sidereal day, then since the orbit now requires more downward force than is supplied by gravity alone the tether will become tensioned by the extra centripetal force required, and this tension will keep the tether structure stable as a crawler carries objects up/down along it.\nRetired satellites.\nGeosynchronous satellites require some station-keeping in order to remain in position, and once they run out of thruster fuel and are no longer useful they are moved into a higher graveyard orbit. It is not feasible to deorbit geosynchronous satellites, for to do so would take far more fuel than would be used by slightly elevating the orbit; and atmospheric drag is negligible, giving GSOs lifetimes of thousands of years.\nThe retirement process is becoming increasingly regulated and satellites must have a 90% chance of moving over 200\u00a0km above the geostationary belt at end of life.\nSpace debris.\nSpace debris in geosynchronous orbits typically has a lower collision speed than at LEO since most GSO satellites orbit in the same plane, altitude and speed; however, the presence of satellites in eccentric orbits allows for collisions at up to 4\u00a0km/s. Although a collision is comparatively unlikely, GSO satellites have a limited ability to avoid any debris.\nDebris less than 10\u00a0cm in diameter cannot be seen from the Earth, making it difficult to assess their prevalence.\nDespite efforts to reduce risk, spacecraft collisions have occurred. The European Space Agency telecom satellite Olympus-1 was struck by a meteoroid on August 11, 1993, and eventually moved to a graveyard orbit, and in 2006 the Russian Express-AM11 communications satellite was struck by an unknown object and rendered inoperable, although its engineers had enough contact time with the satellite to send it into a graveyard orbit. In 2017 both AMC-9 and Telkom-1 broke apart from an unknown cause.\nProperties.\nA geosynchronous orbit has the following properties:\nPeriod.\nAll geosynchronous orbits have an orbital period equal to exactly one sidereal day. This means that the satellite will return to the same point above the Earth's surface every (sidereal) day, regardless of other orbital properties. This orbital period, T, is directly related to the semi-major axis of the orbit through the formula:\n formula_1\nwhere:\n a is the length of the orbit's semi-major axis\n formula_2 is the standard gravitational parameter of the central body\nInclination.\nA geosynchronous orbit can have any inclination.\nSatellites commonly have an inclination of zero, ensuring that the orbit remains over the equator at all times, making it stationary with respect to latitude from the point of view of a ground observer (and in the ECEF reference frame).\nAnother popular inclinations is 63.4\u00b0 for a Tundra orbit, which ensures that the orbit's argument of perigee does not change over time.\nGround track.\nIn the special case of a geostationary orbit, the ground track of a satellite is a single point on the equator. In the general case of a geosynchronous orbit with a non-zero inclination or eccentricity, the ground track is a more or less distorted figure-eight, returning to the same places once per sidereal day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40242", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40242", "title": "The Americana", "text": ""}
{"id": "40243", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40243", "title": "Edward the Confessor", "text": "King of England from 1042 to 1066\nEdward the Confessor (c. 1003\u00a0\u2013 5 January 1066) was King of the English from 1042 until his death in 1066. He was the last reigning monarch of the House of Wessex.\nEdward was the son of \u00c6thelred the Unready and Emma of Normandy. He succeeded Cnut the Great's son\u00a0\u2013 and his own half-brother\u00a0\u2013 Harthacnut. He restored the rule of the House of Wessex after the period of Danish rule since Cnut conquered England in 1016. When Edward died in 1066, he was succeeded by his brother-in-law Harold Godwinson, who was defeated and killed in the same year at the Battle of Hastings by the Normans under William the Conqueror. Edward's young great-nephew Edgar \u00c6theling of the House of Wessex was proclaimed king after the Battle of Hastings, but was never crowned and was peacefully deposed after about eight weeks.\nHistorians disagree about Edward's fairly long 24-year reign. His nickname reflects the traditional image of him as unworldly and pious. The epithet \"Confessor\" reflects his reputation as a saint who did not suffer martyrdom as opposed to his uncle, King Edward the Martyr. Some portray Edward the Confessor's reign as leading to the disintegration of royal power in England and the advance in power of the House of Godwin, because of the infighting that began after his death with no heirs to the throne. Biographers Frank Barlow and Peter Rex, on the other hand, portray Edward as a successful king, one who was energetic, resourceful and sometimes ruthless; they argue that the Norman Conquest shortly after his death tarnished his image. However, Richard Mortimer argues that the return of the Godwins from exile in 1052 \"meant the effective end of his exercise of power\", citing Edward's reduced activity as implying \"a withdrawal from affairs\".\nAbout a century after his death, in 1161, Pope Alexander III canonised the king. Edward was one of England's national saints until King Edward III adopted Saint George as the national patron saint in about 1350. Edward's feast day is 13 October and is celebrated by both the Church of England and the Catholic Church.\nEarly years and exile.\nEdward was the seventh son of \u00c6thelred the Unready, and the first by his second wife, Emma of Normandy. Edward was born between 1003 and 1005 in Islip, Oxfordshire, and is first recorded as a 'witness' to two charters in 1005. He had one full brother, Alfred, and a sister, Godgifu. In charters he was always listed behind his older half-brothers, showing that he ranked beneath them.\nDuring his childhood, England was the target of Viking raids and invasions under Sweyn Forkbeard and his son, Cnut. Following Sweyn's seizure of the throne in 1013, Emma fled to Normandy, followed by Edward and Alfred, and then by \u00c6thelred. Sweyn died in February 1014, and leading Englishmen invited \u00c6thelred back on the condition that he promised to rule 'more justly' than before. \u00c6thelred agreed, sending Edward back with his ambassadors. \u00c6thelred died in April 1016, and he was succeeded by Edward's older half-brother Edmund Ironside, who carried on the fight against Sweyn's son, Cnut. According to Scandinavian tradition, Edward fought alongside Edmund; as Edward was at most thirteen years old at the time, the story is disputed. Edmund died in November 1016, and Cnut became undisputed king. Edward then again went into exile with his brother and sister; in 1017 his mother married Cnut. In the same year, Cnut had Edward's last surviving elder half-brother, Eadwig, executed.\nEdward spent a quarter of a century in exile, probably mainly in Normandy, although there is no evidence of his location until the early 1030s. He probably received support from his sister Godgifu, who married Drogo of Mantes, count of Vexin in about 1024. In the early 1030s, Edward witnessed four charters in Normandy, signing two of them as king of England. According to William of Jumi\u00e8ges, the Norman chronicler, Robert\u00a0I, Duke of Normandy attempted an invasion of England to place Edward on the throne in about 1034 but it was blown off course to Jersey. He also received support for his claim to the throne from several continental abbots, particularly Robert, abbot of the Norman abbey of Jumi\u00e8ges, who later became Edward's Archbishop of Canterbury. Edward was said to have developed an intense personal piety during this period, but modern historians regard this as a product of the later medieval campaign for his canonisation. In Frank Barlow's view \"in his lifestyle would seem to have been that of a typical member of the rustic nobility\". He appeared to have a slim prospect of acceding to the English throne during this period, and his ambitious mother was more interested in supporting Harthacnut, her son by Cnut.\nCnut died in 1035, and Harthacnut succeeded him as king of Denmark. It is unclear whether he intended to keep England as well, but he was defending his position in Denmark and thus was unable to come to England to assert his claim to the throne. It was therefore decided that his elder half-brother Harold Harefoot should act as regent, while Emma held Wessex on Harthacnut's behalf. In 1036, Edward and his brother Alfred separately came to England. Emma later claimed that they came in response to a letter forged by Harold inviting them to visit her, but historians believe that she probably did invite them in an effort to counter Harold's growing popularity. Alfred was captured by Godwin, Earl of Wessex, who turned him over to Harold Harefoot. He had Alfred blinded by forcing red-hot pokers into his eyes to make him unsuitable for kingship, and Alfred died soon after as a result of his wounds. The murder is thought to be the source of much of Edward's hatred for Godwin and one of the primary reasons for Godwin's banishment in autumn 1051. Edward is said to have fought a successful skirmish near Southampton, and then retreated back to Normandy. He thus showed his prudence, but he had some reputation as a soldier in Normandy and Scandinavia.\nIn 1037, Harold was accepted as king, and the following year he expelled Emma, who retreated to Bruges. She then summoned Edward and demanded his help for Harthacnut, but he refused as he had no resources to launch an invasion, and disclaimed any interest for himself in the throne. Harthacnut, his position in Denmark now secure, planned an invasion, but Harold died in 1040, and Harthacnut was able to cross unopposed, with his mother, to take the English throne.\nIn 1041, Harthacnut invited Edward back to England, probably as his heir because he knew he had not long to live. The 12th-century \"Quadripartitus\" states that he was recalled by the intervention of Bishop \u00c6lfwine of Winchester and Earl Godwin. Edward met \"the thegns of all England\" at Hursteshever, likely near modern-day Hurst Spit opposite the Isle of Wight. There, Edward was received as king in return for his oath that he would continue the laws of Cnut. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", Edward was sworn in as king alongside Harthacnut, but a diploma issued by Harthacnut in 1042 describes him as the king's brother.\nEarly reign.\nFollowing Harthacnut's death on 8 June 1042, Godwin, the most powerful of the English earls, supported Edward, who succeeded to the throne. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" describes the popularity he enjoyed at his accession\u00a0\u2013 \"before he [Harthacnut] was buried, all the people chose Edward as king in London.\" Edward was crowned at the cathedral of Winchester, the royal seat of the West Saxons, on Easter Sunday, 3 April 1043.\nEdward complained that his mother had \"done less for him than he wanted before he became king, and also afterwards\". In November 1043, he rode to Winchester with his three leading earls, Leofric of Mercia, Godwin, and Siward of Northumbria, to deprive her of her property, possibly because she was holding on to treasure which belonged to the king. Her adviser, Stigand, was deprived of his bishopric of Elmham in East Anglia. However, both were soon restored to favour. Emma died in 1052.\nEdward's position when he came to the throne was weak. Effective rule required keeping on terms with the three leading earls, but loyalty to the ancient house of Wessex had been eroded by the period of Danish rule, and only Leofric was descended from a family which had served \u00c6thelred. Siward was probably Danish, and although Godwin was English, he was one of Cnut's new men, married to Cnut's former sister-in-law. However, in his early years, Edward restored the traditional strong monarchy, showing himself, in Frank Barlow's view, \"a vigorous and ambitious man, a true son of the impetuous \u00c6thelred and the formidable Emma.\"\nIn 1043, Godwin's eldest son Sweyn was appointed to an earldom in the south-west midlands, and on 23 January 1045 Edward married Godwin's daughter Edith. Soon afterwards, her brother Harold and her Danish cousin Beorn Estrithson were also given earldoms in southern England. Godwin and his family now ruled subordinately all of Southern England. However, in 1047 Sweyn was banished for abducting the abbess of Leominster. In 1049, he returned to try to regain his earldom, but this was said to have been opposed by Harold and Beorn, probably because they had been given Sweyn's land in his absence. Sweyn murdered his cousin Beorn and went again into exile. Edward's nephew Ralph was given Beorn's earldom, but the following year Sweyn's father was able to secure his reinstatement.\nThe wealth of Edward's lands exceeded that of the greatest earls, but they were scattered among the southern earldoms. He had no personal power base, and it seems he did not attempt to build one. In 1050\u201351 he even paid off the fourteen foreign ships which constituted his standing navy and abolished the tax raised to pay for it. However, in ecclesiastical and foreign affairs he was able to follow his own policy. King Magnus I of Norway aspired to the English throne, and in 1045 and 1046, fearing an invasion, Edward took command of the fleet at Sandwich. Beorn's elder brother, Sweyn II of Denmark \"submitted himself to Edward as a son\", hoping for his help in his battle with Magnus for control of Denmark, but in 1047 Edward rejected Godwin's demand that he send aid to Sweyn, and it was only Magnus's death in October that saved England from attack and allowed Sweyn to take the Danish throne.\nModern historians reject the traditional view that Edward mainly employed Norman favourites, but he did have foreigners in his household, including a few Normans, who became unpopular. Chief among them was Robert, abbot of the Norman abbey of Jumi\u00e8ges, who had known Edward from the 1030s and came to England with him in 1041, becoming bishop of London in 1043. According to the \"Vita Edwardi\", he became \"always the most powerful confidential adviser to the king\".\nCrisis of 1051\u201352.\nIn ecclesiastical appointments, Edward and his advisers showed a bias against candidates with local connections, and when the clergy and monks of Canterbury elected a relative of Godwin as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1051, Edward rejected him and appointed Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges, who claimed that Godwin was in illegal possession of some archiepiscopal estates. In September 1051, Edward was visited by his brother-in-law, Godgifu's second husband, Eustace II of Boulogne. His men caused an affray in Dover, and Edward ordered Godwin as earl of Kent to punish the town's burgesses, but he took their side and refused. Edward seized the chance to bring his over-mighty earl to heel. Archbishop Robert accused Godwin of plotting to kill the king, just as he had killed his brother Alfred in 1036, while Leofric and Siward supported the king and called up their vassals. Sweyn and Harold called up their own vassals, but neither side wanted a fight, and Godwin and Sweyn appear to have each given a son as hostage, who were sent to Normandy. The Godwins' position disintegrated as their men were not willing to fight the king. When Stigand, who was acting as an intermediary, conveyed the king's jest that Godwin could have his peace if he could restore Alfred and his companions alive and well, Godwin and his sons fled, going to Flanders and Ireland. Edward repudiated Edith and sent her to a nunnery, perhaps because she was childless, and Archbishop Robert urged her divorce.\nSweyn went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem (dying on his way back), but Godwin and his other sons returned, with an army following a year later, and received considerable support, while Leofric and Siward failed to support the king. Both sides were concerned that a civil war would leave the country open to foreign invasion. The king was furious, but he was forced to give way and restore Godwin and Harold to their earldoms, while Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges and other Frenchmen fled, fearing Godwin's vengeance. Edith was restored as queen, and Stigand, who had again acted as an intermediary between the two sides in the crisis, was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in Robert's place. Stigand retained his existing bishopric of Winchester, and his pluralism was a continuing source of dispute with the pope.\nLater reign.\nUntil the mid-1050s Edward was able to structure his earldoms to prevent the Godwins from becoming dominant. Godwin died in 1053, and although Harold succeeded to his earldom of Wessex, none of his other brothers were earls at this date. His house was then weaker than it had been since Edward's succession, but a succession of deaths from 1055 to 1057 completely changed the control of earldoms. In 1055, Siward died, but his son was considered too young to command Northumbria, and Harold's brother, Tostig, was appointed. In 1057, Leofric and Ralph died, and Leofric's son \u00c6lfgar succeeded as Earl of Mercia, while Harold's brother Gyrth succeeded \u00c6lfgar as Earl of East Anglia. The fourth surviving Godwin brother, Leofwine, was given an earldom in the south-east carved out of Harold's territory, and Harold received Ralph's territory in compensation. Thus by 1057, the Godwin brothers controlled all of England subordinately apart from Mercia. It is not known whether Edward approved of this transformation or whether he had to accept it, but from this time he seems to have begun to withdraw from active politics, devoting himself to hunting, which he pursued each day after attending church.\nIn the 1050s, Edward pursued an aggressive and generally successful policy in dealing with Scotland and Wales. Malcolm Canmore was an exile at Edward's court after his father, Duncan I, was killed in battle in 1040, against men led by Macbeth who seized the Scottish throne. In 1054, Edward sent Siward to invade Scotland. He defeated Macbeth, and Malcolm, who had accompanied the expedition, gained control of southern Scotland. By 1058, Malcolm had killed Macbeth in battle and had taken the Scottish throne. In 1059, he visited Edward, but in 1061, he started raiding Northumbria with the aim of adding it to his territory.\nIn 1053, Edward ordered the assassination of the south Welsh prince Rhys ap Rhydderch in reprisal for a raid on England, and Rhys's head was delivered to him. In 1055, Gruffydd ap Llywelyn established himself as the ruler of Wales, and allied himself with \u00c6lfgar of Mercia, who had been outlawed for treason. They defeated Earl Ralph at Hereford, and Harold had to collect forces from nearly all of England to drive the invaders back into Wales. Peace was concluded with the reinstatement of \u00c6lfgar, who was able to succeed as Earl of Mercia on his father's death in 1057. Gruffydd swore an oath to be a faithful under-king of Edward. \u00c6lfgar likely died in 1062, and his young son Edwin was allowed to succeed as Earl of Mercia, but Harold then launched a surprise attack on Gruffydd. He escaped, but when Harold and Tostig attacked again the following year, he retreated and was killed by Welsh enemies. Edward and Harold were then able to impose vassalage on some Welsh princes.\nIn October 1065, Harold's brother, Tostig, Earl of Northumbria, was hunting with the king when his thegns in Northumbria rebelled against his rule, which they claimed was oppressive, and killed some 200 of his followers. They nominated Morcar, the brother of Edwin of Mercia, as earl and invited the brothers to join them in marching south. They met Harold at Northampton, and Tostig accused Harold before the king of conspiring with the rebels. Tostig seems to have been a favourite with the king and queen, who demanded that the revolt be suppressed, but neither Harold nor anyone else would fight to support Tostig. Edward was forced to submit to his banishment, and the humiliation may have caused a series of strokes which led to his death. He was too weak to attend the consecration of his new church at Westminster, which had been substantially completed in 1065, on 28 December.\nEdward probably entrusted the kingdom to Harold and Edith shortly before he died at Westminster on 5 January 1066. On 6 January he was buried in Westminster Abbey, and Harold was crowned on the same day.\nSuccession.\nStarting as early as William of Malmesbury in the early 12th century, historians have puzzled over Edward's intentions for the succession. One school of thought supports the Norman case that Edward always intended William the Conqueror to be his heir, accepting the medieval claim that Edward had already decided to be celibate before he married, but most historians believe that he hoped to have an heir by Edith at least until his quarrel with Godwin in 1051. William the Conqueror's great-grandfather, Duke Richard I, was the grandfather of Edward the Confessor (Emma's father), making the two men first cousins once removed. William may have visited Edward during Godwin's exile, and he is thought to have promised William the succession at this time, but historians disagree on how seriously he meant the promise, and whether he later changed his mind.\nEdmund Ironside's son, Edward the Exile, had the best claim to be considered Edward's heir. He had been taken as a young child to Hungary, and in 1054 Bishop Ealdred of Worcester visited the Holy Roman Emperor, Henry III to secure his return, probably with a view to becoming Edward's heir. The exile returned to England in 1057 with his family but died almost immediately. His son Edgar, who was then about six years old, was brought up at the English court. He was given the designation \u00c6theling, meaning throne-worthy, which may mean that Edward considered making him his heir, and he was briefly declared king after Harold's death in 1066. However, Edgar was absent from witness lists of Edward's diplomas, and there is no evidence in the Domesday Book that he was a substantial landowner, which suggests that he was marginalised at the end of Edward's reign.\nAfter the mid-1050s, Edward seems to have withdrawn from affairs as he became increasingly dependent on the Godwins, and he may have become reconciled to the idea that one of them would succeed him. The Normans claimed that Edward sent Harold to Normandy in about 1064 to confirm the promise of the succession to William. The strongest evidence comes from a Norman apologist, William of Poitiers. According to his account, shortly before the Battle of Hastings, Harold sent William an envoy who admitted that Edward had promised the throne to William but argued that this was overridden by his deathbed promise to Harold. In reply, William did not dispute the deathbed promise but argued that Edward's prior promise to him took precedence. In Stephen Baxter's view, Edward's \"handling of the succession issue was dangerously indecisive, and contributed to one of the greatest catastrophes to which the English have ever succumbed.\"\nWestminster Abbey.\nEdward's Norman sympathies are most clearly seen in the major building project of his reign, Westminster Abbey, the first Norman Romanesque church in England. This was commenced between 1042 and 1052 as a royal burial church, consecrated on 28 December 1065, completed after his death in about 1090, and demolished in 1245 to make way for Henry III's new building, which still stands. It was very similar to Jumi\u00e8ges Abbey, which was built at the same time. Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges must have been closely involved in both buildings, although it is not clear which is the original and which is the copy. Edward does not appear to have been interested in books and associated arts, but his abbey played a vital role in the development of English Romanesque architecture, showing that he was an innovative and generous patron of the church.\nVeneration.\nEdward the Confessor was the only king of England to be canonized by the pope, but he was part of a tradition of (uncanonised) Anglo-Saxon royal saints, such as Eadburh of Winchester, a daughter of Edward the Elder, Edith of Wilton, a daughter of Edgar the Peaceful, and the boy-king Edward the Martyr. With his proneness to fits of rage and his love of hunting, Edward the Confessor is regarded by most historians as an unlikely saint, and his canonisation as political, although some argue that his cult started so early that it must have had something credible to build on.\nEdward displayed a worldly attitude in his church appointments. When he appointed Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1051, he chose the leading craftsman Spearhafoc to replace Robert as Bishop of London. Robert refused to consecrate him, saying that the pope had forbidden it, but Spearhafoc occupied the bishopric for several months with Edward's support. After the Godwins fled the country, Edward expelled Spearhafoc, who fled with a large store of gold and gems which he had been given to make Edward a crown. Stigand was the first archbishop of Canterbury not to be a monk in almost a hundred years, and he was said to have been excommunicated by several popes because he held Canterbury and Winchester in plurality. Several bishops sought consecration abroad because of the irregularity of Stigand's position. Edward usually preferred clerks to monks for the most important and richest bishoprics, and he probably accepted gifts from candidates for bishoprics and abbacies. However, his appointments were generally respectable. When Odda of Deerhurst died without heirs in 1056, Edward seized lands which Odda had granted to Pershore Abbey and gave them to his Westminster foundation; historian Ann Williams observes that \"the Confessor did not in the 11th century have the saintly reputation which he later enjoyed, largely through the efforts of the Westminster monks themselves\".\nAfter 1066, there was a subdued cult of Edward as a saint, possibly discouraged by the early Norman abbots of Westminster, which gradually increased in the early 12th century. Osbert of Clare, the prior of Westminster Abbey, then started to campaign for Edward's canonisation, aiming to increase the wealth and power of the Abbey. By 1138, he had converted the \"Vita \u00c6dwardi Regis\", the life of Edward commissioned by his widow, into a conventional saint's life. He seized on an ambiguous passage which might have meant that their marriage was chaste, perhaps to give the idea that Edith's childlessness was not her fault, to claim that Edward had been celibate. In 1139, Osbert went to Rome to petition for Edward's canonisation with the support of King Stephen, but he lacked the full support of the English hierarchy and Stephen had quarrelled with the church, so Pope Innocent II postponed a decision, declaring that Osbert lacked sufficient testimonials of Edward's holiness.\nIn 1159, there was a disputed election to the papacy, and Henry II's support helped to secure the recognition of Pope Alexander III. In 1160, a new abbot of Westminster, Laurence, seized the opportunity to renew Edward's claim. This time, it had the full support of the king and the English hierarchy, and a grateful pope issued the bull of canonisation on 7 February 1161, the result of a conjunction of the interests of Westminster Abbey, King Henry II and Pope Alexander III. He was called 'Confessor' as the name for someone who was believed to have lived a saintly life but was not a martyr. In the 1230s, King Henry III became attached to the cult of Saint Edward, and he commissioned a new life, by Matthew Paris. Henry also constructed a grand new tomb for Edward in a rebuilt Westminster Abbey in 1269. Henry III also named his eldest son after Edward.\nUntil about 1350, Edmund the Martyr, Gregory the Great, and Edward the Confessor were regarded as English national saints, but Edward III preferred the more war-like figure of Saint George, and in 1348 he established the Order of the Garter with Saint George as its patron. At Windsor Castle, its chapel of Saint Edward the Confessor was re-dedicated to Saint George, who was acclaimed in 1351 as patron of the English race. Edward was a less popular saint for many, but he was important to the Norman dynasty, which claimed to be the successor of Edward as the last legitimate Anglo-Saxon king.\nThe shrine of Saint Edward the Confessor in Westminster Abbey remains where it was after the final translation of his body to a chapel east of the sanctuary on 13 October 1269 by Henry III. The day of his translation, 13 October (his first translation had also been on that date in 1163), is an optional memorial in the Catholic dioceses of England only. Saint Edward may also be commemorated on the anniversary of his death, 5 January, the date he is inscribed in the \"Martyrologium Romanum\". The Church of England's calendar of saints designates 13 October as a Lesser Festival. Each October the abbey holds a week of festivities and prayer in his honour. Edward is also regarded as a patron saint of difficult marriages.\nAppearance and character.\nThe \"Vita \u00c6dwardi Regis\" states \"[H]e was a very proper figure of a man \u2013 of outstanding height, and distinguished by his milky white hair and beard, full face and rosy cheeks, thin white hands, and long translucent fingers; in all the rest of his body he was an unblemished royal person. Pleasant, but always dignified, he walked with eyes downcast, most graciously affable to one and all. If some cause aroused his temper, he seemed as terrible as a lion, but he never revealed his anger by railing.\" This, as the historian Richard Mortimer notes, 'contains obvious elements of the ideal king, expressed in flattering terms \u2013 tall and distinguished, affable, dignified and just.'\nEdward was allegedly not above accepting bribes. According to the Ramsey \"Liber Benefactorum\", the monastery's abbot decided that it would be dangerous to publicly contest a claim brought by \"a certain powerful man\", but he claimed he was able to procure a favourable judgment by giving Edward twenty marks in gold and his wife five marks.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40244", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40244", "title": "Open Systems Interconnection", "text": ""}
{"id": "40245", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40245", "title": "Halotolerance", "text": "Adaptation to high salinity\nHalotolerance is the adaptation of living organisms to conditions of high salinity. Halotolerant species tend to live in areas such as hypersaline lakes, coastal dunes, saline deserts, salt marshes, and inland salt seas and springs. Halophiles are also organisms that not only live in highly saline environments but also \"require\" the salinity to survive. Halotolerant organisms on the other hand (belonging to different domains of life) can grow under saline conditions, but do not require elevated concentrations of salt for growth. Halophytes are salt-tolerant higher plants. Halotolerant microorganisms are of considerable biotechnological interest.\nApplications.\nFields of scientific research relevant to halotolerance include biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology, physiology, ecology, and genetics.\nAn understanding of halotolerance can be applicable to areas such as arid-zone agriculture, xeriscaping, aquaculture (of fish or algae), bioproduction of desirable compounds (such as phycobiliproteins or carotenoids) using seawater to support growth, or remediation of salt-affected soils. In addition, many environmental stressors involve or induce osmotic changes, so knowledge gained about halotolerance can also be relevant to understanding tolerance to extremes in moisture or temperature.\nGoals of studying halotolerance include increasing the agricultural productivity of lands affected by soil salination or where only saline water is available. Conventional agricultural species could be made more halotolerant by gene transfer from naturally halotolerant species (by conventional breeding or genetic engineering) or by applying treatments developed from an understanding of the mechanisms of halotolerance. In addition, naturally halotolerant plants or microorganisms could be developed into useful agricultural crops or fermentation organisms.\nCellular functions in halophytes.\nTolerance of high salt conditions can be obtained through several routes. High levels of salt entering the plant can trigger ionic imbalances which cause complications in respiration and photosynthesis, leading to reduced rates of growth, injury and death in severe cases. To be considered tolerant of saline conditions, the protoplast must show methods of balancing the toxic and osmotic effects of the increased salt concentrations. Halophytic vascular plants can survive on soils with salt concentrations around 6%, or up to 20% in extreme cases (ocean salinity is around 3.5%). Tolerance of such conditions is reached through the use of stress proteins and compatible cytoplasm osmotic solutes.\nTo exist in such conditions, halophytes tend to be subject to the uptake of high levels of salt into their cells, and this is often required to maintain an osmotic potential lower than that of the soil to ensure water uptake. High salt concentrations within the cell can be damaging to sensitive organelles such as the chloroplast, so sequestration of salt is seen. Under this action, salt is stored within the vacuole to protect such delicate areas. If high salt concentrations are seen within the vacuole, a high concentration gradient will be established between the vacuole and the cytoplasm, leading to high levels of energy investment to maintain this state. Therefore, the accumulation of compatible cytoplasmic osmotic solutes can be seen to prevent this situation from occurring. Amino acids such as proline accumulate in halophytic Brassica species, quaternary ammonium bases such as Glycine Betaine and sugars have been shown to act in this role within halophytic members of Chenopodiaceae and members of Asteraceae show the buildup of cyclites and soluble sugars. The buildup of these compounds allow for the balancing of the osmotic effect while preventing the establishment of toxic concentrations of salt or requiring the maintenance of high concentration gradients.\nBacterial halotolerance.\nThe extent of halotolerance varies widely amongst different species of bacteria. A number of cyanobacteria are halotolerant; an example location of occurrence for such cyanobacteria is in the Makgadikgadi Pans, a large hypersaline lake in Botswana.\nFungal halotolerance.\nFungi from habitats with high concentration of salt are mostly halotolerant (i.e. they do not require salt for growth) and not halophilic. Halophilic fungi are a rare exception. Halotolerant fungi constitute a relatively large and constant part of hypersaline environment communities, such as those in the solar salterns. Well studied examples include the yeast \"Debaryomyces hansenii \"and black yeasts \"Aureobasidium pullulans\" and \"Hortaea werneckii\". The latter can grow in media without salt, as well as in almost saturated NaCl solutions. To emphasize this unusually wide adaptability, some authors describe \"H. werneckii \"as \"extremely halotolerant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40247", "revid": "42425010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40247", "title": "Pulsed inductive thruster", "text": "A pulsed inductive thruster (PIT) is a form of ion thruster, used in spacecraft propulsion. It is a plasma propulsion engine using perpendicular electric and magnetic fields to accelerate a propellant with no electrode.\nOperation.\nA nozzle releases a puff of gas which spreads across a flat spiraling induction coil of wire about 1 meter across. A bank of capacitors releases a pulse of high voltage electric current of tens of kilovolts lasting 10 microseconds into the coil, generating a radial magnetic field. This induces a circular electrical field in the gas, ionizing it and causing charged particles (free electrons and ions) to revolve in the opposite direction as the original pulse of current. Because the motion of this induced current flow is perpendicular to the magnetic field, the plasma is accelerated out into space by the Lorentz force at a high exhaust velocity (10 to 100\u00a0km/s).\nAdvantages.\nUnlike an electrostatic ion thruster which uses an electric field to accelerate only one species (positive ions), a PIT uses the Lorentz body force acting upon all charged particles within a quasi-neutral plasma. Unlike most other ion and plasma thrusters, it also requires no electrodes (which are susceptible to erosion) and its power can be scaled up simply by increasing the number of pulses per second. A 1-megawatt system would pulse 200 times per second.\nPulsed inductive thrusters can maintain constant specific impulse and thrust efficiency over a wide range of input power levels by adjusting the pulse rate to maintain a constant discharge energy per pulse. It has demonstrated efficiency greater than 50%.\nPulsed inductive thrusters can use a wide range of gases as a propellant, such as water, hydrazine, ammonia, argon, or xenon, among many others. Due to this ability, it has been suggested to use PITs for Martian missions: an orbiter could refuel by scooping CO2 from the atmosphere of Mars, compressing the gas and liquefying it into storage tanks for the return journey or another interplanetary mission, whilst orbiting the planet.\nDevelopments.\nEarly development began with fundamental proof-of-concept studies performed in the mid-1960s. NASA conducts experiments on this device since the early 1980s.\nPIT Mk V, VI and VII.\nNGST (Northrop Grumman Space Technology), as a contractor for NASA, built several experimental PITs.\nResearch efforts during the first period (1965\u20131973) were aimed at understanding the structure of an inductive current sheet and evaluating different concepts for propellant injection and preionization.\nIn the second period (1979\u20131988), the focus shifted more towards developing a true propulsion system and increasing the performance of the base design through incremental design changes, with the build of \"Mk I\" and \"Mk IV\" prototypes.\nThe third period (1991-today) began with the introduction of a new PIT thruster design known as the \"Mk V\". It evolved into the \"Mk VI\", developed to reproduce Mk V single-shot tests, which completely characterize thruster performance. It uses an improved coil of hollow copper tube construction and an improved propellant valve, but is electrically identical to the Mk V, using the same capacitors and switches. The \"Mk VII\" (early 2000s) has the same geometry as Mk VI, but is designed for high pulse frequency and long-duration firing with a liquid-cooled coil, longer-life capacitors, and fast, high-power solid-state switches. The goal for Mk VII is to demonstrate up to 50 pulses per second at the rated efficiency and impulse bit at 200\u00a0kW of input power in a single thruster. Mk VII design is the base for the most recent \"NuPIT\" (Nuclear-electric PIT).\nThe PIT has obtained relatively high performance in the laboratory environment, but it still requires additional advancements in switching technology and energy storage before becoming practical for high-power in-space applications, with the need for a nuclear-based onboard power source.\nFARAD.\n\"FARAD\", which stands for \"Faraday accelerator with radio-frequency assisted discharge\", is a lower-power alternative to the PIT that has the potential for space operation using current technologies.\nIn the PIT, both propellant ionization and acceleration are performed by the HV pulse of current in the induction coil, while FARAD uses a separate inductive RF discharge to preionize the propellant before it is accelerated by the current pulse. This preionization allows FARAD to operate at much\nlower discharge energies than the PIT (100 joules per pulse vs 4 kilojoules per pulse) and allows for a reduction in the thruster's size.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40248", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40248", "title": "Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket", "text": "Electrothermal thruster in development\nThe Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) is an electrothermal thruster under development for possible use in spacecraft propulsion. It uses radio waves to ionize and heat an inert propellant, forming a plasma, then a magnetic field to confine and accelerate the expanding plasma, generating thrust. It is a plasma propulsion engine, one of several types of spacecraft electric propulsion systems.\nThe VASIMR method for heating plasma was originally developed during nuclear fusion research. VASIMR is intended to bridge the gap between high thrust, low specific impulse chemical rockets and low thrust, high specific impulse electric propulsion, but has not yet demonstrated high thrust. The VASIMR concept originated in 1977 with former NASA astronaut Franklin Chang-D\u00edaz, who has been developing the technology ever since.\nDesign and operation.\nVASIMR is a type of electrothermal plasma thruster/electrothermal magnetoplasma thruster. In these engines, a neutral, inert propellant is ionized and heated using radio waves. The resulting plasma is then accelerated with magnetic fields to generate thrust. Other related electrically powered spacecraft propulsion concepts are the electrodeless plasma thruster, the microwave arcjet rocket, and the pulsed inductive thruster. \nThe propellant, a neutral gas such as argon or xenon, is injected into a hollow cylinder surfaced with electromagnets. On entering the engine, the gas is first heated to a \"cold plasma\" by a helicon RF antenna/coupler that bombards the gas with electromagnetic energy, at a frequency of 10 to 50 MHz, stripping electrons off the propellant atoms and producing a plasma of ions and free electrons. By varying the amount of RF heating energy and plasma, VASIMR is claimed to be capable of generating either low-thrust, high\u2013specific impulse exhaust or relatively high-thrust, low\u2013specific impulse exhaust. The second phase of the engine is a strong solenoid-configuration electromagnet that channels the ionized plasma, acting as a convergent-divergent nozzle like the physical nozzle in conventional rocket engines.\nA second coupler, known as the Ion Cyclotron Heating (ICH) section, emits electromagnetic waves in resonance with the orbits of ions and electrons as they travel through the engine. Resonance is achieved through a reduction of the magnetic field in this portion of the engine that slows the orbital motion of the plasma particles. This section further heats the plasma to greater than \u2014about 173 times the temperature of the Sun's surface.\nThe path of ions and electrons through the engine approximates lines parallel to the engine walls; however, the particles actually orbit those lines while traveling linearly through the engine. The final, diverging, section of the engine contains an expanding magnetic field that ejects the ions and electrons from the engine at velocities as great as .\nAdvantages.\nIn contrast to the typical cyclotron resonance heating processes, VASIMR ions are immediately ejected from the magnetic nozzle before they achieve thermalized distribution. Based on novel theoretical work in 2004 by Alexey V. Arefiev and Boris N. Breizman of University of Texas at Austin, virtually all of the energy in the ion cyclotron wave is uniformly transferred to ionized plasma in a single-pass cyclotron absorption process. This allows for ions to leave the magnetic nozzle with a very narrow energy distribution, and for significantly simplified and compact magnet arrangement in the engine.\nVASIMR does not use electrodes; instead, it magnetically shields plasma from most hardware parts, thus eliminating electrode erosion, a major source of wear in ion engines. Compared to traditional rocket engines with very complex plumbing, high performance valves, actuators and turbopumps, VASIMR has almost no moving parts (apart from minor ones, like gas valves), maximizing long term durability.\nDisadvantages.\nAccording to Ad Astra as of 2015, the VX-200 engine requires 200\u00a0kW electrical power to produce 5 N of thrust, or 40\u00a0kW/N. In contrast, the conventional NEXT ion thruster produces 0.327 N with only 7.7\u00a0kW, or 24\u00a0kW/N. Electrically speaking, NEXT is almost twice as efficient, and successfully completed a 48,000 hours (5.5 years) test in December 2009.\nNew problems also emerge with VASIMR, such as interaction with strong magnetic fields and thermal management. The inefficiency with which VASIMR operates generates substantial waste heat that needs to be channeled away without creating thermal overload and thermal stress. The superconducting electromagnets necessary to contain hot plasma generate tesla-range magnetic fields that can cause problems with other onboard devices and produce unwanted torque by interaction with the magnetosphere. To counter this latter effect, two thruster units can be packaged with magnetic fields oriented in opposite directions, making a net zero-torque magnetic quadrupole.\nResearch and development.\nThe first VASIMR experiment was conducted at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1983. Important refinements were introduced in the 1990s, including the use of the helicon plasma source, which replaced the plasma gun originally envisioned and its electrodes, adding to durability and long life.\nAs of 2010,[ [update]] Ad Astra Rocket Company (AARC) was responsible for VASIMR development, signing the first Space Act Agreement on 23 June 2005 to privatize VASIMR technology. Franklin Chang-D\u00edaz is Ad Astra's chairman and CEO, and the company had a testing facility in Liberia, Costa Rica on the campus of Earth University.\nVX-10 to VX-50.\nIn 1998, the first helicon plasma experiment was performed at the ASPL. VASIMR experiment 10 (VX-10) in 1998 achieved a helicon RF plasma discharge of up to 10\u00a0kW and VX-25 in 2002 of up to 25\u00a0kW. By 2005 progress at ASPL included full and efficient plasma production and acceleration of the plasma ions with the 50\u00a0kW, thrust VX-50. Published data on the 50\u00a0kW VX-50 showed the electrical efficiency to be 59% based on a 90% coupling efficiency and a 65% ion speed boosting efficiency.\nVX-100.\nThe 100 kilowatt VASIMR experiment was successfully running by 2007 and demonstrated efficient plasma production with an ionization cost below 100eV. VX-100 plasma output tripled the prior record of the VX-50.\nThe VX-100 was expected to have an ion speed boosting efficiency of 80%, but could not achieve this efficiency due to losses from the conversion of DC electric current to radio frequency power and the auxiliary equipment for the superconducting magnet. In contrast, 2009 state-of-the-art, proven ion engine designs such as NASA's High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) operated at 80% total thruster/PPU energy efficiency.\nVX-200.\nOn 24 October 2008, the company announced in a press release that the helicon plasma generation component of the 200\u00a0kW VX-200 engine had reached operational status. The key enabling technology, solid-state DC-RF power-processing, reached 98% efficiency. The helicon discharge used 30\u00a0kW of radio waves to turn argon gas into plasma. The remaining 170\u00a0kW of power was allocated for acceleration of plasma in the second part of the engine, via ion cyclotron resonance heating.\nBased on data from VX-100 testing, it was expected that, if room temperature superconductors are ever discovered, the VX-200 engine would have a system efficiency of 60\u201365% and a potential thrust level of 5\u00a0N. Optimal specific impulse appeared to be around 5,000\u00a0s using low cost argon propellant. One of the remaining untested issues was whether the hot plasma actually detached from the rocket. Another issue was waste heat management. About 60% of input energy became useful kinetic energy. Much of the remaining 40% is secondary ionizations from plasma crossing magnetic field lines and exhaust divergence. A significant portion of that 40% was waste heat (see energy conversion efficiency). Managing and rejecting that waste heat is critical.\nBetween April and September 2009, 200\u00a0kW tests were performed on the VX-200 prototype with 2 tesla superconducting magnets that are powered separately and not accounted for in any \"efficiency\" calculations. During November 2010, long duration, full power firing tests were performed, reaching steady state operation for 25 seconds and validating basic design characteristics.\nResults presented in January 2011 confirmed that the design point for optimal efficiency on the VX-200 is 50\u00a0km/s exhaust velocity, or an \"I\"sp of 5000s. The 200\u00a0kW VX-200 had executed more than 10,000 engine firings with argon propellant at full power by 2013, demonstrating greater than 70% thruster efficiency relative to RF power input.\nVX-200SS.\nIn March 2015, Ad Astra announced a $10 million award from NASA to advance the technology readiness of the next version of the VASIMR engine, the VX-200SS to meet the needs of deep space missions. The SS in the name stands for \"steady state\", as a goal of the long duration test is to demonstrate continuous operation at thermal steady state.\nIn August 2016, Ad Astra announced completion of the milestones for the first year of its 3-year contract with NASA. This allowed for first high-power plasma firings of the engines, with a stated goal to reach 100hr and 100\u00a0kW by mid-2018. In August 2017, the company reported completing its Year 2 milestones for the VASIMR electric plasma rocket engine. NASA gave approval for Ad Astra to proceed with Year 3 after reviewing completion of a 10-hour cumulative test of the VX-200SS engine at 100kW. It appears as though the planned 200\u00a0kW design is being run at 100\u00a0kW for reasons that are not mentioned in the press release. \nIn August 2019, Ad Astra announced the successful completion of tests of a new generation radio-frequency (RF) Power Processing Unit (PPU) for the VASIMR engine, built by Aethera Technologies Ltd. of Canada. Ad Astra declared a power of 120 kW and &gt;97% electrical-to-RF power efficiency, and that, at 52\u00a0kg, the new RF PPU is about 10x lighter than the PPUs of competing electric thrusters (power-to-weight ratio: 2.31\u00a0kW/kg)\nIn July 2021, Ad Astra announced the completion of a record-breaking test for the engine, running it for 28 hours at a power level of 82.5kW. A second test, conducted from July 12 to 16, successfully ran the engine for 88 hours at a power level of 80kW. Ad Astra anticipates conducting 100kW power level tests in 2023.\nPotential applications.\nVASIMR has a comparatively poor thrust-to-weight ratio, and requires an ambient vacuum.\nProposed applications for VASIMR such as the rapid transportation of people to Mars would require a very high power, low mass energy source, ten times more efficient than a nuclear reactor (see nuclear electric rocket). In 2010 NASA Administrator Charles Bolden said that VASIMR technology could be the breakthrough technology that would reduce the travel time on a Mars mission from 2.5 years to 5 months. However this claim has not been repeated in the last decade.\nIn August 2008, Tim Glover, Ad Astra director of development, publicly stated that the first expected application of VASIMR engine is \"hauling things [non-human cargo] from low-Earth orbit to low-lunar orbit\" supporting NASA's return to Moon efforts.\nMars in 39 days.\nIn order to conduct an imagined crewed trip to Mars in 39 days, the VASIMR would require a very high electrical power level.\nOn top of that, any power generation technology will produce waste heat. The necessary 200 megawatt reactor \"with a power-to-mass density of 1,000 watts per kilogram\" would require extremely efficient radiators to avoid the need for \"football-field sized radiators\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40249", "revid": "16941980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40249", "title": "Mongolian writing systems", "text": "Writing systems devised for the Mongolian language\nVarious Mongolian writing systems have been devised for the Mongolian language over the centuries, and from a variety of scripts. The oldest and native script, called simply the Mongolian script, has been the predominant script during most of Mongolian history, and is still in active use today in the Inner Mongolia region of China and has \"de facto\" use in Mongolia. \nIt has in turn spawned several alphabets, either as attempts to fix its perceived shortcomings, or to allow the notation of other languages, such as Chinese, Sanskrit and Tibetan. In the 20th century, Mongolia briefly switched to the Latin script, but then almost immediately replaced it with the modified Cyrillic alphabet because of its smaller discrepancy between written and spoken form, contributing to the success of the literacy campaign, which increased the literacy rate from 17.3% to 73.5% between 1941 and 1950. Nevertheless, Mongols living in Inner Mongolia as well as other parts of China continued to use alphabets based on the traditional Mongolian script.\nIn March 2020, the Government of Mongolia announced plans to use the traditional Mongolian script alongside the Cyrillic script in official documents (e.g. identity documents, academic certificates, birth certificates, marriage certificates, among others) as well as the State Great Khural by 2025, although the Cyrillic script could be used alone on an optional basis for less official writing.\nPrecursors.\nThe Xianbei spoke a proto-Mongolic language and wrote down several pieces of literature in their language. They are believed to have used Chinese characters to phonetically represent Xianbei, like the Japanese system of Man'y\u014dgana with Chinese, but all works written in Xianbei are now lost.\nIn 2019, with the emergence of new evidence through the analysis of the \"Br\u0101hm\u012b Bugut\" and \"Kh\u00fcis Tolgoi\", Rouran language was deciphered, and Rouran was spelled in Brahmi script.\nThe Khitan spoke another proto-Mongolic language and developed two scripts for writing it: Khitan large script and Khitan small script, logographic scripts derived from Chinese characters.\nClassic Mongolian scripts.\nTraditional alphabet.\nAt the very beginning of the Mongol Empire, around 1204, Genghis Khan defeated the Naimans and captured a Uyghur scribe called Tata-tonga, who then adapted the Uyghur alphabet\u2014a descendant of the Syriac alphabet, via Sogdian\u2014to write Mongol. With only minor modifications, it is used in Inner Mongolia to this day. Its most salient feature is its vertical direction; it is the only vertical script still in use that is written from left to right. (All other vertical writing systems are written right to left.) This is because the Uyghurs rotated their script 90 degrees anticlockwise to emulate the Chinese writing system.\nAs a variant of the traditional script there exists a \"vertical square script\" (\u0411\u043e\u0441\u043e\u043e \u0434\u04e9\u0440\u0432\u04e9\u043b\u0436\u0438\u043d), also called \"folded script\", used e.g. on the Mongolian banknotes.\nGalik alphabet.\nIn 1587, the translator and scholar Ayuush G\u00fc\u00fcsh created the Galik alphabet, inspired by Sonam Gyatso, the third Dalai Lama. It primarily added extra letters to transcribe Tibetan and Sanskrit terms in religious texts, and later also from Chinese and Russian. Later some of these letters were officially merged into traditional alphabet as a group named \"Galig usug\" to transcribe foreign words in modern use.\nTodo alphabet.\nIn 1648, the Oirat Buddhist monk Zaya Pandita created this variation with the goal of bringing the written language closer to the actual Oirat pronunciation, and to make it easier to transcribe Tibetan and Sanskrit. The script was used by Kalmyks of Russia until 1924, when it was replaced by the Cyrillic alphabet. In Xinjiang, China, the Oirats still use it.\n'Phags-pa script (Square script).\nThe traditional Mongolian alphabet is not a perfect fit for the Mongolian language, and it would be impractical to extend it to a language with a very different phonology like Chinese. Therefore, during the Yuan dynasty (c.\u20091269), Kublai Khan asked a Tibetan monk, Drog\u00f6n Ch\u00f6gyal Phagpa, to design a new script for use by the whole empire. Phagpa extended his native Tibetan script to encompass Mongolian and Chinese; the result was known by several descriptive names, such as the \"Mongolian new script\", but today is known as the 'Phags-pa script. The script did not receive wide acceptance and fell into disuse with the collapse of the Yuan dynasty in 1368. After this it was mainly used as a phonetic gloss for Mongols learning Chinese characters. However, scholars such as Gari Ledyard believe that in the meantime it was the source of some of the basic letters of the Korean hangul alphabet.\nSoyombo script.\nThe Soyombo script is an abugida created by the Mongolian monk and scholar Bogdo Zanabazar in the late 17th century, that can also be used to write Tibetan and Sanskrit. A special glyph in the script, the Soyombo symbol, became a national symbol of Mongolia, and has appeared on the national flag since 1921, and on the national coat of arms since 1992, as well as money, stamps, etc.\nZanabazar had created it for the translation of Buddhist texts from Sanskrit or Tibetan, and both he and his students used it extensively for that purpose. Aside from historical texts, it can usually be found in temple inscriptions. It also has some relevance to linguistic research, because it reflects certain developments in the Mongolian language, such as that of long vowels.\nHorizontal square script.\nAt around the same time, Zanabazar also developed the \"horizontal square script\" (\u0425\u044d\u0432\u0442\u044d\u044d \u0434\u04e9\u0440\u0432\u04e9\u043b\u0436\u0438\u043d), which was only rediscovered in 1801. The script's applications during the period of its use are not known. It was also largely based on the Tibetan alphabet, read left to right, and employed vowel diacritics above and below the consonant letters. Additionally, a dot was used below consonants to show that they were syllable-final.\nHorizontal square script is included in the Unicode Standard under the name \"Zanabazar Square\". The Zanabazar Square block, comprising 72 characters, was added as part of Unicode version 10.0 in June 2017.\nForeign scripts.\nBefore the 13th century, foreign scripts such as the Uighur and the Tibetan scripts were used to write the Mongolian language. Even during the reign of the Mongol Empire, people in the conquered areas often wrote it in their local systems. In some cases it was transcribed phonetically using Chinese characters, as is the case with the only surviving copies of \"The Secret History of the Mongols\". Subjects from the Middle East hired into administrative functions would also often use Perso-Arabic script to write their Mongolian language documents.\nLatin script.\nOn 1 February 1930, Mongolia officially adopted a Latin alphabet. On 25 March 1941, the decision was reversed. According to later official claims, the alphabet had turned out to have not been thought out well. It was said not to distinguish all the sounds of the Mongolian language, and was difficult to use. Using \"y\" as feminine \"u\" , with additional feminine \"o\" (\"\u04e9\") and with additional consonants \"\u00e7\" for \"ch\" , \"\u015f\" for \"sh\" and \u01b6 for \"zh\" , it successfully served in printing books and newspapers. Many of the Latin letters (f, h, p, v) were even rarely used while q, w and x were completely excluded. The adoption of the Cyrillic script a short time later, almost simultaneously with most Soviet republics, suggests political reasons. In the advent of the Internet, people who use social networking services prefer typing in the Latin script for the ease of typing compared to the Cyrillic script, using the orthography introduced in 1939.\nCyrillic script.\nThe most recent Mongolian alphabet is based on the Cyrillic script, more specifically the Russian alphabet plus the letters, \u04e8\u04e9 \"\u00d6\u00f6\" and \u04ae\u04af \"\u00dc\u00fc\". It was introduced in the 1940s and has been in use as the official writing system of Mongolia ever since.\nIn March 2020, the Government of Mongolia announced plans to use the traditional Mongolian script alongside Cyrillic in official documents starting from 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40250", "revid": "44959787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40250", "title": "Specific impulse", "text": "Change in velocity per amount of fuel\nSpecific impulse (usually abbreviated as \"I\"sp) is a measure of how efficiently an engine, such as a rocket or jet engine generates thrust. It is either measured in units of velocity (metres per second, or feet per second), or time (seconds). When measured in velocity, this is the effective exhaust velocity used in the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation which calculates how much an engine with a given quantity of fuel can change a vehicle's velocity. When measured as a time, \"I\"sp is the velocity divided by earth's gravity, \"g\". This is convenient because the time is the same in metric and English units. This is the time that one kilogram of fuel can produce one kilogram of thrust, which is equal to the time that one pound of fuel can produce one pound of thrust.\nSpecific impulse is a ratio of the \"impulse\", i.e. change in momentum, to the \"mass\" of propellant. This is equivalent to \"thrust per massflow\".\nMathematical derivation.\nIf the engine expels mass at a constant exhaust velocity formula_1 then the thrust is:\nformula_2.\nIf this is integrated over time, the result is the total change in momentum. This is divided by the mass, showing that the specific impulse is equal to the exhaust velocity formula_1. In practice, the specific impulse is usually lower than the actual physical exhaust velocity due to inefficiencies in the rocket, and thus corresponds to an \"effective\" exhaust velocity. \nThat is, the specific impulse formula_4 in units of velocity \"is defined by\" \n formula_5, \nwhere formula_6 is the average thrust.\nThe practical meaning of the measurement varies with different types of engines. Car engines consume onboard fuel, breathe environmental air to burn the fuel, and react (through the tires) against the ground beneath them. In this case, the interpretation is momentum per fuel burned.\nChemical rocket engines, by contrast, carry with them their fuel, oxidizer, and reaction mass, so the measure is momentum per reaction mass.\nAirplane engines are in the middle, as they only react against airflow through the engine, but some of this reaction mass (and combustion ingredients) is breathed rather than carried on board. As such, \"specific impulse\" could be taken to mean either \"per reaction mass\", as with a rocket, or \"per fuel burned\" as with cars. The latter is the traditional and common choice. In sum, specific impulse is not practically comparable between different types of engines.\nSpecific impulse can be taken as a measure of efficiency. In cars and planes, it typically corresponds with fuel mileage; in rocketry, it corresponds to the achievable delta-\"v\", which is the typical way to measure changes between orbits, via the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation \n formula_7 \nwhere formula_4 is the specific impulse measured in units of velocity and formula_9 are the initial and final masses of the rocket. \nPropulsion systems.\nRockets.\nFor any chemical rocket engine, the momentum transfer efficiency depends heavily on the effectiveness of the nozzle; the nozzle is the primary means of converting reactant energy (e.g. thermal or pressure energy) into a flow of momentum all directed the same way. Therefore, nozzle shape and effectiveness has a great impact on total momentum transfer from the reaction mass to the rocket. \nEfficiency of conversion of input energy to reactant energy also matters; be that thermal energy in combustion engines or electrical energy in ion engines, the engineering involved in converting such energy to outbound momentum can have high impact on specific impulse. Specific impulse in turn affects the achievable delta-v (through the rocket equation) and associated orbits achievable given a certain mass fraction. That is, a higher specific impulse allows one to deliver a larger fraction of mass as payload after imparting a certain delta-v. Optimizing the tradeoffs between mass fraction and specific impulse is one of the fundamental engineering challenges in rocketry.\nAlthough the specific impulse has units equivalent to velocity, it almost never corresponds to an actual physical velocity. In chemical and cold gas rockets, the shape of the nozzle has a high impact on the energy-to-momentum conversion, and is never perfect, and there are other sources of losses and inefficiencies (e.g. the details of the combustion in such engines). As such, the physical exhaust velocity is higher than the \"effective exhaust velocity\", i.e. that \"velocity\" suggested by the specific impulse. In any case, the momentum exchanged and the mass used to generate it \"are\" physically real measurements. Typically, rocket nozzles work better when the ambient pressure is lower, i.e. better in space than in atmosphere. Ion engines operate without a nozzle, although they have other sources of losses such that the momentum transferred is lower than the physical exhaust velocity.\nIt is common to express specific impulse as the product of two numbers: characteristic velocity which summarizes combustion chamber performance into a quantity with units of speed; and thrust coefficient, a dimensionless quantity that summarizes nozzle performance. An additional factor of formula_10 is simply a units conversion.\nformula_11\nUnits of seconds.\nRocketry typically converts units of velocity to units of time by dividing by a standard reference acceleration, that being standard gravity g0. This is a historical quirk of the imperial system which was pervasively used in early rocket engineering (and still is to a great extent, often alongside SI). Representing specific impulse in units of time has the advantage of being system-agnostic. Properly written out, specific impulse was originally defined as:\nformula_12 \nwhich is significantly easier to directly measure on a test stand than effective exhaust velocity (e.g. with load cells and flow meters), but is an equivalent way to represent the efficiency of the engine. Unlike the SI system with N and kg which uses a more direct relationship, the one-to-one correspondence between pound-force lbf and pound-mass lbm only works in standard Earth gravity, hence the appearance of g0 in the final equation. This could be avoided by using slugs instead of pound-mass, which would result in specific impulse being expressed in feet/second (like the m/s used in SI). However, lbm was and is a much more common unit and is what flowmeters, tanks and the like would have expressed propellant mass in.\nPhysically, it is the amount of time a rocket engine can generate thrust, given a quantity of propellant whose weight is equal to the engine's thrust. That is, in units of seconds the specific impulse formula_4 is defined by \n formula_14\nwhere formula_6 is again the average thrust and formula_16 is the standard gravity.\nCars.\nAlthough the car industry almost never uses specific impulse on any practical level, the measure can be defined, and makes good contrast against other engine types. Car engines breathe external air to combust their fuel, and (via the wheels) react against the ground. As such, the only meaningful way to interpret \"specific impulse\" is as \"thrust per fuelflow\", although one must also specify if the force is measured at the crankshaft or at the wheels, since there are transmission losses. Such a measure corresponds to fuel mileage.\nAirplanes.\nIn an aerodynamic context, there are similarities to both cars and rockets. Like cars, airplane engines breathe outside air; unlike cars they react only against fluids flowing through the engine (including the propellers as applicable). As such, there are several possible ways to interpret \"specific impulse\": as thrust per fuel flow, as thrust per breathing-flow, or as thrust per \"turbine-flow\" (i.e. excluding air though the propeller/bypass fan). Since the air breathed is not a direct cost, with wide engineering leeway on how much to breathe, the industry traditionally chooses the \"thrust per fuel flow\" interpretation with its focus on cost efficiency. In this interpretation, the resulting specific impulse numbers are much higher than for rocket engines, although this comparison is quite different \u2014 one is with and the other is without reaction mass. It exemplifies the advantage an airplane engine has over a rocket due to not having to carry the air it uses.\nAs with all kinds of engines, there are many engineering choices and tradeoffs that affect specific impulse. Nonlinear air resistance and the engine's inability to keep a high specific impulse at a fast burn rate are limiting factors to the fuel consumption rate.\nAs with rocket engines, the interpretation of specific impulse as a \"velocity\" does not actually correspond to the physical exhaust velocity. Since the usual interpretation excludes much of the reaction mass, the physical velocity of the reactants downstream is much lower than the effective exhaust velocity suggested from the Isp.\nGeneral considerations.\nSpecific impulse should not be confused with energy efficiency, which can decrease as specific impulse increases, since propulsion systems that give high specific impulse require high energy to do so.\nSpecific impulse should not be confused with total thrust. Thrust is the force supplied by the engine and depends on the propellant mass flow through the engine. Specific impulse measures the thrust \"per\" propellant mass flow. Thrust and specific impulse are related by the design and propellants of the engine in question, but this relationship is tenuous: in most cases, high thrust and high specific impulse are mutually exclusive engineering goals. For example, LH2/LO2 bipropellant produces higher \"I\"sp (due to higher chemical energy and lower exhaust molecular mass) but lower thrust than RP-1/LO2 (due to higher density and propellant flow). In many cases, propulsion systems with very high specific impulse\u2014some ion thrusters reach 25x-35x better \"I\"sp than chemical engines\u2014produce correspondingly low thrust. \nWhen calculating specific impulse, only propellant carried with the vehicle before use is counted, in the standard interpretation. This usage best corresponds to the cost of operating the vehicle. For a chemical rocket, unlike a plane or car, the propellant mass therefore would include both fuel and oxidizer. For any vehicle, optimizing for specific impulse is generally not the same as optimizing for total performance or total cost. In rocketry, a heavier engine with a higher specific impulse may not be as effective in gaining altitude, distance, or velocity as a lighter engine with a lower specific impulse, especially if the latter engine possesses a higher thrust-to-weight ratio. This is a significant reason for most rocket designs having multiple stages. The first stage can optimized for high thrust to effectively fight gravity drag and air drag, while the later stages operating strictly in orbit and in vacuum can be more easily optimized for higher specific impulse, especially for high delta-v orbits.\nPropellant quantity units.\nThe amount of propellant could be defined either in units of mass or weight. If mass is used, specific impulse is an impulse per unit of mass, which dimensional analysis shows to be equivalent to units of speed; this interpretation is commonly labeled the \"effective exhaust velocity\". If a force-based unit system is used, impulse is divided by propellant weight (weight is a measure of force), resulting in units of time. The problem with weight, as a measure of quantity, is that it depends on the acceleration applied to the propellant, which is arbitrary with no relation to the design of the engine. Historically, standard gravity was the reference conversion between weight and mass. But since technology has progressed to the point that we can measure Earth gravity's variation across the surface, and where such differences can cause differences in practical engineering projects (not to mention science projects on other solar bodies), modern science and engineering focus on mass as the measure of quantity, so as to remove the acceleration dependence. As such, measuring specific impulse by propellant mass gives it the same meaning for a car at sea level, an airplane at cruising altitude, or a helicopter on Mars.\nNo matter the choice of mass or weight, the resulting quotient of \"velocity\" or \"time\" usually doesn't correspond directly to an actual velocity or time. Due to various losses in real engines, the actual exhaust velocity is different from the Isp \"velocity\" (and for cars there isn't even a sensible definition of \"actual exhaust velocity\"). Rather, the specific impulse is just that: a physical momentum from a physical quantity of propellant (be that in mass or weight).\nUnits.\nThe most common unit for specific impulse is the second, as values are identical regardless of whether the calculations are done in SI, imperial, or US customary units. Nearly all manufacturers quote their engine performance in seconds, and the unit is also useful for specifying aircraft engine performance.\nThe use of metres per second to specify effective exhaust velocity is also reasonably common. The unit is intuitive when describing rocket engines, although the effective exhaust speed of the engines may be significantly different from the actual exhaust speed, especially in gas-generator cycle engines. For airbreathing jet engines, the effective exhaust velocity does not account for the mass of the air used (as the air is taken in from the environment), although it can still be used for comparison purposes.\nMetres per second are numerically equivalent to newton-seconds per kg (N\u00b7s/kg), and SI measurements of specific impulse can be written in terms of either units interchangeably. This unit highlights the definition of specific impulse as impulse per unit mass of propellant.\nSpecific fuel consumption is inversely proportional to specific impulse and has units of g/(kN\u00b7s) or lb/(lbf\u00b7h). Specific fuel consumption is used extensively for describing the performance of air-breathing jet engines.\nSpecific impulse in seconds.\nSpecific impulse, measured in seconds, can be thought of as how many seconds one kilogram of fuel can produce one kilogram of thrust. Or, more precisely, how many seconds a given propellant, when paired with a given engine, can accelerate its own initial mass at 1\u00a0g. The longer it can accelerate its own mass, the more delta-V it delivers to the whole system.\nIn other words, given a particular engine and a mass of a particular propellant, specific impulse measures for how long a time that engine can exert a continuous force (thrust) until fully burning that mass of propellant. A given mass of a more energy-dense propellant can burn for a longer duration than some less energy-dense propellant made to exert the same force while burning in an engine. Different engine designs burning the same propellant may not be equally efficient at directing their propellant's energy into effective thrust. \nFor all vehicles, specific impulse (impulse per unit weight-on-Earth of propellant) in seconds can be defined by the following equation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"I\"sp in seconds is the amount of time a rocket engine can generate thrust, given a quantity of propellant the weight of which is equal to the engine's thrust.\nThe advantage of this formulation is that it may be used for rockets, where all the reaction mass is carried on board, as well as airplanes, where most of the reaction mass is taken from the atmosphere. In addition, giving the result as a unit of time makes the result easily comparable between calculations in SI units, imperial units, US customary units or other unit framework.\nImperial units conversion.\nThe English unit pound mass is more commonly used than the slug, and when using pounds per second for mass flow rate, it is more convenient to express standard gravity as 1 pound-force per pound-mass. Note that this is equivalent to 32.17405 ft/s2, but expressed in more convenient units. This gives:\nformula_17\nRocketry.\nIn rocketry, the only reaction mass is the propellant, so the specific impulse is calculated using an alternative method, giving results with units of seconds. Specific impulse is defined as the thrust integrated over time per unit weight-on-Earth of the propellant:\nformula_18\nwhere\nIn rockets, due to atmospheric effects, the specific impulse varies with altitude, reaching a maximum in a vacuum. This is because the exhaust velocity is not simply a function of the chamber pressure, but is a function of the difference between the interior and exterior of the combustion chamber. Values are usually given for operation at sea level (\"sl\") or in a vacuum (\"vac\").\nSpecific impulse as effective exhaust velocity.\nBecause of the geocentric factor of \"g\"0 in the equation for specific impulse, many prefer an alternative definition. The specific impulse of a rocket can be defined in terms of thrust per unit mass flow of propellant. This is an equally valid (and in some ways somewhat simpler) way of defining the effectiveness of a rocket propellant. For a rocket, the specific impulse defined in this way is simply the effective exhaust velocity relative to the rocket, \"v\"e. \"In actual rocket nozzles, the exhaust velocity is not really uniform over the entire exit cross section and such velocity profiles are difficult to measure accurately. A uniform axial velocity, \"v\"e, is assumed for all calculations which employ one-dimensional problem descriptions. This effective exhaust velocity represents an average or mass equivalent velocity at which propellant is being ejected from the rocket vehicle.\" The two definitions of specific impulse are proportional to one another, and related to each other by:\nformula_22\nwhere\nThis equation is also valid for air-breathing jet engines, but is rarely used in practice.\nIt is related to the thrust, or forward force on the rocket by the equation:\nformula_27\nwhere formula_28 is the propellant mass flow rate, which is the rate of decrease of the vehicle's mass.\nA rocket must carry all its propellant with it, so the mass of the unburned propellant must be accelerated along with the rocket itself. Minimizing the mass of propellant required to achieve a given change in velocity is crucial to building effective rockets. The Tsiolkovsky rocket equation shows that for a rocket with a given empty mass and a given amount of propellant, the total change in velocity it can accomplish is proportional to the effective exhaust velocity. \nA spacecraft without propulsion follows an orbit determined by its trajectory and any gravitational field. Deviations from the corresponding velocity pattern (these are called \u0394\"v\") are achieved by sending exhaust mass in the direction opposite to that of the desired velocity change.\nActual exhaust speed versus effective exhaust speed.\nWhen an engine is run within the atmosphere, the exhaust velocity is reduced by atmospheric pressure, in turn reducing specific impulse. This is a reduction in the effective exhaust velocity, versus the actual exhaust velocity achieved in vacuum conditions. In the case of gas-generator cycle rocket engines, more than one exhaust gas stream is present as turbopump exhaust gas exits through a separate nozzle. Calculating the effective exhaust velocity requires averaging the two mass flows as well as accounting for any atmospheric pressure.\nFor air-breathing jet engines, particularly turbofans, the actual exhaust velocity and the effective exhaust velocity are different by orders of magnitude. This happens for several reasons. First, a good deal of additional momentum is obtained by using air as reaction mass, such that combustion products in the exhaust have more mass than the burned fuel. Next, inert gases in the atmosphere absorb heat from combustion, and through the resulting expansion provide additional thrust. Lastly, for turbofans and other designs there is even more thrust created by pushing against intake air which never sees combustion directly. These all combine to allow a better match between the airspeed and the exhaust speed, which saves energy/propellant and enormously increases the \"effective\" exhaust velocity while reducing the \"actual\" exhaust velocity. Again, this is because the mass of the air is not counted in the specific impulse calculation, thus attributing \"all\" of the thrust momentum to the mass of the fuel component of the exhaust, and omitting the reaction mass, inert gas, and effect of driven fans on overall engine efficiency from consideration. \nEssentially, the momentum of engine exhaust includes a lot more than just fuel, but specific impulse calculation ignores everything but the fuel. Even though the \"effective\" exhaust velocity for an air-breathing engine seems nonsensical in the context of actual exhaust velocity, this is still useful for comparing absolute fuel efficiency of different engines.\nDensity specific impulse.\nA related measure, the density specific impulse, sometimes also referred to as Density Impulse and usually abbreviated as \"I\"s\"d\" is the product of the average specific gravity of a given propellant mixture and the specific impulse. While less important than the specific impulse, it is an important measure in launch vehicle design, as a low specific impulse implies that bigger tanks will be required to store the propellant, which in turn will have a detrimental effect on the launch vehicle's mass ratio.\nSpecific fuel consumption.\nSpecific impulse is inversely proportional to specific fuel consumption (SFC) by the relationship \"I\"sp = 1/(\"go\"\u00b7SFC) for SFC in kg/(N\u00b7s) and \"I\"sp = 3600/SFC for SFC in lb/(lbf\u00b7hr).\nExamples.\nAn example of a specific impulse measured in time is 453\u00a0seconds, which is equivalent to an effective exhaust velocity of , for the RS-25 engines when operating in a vacuum. An air-breathing jet engine typically has a much larger specific impulse than a rocket; for example a turbofan jet engine may have a specific impulse of 6,000\u00a0seconds or more at sea level whereas a rocket would be between 200 and 400\u00a0seconds.\nAn air-breathing engine is thus much more propellant efficient than a rocket engine, because the air serves as reaction mass and oxidizer for combustion which does not have to be carried as propellant, and the actual exhaust speed is much lower, so the kinetic energy the exhaust carries away is lower and thus the jet engine uses far less energy to generate thrust. While the \"actual\" exhaust velocity is lower for air-breathing engines, the \"effective\" exhaust velocity is very high for jet engines. This is because the effective exhaust velocity calculation assumes that the carried propellant is providing all the reaction mass and all the thrust. Hence effective exhaust velocity is not physically meaningful for air-breathing engines; nevertheless, it is useful for comparison with other types of engines.\nThe highest specific impulse for a chemical propellant ever test-fired in a rocket engine was with a tripropellant of lithium, fluorine, and hydrogen. However, this combination is impractical. Lithium and fluorine are both extremely corrosive, lithium ignites on contact with air, fluorine ignites on contact with most fuels, and hydrogen, while not hypergolic, is an explosive hazard. Fluorine and the hydrogen fluoride (HF) in the exhaust are very toxic, which damages the environment, makes work around the launch pad difficult, and makes getting a launch license that much more difficult. The rocket exhaust is also ionized, which would interfere with radio communication with the rocket.\nNuclear thermal rocket engines differ from conventional rocket engines in that energy is supplied to the propellants by an external nuclear heat source instead of the heat of combustion. The nuclear rocket typically operates by passing liquid hydrogen gas through an operating nuclear reactor. Testing in the 1960s yielded specific impulses of about 850 seconds (8,340\u00a0m/s), about twice that of the Space Shuttle engines.\nA variety of other rocket propulsion methods, such as ion thrusters, give much higher specific impulse but with much lower thrust; for example the Hall-effect thruster on the SMART-1 satellite has a specific impulse of but a maximum thrust of only . The variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rocket (VASIMR) engine currently in development will theoretically yield , and a maximum thrust of .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40252", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40252", "title": "Rowrbrazzle", "text": "Magazine\nRowrbrazzle is an Amateur Press Association magazine devoted to funny animal cartoon illustration.\nHistory.\n\"Rowrbrazzle\" was founded in 1983 by Marc Schirmeister, who published the first issue in February 1984, and was editor for the first nineteen quarterly mailings. Fred Patten was then editor from January 1989 (Issue 20) through January 2005 until suffering a stroke and retiring after Issue 84. Edd Vick became Official Editor from April 2005 (Issue 85) to April 2007 (Issue 93), William Earl Haskell became Official Editor from Issue 94 (July 2007) to January 2016 (Issue 128) when he was forced to retire due to poor health, and Edd Vick became Official Editor again from April 2016 (Issue 129).\nThe first \"Rowrbrazzle\" was distributed to the association membership in February 1984.\nLandmark issue number 150 was distributed in July 2021, in a continuing uninterrupted run of 37 1/2 years.\nSignificance.\nFred Patten, onetime editor of \"Rowrbrazzle\", had this view of \"Rowrbrazzle\"'s significance:\n\"My thesis is that furry fandom coalesced out of sf fandom and comics fandom, blending elements from both of them and achieving its own critical mass in 1983/1984. The first clear signs of the independent furry fandom were the creation of its first APA, Rowrbrazzle, and the decision by some fans to self-publish furry comic books because there seemed to be enough fans of stories with talking animals to support them (as distinct from earlier attempts to self-publish comics which had to hope for sufficient sales from the public alone.)\n\"Rowrbrazzle started in February 1984. Since it was specifically an APA for writing and drawing funny animals as a genre and discussing the new fandom that was forming about them, it is a handy landmark to say that 'furry fandom existed at this time.'\"https://\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40253", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40253", "title": "Precognition", "text": "Paranormal sight of the future\nPrecognition (from the Latin 'before', and 'acquiring knowledge') is the purported psychic phenomenon of seeing, or otherwise becoming directly aware of, events in the future.\nThere is no accepted scientific evidence that precognition is a real effect, and it is widely considered to be pseudoscience. Precognition violates the principle of causality, that an effect cannot occur before its cause.\nPrecognition has been widely believed in throughout history. Despite the lack of scientific evidence, many people believe it to be real; it is still widely reported and remains a topic of research and discussion within the parapsychology community.\nPrecognitive phenomena.\nPrecognition is sometimes treated as an example of the wider phenomenon of prescience or foreknowledge, to understand by any means what is likely to happen in the future. It is distinct from premonition, which is a vaguer feeling of some impending disaster. Related activities such as predictive prophecy and fortune telling have been practised throughout history.\nPrecognitive dreams are the most widely reported occurrences of precognition. Usually, a dream or vision can only be identified as precognitive after the putative event has taken place. When such an event occurs after a dream, it is said to have \"broken the dream\".\nIn religion.\nIn Judaism it is believed that dreams are mostly insignificant while others \"have the potential to contain prophetic messages\". Others hold that dreams have meaning, and bad dreams require amelioration. According to the Book of Genesis, God granted Joseph precognition through prophetic dreams and the ability to interpret the dreams of others.\nPrecognition has a role in Buddhism with dreams believed to be 'mind-created phenomena'. Those dreams which 'warn of impending danger or even prepare us for overwhelming good news\" are considered the most important.\nHistory.\nThroughout history it has been believed that certain individuals have precognitive abilities, or that certain practices can induce such experiences, and these visions have sometimes been associated with important historical events. Despite the lack of scientific evidence, many people still believe in precognition. A poll in 2005 showed 73% of Americans believe in at least one type of paranormal experience, with 41% believing in extrasensory perception.\nAntiquity.\nSince ancient times precognition has been associated with dreams and trance states as well as waking premonitions, giving rise to acts of prophecy and fortune telling. Oracles, originally seen as sources of wisdom, became progressively associated with previsions of the future.\nSuch claims of seeing the future have never been without their sceptical critics. Aristotle carried out an inquiry into allegedly prophetic dreams in his \"On Divination in Sleep\". He accepted that \"it is quite conceivable that some dreams may be tokens and causes [of future events]\" but also believed that \"most [so-called prophetic] dreams are, however, to be classed as mere coincidences...\". Where Democritus had suggested that emanations from future events could be sent back to the dreamer, Aristotle proposed that it was, rather, the dreamer's sense impressions which reached forward to the event.\n17th\u201319th centuries.\nThe term \"precognition\" first appeared in the 17th century but did not come into common use among investigators until much later.\nAn early investigation into claims of precognition was published by the missionary Fr. P. Boilat in 1883. He claimed to have put an unspoken question to an African witch-doctor whom he mistrusted. Contrary to his expectations, the witch-doctor gave him the correct answer without ever having heard the question.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn the early 20th century J. W. Dunne, a British soldier and aeronautics engineer, experienced several dreams which he regarded as precognitive. He developed techniques to record and analyse them, identifying any correspondences between his future experiences and his recorded dreams. He reported his findings in his 1927 book \"An Experiment with Time\". In it he alleges that 10% of his dreams appeared to include some element of future experience. He also persuaded some friends to try the experiment on themselves, with mixed results. He noted a strong cognitive bias in which subjects, including himself, were reluctant to ascribe their dream correspondences to precognition and determinedly sought alternative explanations. Dunne concluded that precognitive elements in dreams are common and that many people unknowingly have them. He suggested also that dream precognition did not reference future events of all kinds, but specifically the future experiences of the dreamer. He was led to this idea when he found that a dream of a volcanic eruption appeared to foresee not the disaster itself but his subsequent misreading of an inaccurate account in a newspaper. \nEdith Lyttelton, who became President of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR), regarded his theory as consistent with her own idea of the superconscious. In 1932 he helped the SPR to conduct a more formal experiment, but he and the Society's lead researcher Theodore Besterman failed to agree on the significance of the results. Nevertheless, the Philosopher C. D. Broad remarked that, \"The only theory known to me which seems worth consideration is that proposed by Mr. Dunne in his Experiment with Time.\" \"An Experiment with Time\" was widely read and \"undoubtedly helped to form something of the imaginative climate of [the interwar] years\", influencing many writers of both fact and fiction both then and since. According to Flieger, \"Dunne's theory was so current and popular a topic that not to understand it was a mark of singularity.\" Major writers whose work was significantly influenced by his ideas on precognition in dreams and visions include H. G. Wells, J. B. Priestley and Olaf Stapledon. Vladimir Nabokov was also later influenced by Dunne.\nIn 1932 Charles Lindbergh's infant son was kidnapped, murdered and buried among trees. Psychologists Henry Murray and D. R. Wheeler used the event to test for dream precognition, by inviting the public to report any dreams of the child. A total of 1,300 dreams were reported. Only five per cent envisioned the child dead and only 4 of the 1,300 envisioned the location of the grave as amongst trees.\nThe first ongoing and organised research program on precognition was instituted by husband-and-wife team Joseph Banks Rhine and Louisa E. Rhine in the 1930s at Duke University's Parapsychology Laboratory. J. B. Rhine used a method of forced-choice matching in which participants guessed the order of a deck of 25 cards, each five of which bore one of five geometrical symbols. Although his results were positive and gained some academic acceptance, his methods were later shown to be badly flawed and subsequent researchers using more rigorous procedures were unable to reproduce his results. His mathematics was sometimes flawed, the experiments were not double-blinded or even necessarily single-blinded and some of the cards to be guessed were so thin that the symbol could be seen through the backing.\nSamuel G. Soal, another leading member of the SPR, was described by Rhine as one of his harshest critics, running many similar experiments with wholly negative results. However, from around 1940 he ran forced-choice ESP experiments in which a subject attempted to identify which of five animal pictures a subject in another room was looking at. Their performance on this task was at chance, but when the scores were matched with the card that came \"after\" the target card, three of the thirteen subjects showed a very high hit rate; Rhine now described Soal's work as \"a milestone in the field\". However analyses of Soal's findings, conducted several years later, concluded that the positive results were more likely the result of deliberate fraud. The controversy continued for many years more. In 1978 the statistician and parapsychology researcher Betty Markwick, while seeking to vindicate Soal, discovered that he had tampered with his data. The untainted experimental results showed no evidence of precognition.\nLate 20th century.\nAs more modern technology became available, more automated techniques of experimentation were developed that did not rely on hand-scoring of equivalence between targets and guesses, and in which the targets could be more reliably and readily tested at random. In 1969 Helmut Schmidt introduced the use of high-speed random event generators (REG) for precognition testing, and experiments were also conducted at the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Lab. Once again, flaws were found in all of Schmidt's experiments, when the psychologist C. E. M. Hansel found that several necessary precautions were not taken.\nScience fiction writer Philip K Dick believed that he had precognitive experiences and used the idea in some of his novels, especially as a central plot element in his 1956 science fiction short story \"The Minority Report\" and in his 1956 novel \"The World Jones Made\".\nIn 1963 the BBC television programme \"Monitor\" broadcast an appeal by the writer J.B. Priestley for experiences which challenged our understanding of Time. He received hundreds of letters in reply and believed that many of them described genuine precognitive dreams. In 2014 the BBC Radio 4 broadcaster Francis Spufford revisited Priestley's work and its relation to the ideas of J.W. Dunne.\nIn 1965 G. W. Lambert, a former Council member of the SPR, proposed five criteria that needed to be met before an account of a precognitive dream could be regarded as credible:\nDavid Ryback, a psychologist in Atlanta, used a questionnaire survey approach to investigate precognitive dreaming in college students during the 1980s. His survey of over 433 participants showed that 290 or 66.9 per cent reported some form of paranormal dream. He rejected many of these reports, but claimed that 8.8 per cent of the population was having actual precognitive dreams.\n21st century.\nIn 2011 the psychologist Daryl Bem, a Professor Emeritus at Cornell University, published findings showing statistical evidence for precognition in the \"Journal of Personality and Social Psychology\". The paper was heavily criticised, and the criticism widened to include the journal itself and the validity of the peer-review process. In 2012, an independent attempt to reproduce Bem's results was published, but it failed to do so. The widespread controversy led to calls for improvements in practice and for more research.\nScientific reception.\nClaims of precognition are, like any other claims, open to scientific criticism. However, the nature of the criticism must adapt to the nature of the claim.\nPseudoscience.\nClaims of precognition are criticised on three main grounds:\nConsequently, precognition is widely considered to be pseudoscience.\nViolation of causality.\nPrecognition would violate the principle of antecedence (causality); that is, that an effect does not happen before its cause. Information passing backwards in time (retrocausality) would need to be carried by physical particles doing the same. Experimental evidence from high-energy physics suggests that this cannot happen. There is therefore no direct justification for precognition from a physics-based approach.\nPrecognition would also contradict \"most of the neuroscience and psychology literature, from electrophysiology and neuroimaging to temporal effects found in psychophysical research.\"\nLack of evidence.\nA great deal of evidence for precognition has been put forward, both as witnessed anecdotes and as experimental results, but none has been accepted as rigorous scientific proof of the phenomenon. Even the most prominent pieces of evidence have been repeatedly rejected due to errors in those experiments as well as follow-on studies contradicting the original evidence. This suggests that the evidence was not valid in the first place.\nAlternative explanations.\nVarious known psychological processes have been put forward to explain experiences of apparent precognition. These include:\nPsychological explanations have also been proposed for belief in precognition. Psychologists have conducted experiments which are claimed to show that people who feel loss of control in their lives will turn to belief in precognition, because it gives them a sense of regaining control.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40254", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40254", "title": "Genetic algorithm", "text": "Competitive algorithm for searching a problem space\nIn computer science and operations research, a genetic algorithm (GA) is a metaheuristic inspired by the process of natural selection that belongs to the larger class of evolutionary algorithms (EA). Genetic algorithms are commonly used to generate high-quality solutions to optimization and search problems via biologically inspired operators such as selection, crossover, and mutation. Some examples of GA applications include optimizing decision trees for better performance, solving sudoku puzzles, hyperparameter optimization, and causal inference.\nMethodology.\nOptimization problems.\nIn a genetic algorithm, a population of candidate solutions (called individuals, creatures, organisms, or phenotypes) to an optimization problem is evolved toward better solutions. Each candidate solution has a set of properties (its chromosomes or genotype) which can be mutated and altered; traditionally, solutions are represented in binary as strings of 0s and 1s, but other encodings are also possible.\nThe evolution usually starts from a population of randomly generated individuals, and is an iterative process, with the population in each iteration called a \"generation\". In each generation, the fitness of every individual in the population is evaluated; the fitness is usually the value of the objective function in the optimization problem being solved. The more fit individuals are stochastically selected from the current population, and each individual's genome is modified (recombined and possibly randomly mutated) to form a new generation. The new generation of candidate solutions is then used in the next iteration of the algorithm. Commonly, the algorithm terminates when either a maximum number of generations has been produced, or a satisfactory fitness level has been reached for the population.\nA typical genetic algorithm requires:\nA standard representation of each candidate solution is as an array of bits (also called \"bit set\" or \"bit string\"). Arrays of other types and structures can be used in essentially the same way. The main property that makes these genetic representations convenient is that their parts are easily aligned due to their fixed size, which facilitates simple crossover operations. Variable length representations may also be used, but crossover implementation is more complex in this case. Tree-like representations are explored in genetic programming and graph-form representations are explored in evolutionary programming; a mix of both linear chromosomes and trees is explored in gene expression programming.\nOnce the genetic representation and the fitness function are defined, a GA proceeds to initialize a population of solutions and then to improve it through repetitive application of the mutation, crossover, inversion and selection operators.\nInitialization.\nThe population size depends on the nature of the problem, but typically contains hundreds or thousands of possible solutions. Often, the initial population is generated randomly, allowing the entire range of possible solutions (the search space). Occasionally, the solutions may be \"seeded\" in areas where optimal solutions are likely to be found or the distribution of the sampling probability tuned to focus in those areas of greater interest.\nSelection.\nDuring each successive generation, a portion of the existing population is selected to reproduce for a new generation. Individual solutions are selected through a \"fitness-based\" process, where fitter solutions (as measured by a fitness function) are typically more likely to be selected. Certain selection methods rate the fitness of each solution and preferentially select the best solutions. Other methods rate only a random sample of the population, as the former process may be very time-consuming.\nThe fitness function is defined over the genetic representation and measures the \"quality\" of the represented solution. The fitness function is always problem-dependent. For instance, in the knapsack problem one wants to maximize the total value of objects that can be put in a knapsack of some fixed capacity. A representation of a solution might be an array of bits, where each bit represents a different object, and the value of the bit (0 or 1) represents whether or not the object is in the knapsack. Not every such representation is valid, as the size of objects may exceed the capacity of the knapsack. The \"fitness\" of the solution is the sum of values of all objects in the knapsack if the representation is valid, or 0 otherwise.\nIn some problems, it is hard or even impossible to define the fitness expression; in these cases, a simulation may be used to determine the fitness function value of a phenotype (e.g. computational fluid dynamics is used to determine the air resistance of a vehicle whose shape is encoded as the phenotype), or even interactive genetic algorithms are used.\nGenetic operators.\nThe next step is to generate a second generation population of solutions from those selected, through a combination of genetic operators: crossover (also called recombination), and mutation.\nFor each new solution to be produced, a pair of \"parent\" solutions is selected for breeding from the pool selected previously. By producing a \"child\" solution using the above methods of crossover and mutation, a new solution is created which typically shares many of the characteristics of its \"parents\". New parents are selected for each new child, and the process continues until a new population of solutions of appropriate size is generated.\nAlthough reproduction methods that are based on the use of two parents are more \"biology inspired\", some research suggests that more than two \"parents\" generate higher quality chromosomes.\nThese processes ultimately result in the next generation population of chromosomes that is different from the initial generation. Generally, the average fitness will have increased by this procedure for the population, since only the best organisms from the first generation are selected for breeding, along with a small proportion of less fit solutions. These less fit solutions ensure genetic diversity within the genetic pool of the parents and therefore ensure the genetic diversity of the subsequent generation of children.\nOpinion is divided over the importance of crossover versus mutation. There are many references in Fogel (2006) that support the importance of mutation-based search.\nAlthough crossover and mutation are known as the main genetic operators, it is possible to use other operators such as regrouping, colonization-extinction, or migration in genetic algorithms.\nIt is worth tuning parameters such as the mutation probability, crossover probability and population size to find reasonable settings for the problem's complexity class being worked on. A very small mutation rate may lead to genetic drift (which is non-ergodic in nature). A recombination rate that is too high may lead to premature convergence of the genetic algorithm. A mutation rate that is too high may lead to loss of good solutions, unless elitist selection is employed. An adequate population size ensures sufficient genetic diversity for the problem at hand, but can lead to a waste of computational resources if set to a value larger than required.\nHeuristics.\nIn addition to the main operators above, other heuristics may be employed to make the calculation faster or more robust. The \"speciation\" heuristic penalizes crossover between candidate solutions that are too similar; this encourages population diversity and helps prevent premature convergence to a less optimal solution.\nTermination.\nThis generational process is repeated until a termination condition has been reached. Common terminating conditions are:\nThe building block hypothesis.\nGenetic algorithms are simple to implement, but their behavior is difficult to understand. In particular, it is difficult to understand why these algorithms frequently succeed at generating solutions of high fitness when applied to practical problems. The building block hypothesis (BBH) consists of:\nGoldberg describes the heuristic as follows:\n\"Short, low order, and highly fit schemata are sampled, recombined [crossed over], and resampled to form strings of potentially higher fitness. In a way, by working with these particular schemata [the building blocks], we have reduced the complexity of our problem; instead of building high-performance strings by trying every conceivable combination, we construct better and better strings from the best partial solutions of past samplings.\n\"Because highly fit schemata of low defining length and low order play such an important role in the action of genetic algorithms, we have already given them a special name: building blocks. Just as a child creates magnificent fortresses through the arrangement of simple blocks of wood, so does a genetic algorithm seek near optimal performance through the juxtaposition of short, low-order, high-performance schemata, or building blocks.\"\nDespite the lack of consensus regarding the validity of the building-block hypothesis, it has been consistently evaluated and used as reference throughout the years. Many estimation of distribution algorithms, for example, have been proposed in an attempt to provide an environment in which the hypothesis would hold. Although good results have been reported for some classes of problems, skepticism concerning the generality and/or practicality of the building-block hypothesis as an explanation for GAs' efficiency still remains. Indeed, there is a reasonable amount of work that attempts to understand its limitations from the perspective of estimation of distribution algorithms.\nLimitations.\nThe practical use of a genetic algorithm has limitations, especially as compared to alternative optimization algorithms:\nVariants.\nChromosome representation.\nThe simplest algorithm represents each chromosome as a bit string. Typically, numeric parameters can be represented by integers, though it is possible to use floating point representations. The floating point representation is natural to evolution strategies and evolutionary programming. The notion of real-valued genetic algorithms has been offered but is really a misnomer because it does not really represent the building block theory that was proposed by John Henry Holland in the 1970s. This theory is not without support though, based on theoretical and experimental results (see below). The basic algorithm performs crossover and mutation at the bit level. Other variants treat the chromosome as a list of numbers which are indexes into an instruction table, nodes in a linked list, hashes, objects, or any other imaginable data structure. Crossover and mutation are performed so as to respect data element boundaries. For most data types, specific variation operators can be designed. Different chromosomal data types seem to work better or worse for different specific problem domains.\nWhen bit-string representations of integers are used, Gray coding is often employed. In this way, small changes in the integer can be readily affected through mutations or crossovers. This has been found to help prevent premature convergence at so-called \"Hamming walls\", in which too many simultaneous mutations (or crossover events) must occur in order to change the chromosome to a better solution.\nOther approaches involve using arrays of real-valued numbers instead of bit strings to represent chromosomes. Results from the theory of schemata suggest that in general the smaller the alphabet, the better the performance, but it was initially surprising to researchers that good results were obtained from using real-valued chromosomes. This was explained as the set of real values in a finite population of chromosomes as forming a \"virtual alphabet\" (when selection and recombination are dominant) with a much lower cardinality than would be expected from a floating point representation.\nAn expansion of the Genetic Algorithm accessible problem domain can be obtained through more complex encoding of the solution pools by concatenating several types of heterogenously encoded genes into one chromosome. This particular approach allows for solving optimization problems that require vastly disparate definition domains for the problem parameters. For instance, in problems of cascaded controller tuning, the internal loop controller structure can belong to a conventional regulator of three parameters, whereas the external loop could implement a linguistic controller (such as a fuzzy system) which has an inherently different description. This particular form of encoding requires a specialized crossover mechanism that recombines the chromosome by section, and it is a useful tool for the modelling and simulation of complex adaptive systems, especially evolution processes.\nAnother important expansion of the Genetic Algorithm (GA) accessible solution space was driven by the need to make representations amenable to variable levels of knowledge about the solution states. Variable-length representations were inspired by the observation that, in nature, evolution tends to progress from simpler organisms to more complex ones\u2014suggesting an underlying rationale for embracing flexible structures. A second, more pragmatic motivation was that most real-world engineering and knowledge-based problems do not naturally conform to rigid knowledge structures.\nThese early innovations in variable-length representations laid essential groundwork for the development of Genetic programming, which further extended the classical GA paradigm. Such representations required enhancements to the simplistic genetic operators used for fixed-length chromosomes, enabling the emergence of more sophisticated and adaptive GA models.\nElitism.\nA practical variant of the general process of constructing a new population is to allow the best organism(s) from the current generation to carry over to the next, unaltered. This strategy is known as \"elitist selection\" and guarantees that the solution quality obtained by the GA will not decrease from one generation to the next.\nParallel implementations.\nParallel implementations of genetic algorithms come in two flavors. Coarse-grained parallel genetic algorithms assume a population on each of the computer nodes and migration of individuals among the nodes. Fine-grained parallel genetic algorithms assume an individual on each processor node which acts with neighboring individuals for selection and reproduction.\nOther variants, like genetic algorithms for online optimization problems, introduce time-dependence or noise in the fitness function.\nAdaptive GAs.\nGenetic algorithms with adaptive parameters (adaptive genetic algorithms, AGAs) is another significant and promising variant of genetic algorithms. The probabilities of crossover (pc) and mutation (pm) greatly determine the degree of solution accuracy and the convergence speed that genetic algorithms can obtain. Researchers have analyzed GA convergence analytically.\nInstead of using fixed values of \"pc\" and \"pm\", AGAs utilize the population information in each generation and adaptively adjust the \"pc\" and \"pm\" in order to maintain the population diversity as well as to sustain the convergence capacity. In AGA (adaptive genetic algorithm), the adjustment of \"pc\" and \"pm\" depends on the fitness values of the solutions. There are more examples of AGA variants: Successive zooming method is an early example of improving convergence. In \"CAGA\" (clustering-based adaptive genetic algorithm), through the use of clustering analysis to judge the optimization states of the population, the adjustment of \"pc\" and \"pm\" depends on these optimization states. Recent approaches use more abstract variables for deciding \"pc\" and \"pm\". Examples are dominance &amp; co-dominance principles and LIGA (levelized interpolative genetic algorithm), which combines a flexible GA with modified A* search to tackle search space anisotropicity.\nIt can be quite effective to combine GA with other optimization methods. A GA tends to be quite good at finding generally good global solutions, but quite inefficient at finding the last few mutations to find the absolute optimum. Other techniques (such as simple hill climbing) are quite efficient at finding absolute optimum in a limited region. Alternating GA and hill climbing can improve the efficiency of GA while overcoming the lack of robustness of hill climbing.\nThis means that the rules of genetic variation may have a different meaning in the natural case. For instance \u2013 provided that steps are stored in consecutive order \u2013 crossing over may sum a number of steps from maternal DNA adding a number of steps from paternal DNA and so on. This is like adding vectors that more probably may follow a ridge in the phenotypic landscape. Thus, the efficiency of the process may be increased by many orders of magnitude. Moreover, the inversion operator has the opportunity to place steps in consecutive order or any other suitable order in favour of survival or efficiency.\nA variation, where the population as a whole is evolved rather than its individual members, is known as gene pool recombination.\nA number of variations have been developed to attempt to improve performance of GAs on problems with a high degree of fitness epistasis, i.e. where the fitness of a solution consists of interacting subsets of its variables. Such algorithms aim to learn (before exploiting) these beneficial phenotypic interactions. As such, they are aligned with the Building Block Hypothesis in adaptively reducing disruptive recombination. Prominent examples of this approach include the mGA, GEMGA and LLGA.\nProblem domains.\nProblems which appear to be particularly appropriate for solution by genetic algorithms include timetabling and scheduling problems, and many scheduling software packages are based on GAs. GAs have also been applied to engineering. Genetic algorithms are often applied as an approach to solve global optimization problems.\nAs a general rule of thumb genetic algorithms might be useful in problem domains that have a complex fitness landscape as mixing, i.e., mutation in combination with crossover, is designed to move the population away from local optima that a traditional hill climbing algorithm might get stuck in. Observe that commonly used crossover operators cannot change any uniform population. Mutation alone can provide ergodicity of the overall genetic algorithm process (seen as a Markov chain).\nExamples of problems solved by genetic algorithms include: mirrors designed to funnel sunlight to a solar collector, antennae designed to pick up radio signals in space, walking methods for computer figures, optimal design of aerodynamic bodies in complex flowfields\nIn his \"Algorithm Design Manual\", Skiena advises against genetic algorithms for any task:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]t is quite unnatural to model applications in terms of genetic operators like mutation and crossover on bit strings. The pseudobiology adds another level of complexity between you and your problem. Second, genetic algorithms take a very long time on nontrivial problems. [...] [T]he analogy with evolution\u2014where significant progress require [sic] millions of years\u2014can be quite appropriate.\nI have never encountered any problem where genetic algorithms seemed to me the right way to attack it. Further, I have never seen any computational results reported using genetic algorithms that have favorably impressed me. Stick to simulated annealing for your heuristic search voodoo needs.\u2014\u200a\nHistory.\nIn 1950, Alan Turing proposed a \"learning machine\" which would parallel the principles of evolution. Computer simulation of evolution started as early as in 1954 with the work of Nils Aall Barricelli, who was using the computer at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. His 1954 publication was not widely noticed. Starting in 1957, the Australian quantitative geneticist Alex Fraser published a series of papers on simulation of artificial selection of organisms with multiple loci controlling a measurable trait. From these beginnings, computer simulation of evolution by biologists became more common in the early 1960s, and the methods were described in books by Fraser and Burnell (1970) and Crosby (1973). Fraser's simulations included all of the essential elements of modern genetic algorithms. In addition, Hans-Joachim Bremermann published a series of papers in the 1960s that also adopted a population of solution to optimization problems, undergoing recombination, mutation, and selection. Bremermann's research also included the elements of modern genetic algorithms. Other noteworthy early pioneers include Richard Friedberg, George Friedman, and Michael Conrad. Many early papers are reprinted by Fogel (1998).\nAlthough Barricelli, in work he reported in 1963, had simulated the evolution of ability to play a simple game, artificial evolution only became a widely recognized optimization method as a result of the work of Ingo Rechenberg and Hans-Paul Schwefel in the 1960s and early 1970s \u2013 Rechenberg's group was able to solve complex engineering problems through evolution strategies. Another approach was the evolutionary programming technique of Lawrence J. Fogel, which was proposed for generating artificial intelligence. Evolutionary programming originally used finite state machines for predicting environments, and used variation and selection to optimize the predictive logics. Genetic algorithms in particular became popular through the work of John Holland in the early 1970s, and particularly his book \"Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems\" (1975). His work originated with studies of cellular automata, conducted by Holland and his students at the University of Michigan. Holland introduced a formalized framework for predicting the quality of the next generation, known as Holland's Schema Theorem. Research in GAs remained largely theoretical until the mid-1980s, when The First International Conference on Genetic Algorithms was held in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.\nCommercial products.\nIn the late 1980s, General Electric started selling the world's first genetic algorithm product, a mainframe-based toolkit designed for industrial processes. \nIn 1989, Axcelis, Inc. released Evolver, the world's first commercial GA product for desktop computers. The New York Times technology writer John Markoff wrote about Evolver in 1990, and it remained the only interactive commercial genetic algorithm until 1995. Evolver was sold to Palisade in 1997, translated into several languages, and is currently in its 6th version. Since the 1990s, MATLAB has built in three derivative-free optimization heuristic algorithms (simulated annealing, particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithm) and two direct search algorithms (simplex search, pattern search).\nRelated techniques.\nParent fields.\nGenetic algorithms are a sub-field:\nRelated fields.\nEvolutionary algorithms.\nEvolutionary algorithms is a sub-field of evolutionary computing.\nSwarm intelligence.\nSwarm intelligence is a sub-field of evolutionary computing.\nOther evolutionary computing algorithms.\nEvolutionary computation is a sub-field of the metaheuristic methods.\nOther metaheuristic methods.\nMetaheuristic methods broadly fall within stochastic optimisation methods.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40255", "revid": "432843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40255", "title": "Jupiter (god)", "text": "Chief deity of Roman state religion\nIn ancient Roman religion and mythology, Jupiter ( or , from Proto-Italic \"day, sky\" + \"father\", thus \"sky father\" Greek: \u0394\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 or \u0396\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2), also known as Jove (nom. and gen. ), is the god of the sky and thunder, and king of the gods. Jupiter was the chief deity of Roman state religion throughout the Republican and Imperial eras, until Christianity became the dominant religion of the Empire. In Roman mythology, he negotiates with Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome, to establish principles of Roman religion such as offering, or sacrifice.\nJupiter is thought to have originated as a sky god. His identifying implement is the thunderbolt and his primary sacred animal is the eagle, which held precedence over other birds in the taking of auspices and became one of the most common symbols of the Roman army (see Aquila). The two emblems were often combined to represent the god in the form of an eagle holding in its claws a thunderbolt, frequently seen on Greek and Roman coins. As the sky god, he was a divine witness to oaths, the sacred trust on which justice and good government depend. Many of his functions were focused on the Capitoline Hill, where the citadel was located. In the Capitoline Triad, he was the central guardian of the state with Juno and Minerva. His sacred tree was the oak.\nThe Romans regarded Jupiter as the equivalent of the Greek Zeus, and in Latin literature and Roman art, the myths and iconography of Zeus are adapted under the name \"Jupiter\". In the Greek-influenced tradition, Jupiter was the brother of Neptune and Pluto, the Roman equivalents of Poseidon and Hades respectively. Each presided over one of the three realms of the universe: sky, the waters, and the underworld. The Italic Diespiter was also a sky god who manifested himself in the daylight, usually identified with Jupiter. Tinia is usually regarded as his Etruscan counterpart.\nRole in the state.\nThe Romans believed that Jupiter granted them supremacy because they had honoured him more than any other people had. Jupiter was \"the fount of the auspices upon which the relationship of the city with the gods rested.\" He personified the divine authority of Rome's highest offices, internal organization, and external relations. His image in the Republican and Imperial Capitol bore regalia associated with Rome's ancient kings and the highest consular and Imperial honours.\nThe consuls swore their oath of office in Jupiter's name, and honoured him on the annual \"feriae\" of the Capitol in September. To thank him for his help, and to secure his continued support, they sacrificed a white ox \"(bos mas)\" with gilded horns. A similar sacrificial offering was made by triumphal generals, who surrendered the tokens of their victory at the feet of Jupiter's statue in the Capitol. Some scholars have viewed the \"triumphator\" as embodying (or impersonating) Jupiter in the triumphal procession.\nJupiter's association with kingship and sovereignty was reinterpreted as Rome's form of government changed. Originally, Rome was ruled by kings; after the monarchy was abolished and the Republic established, religious prerogatives were transferred to the \"patres\", the patrician ruling class. Nostalgia for the kingship \"(affectatio regni)\" was considered treasonous. Those suspected of harbouring monarchical ambitions were punished, regardless of their service to the state. In the 5th century BC, the \"triumphator\" Camillus was sent into exile after he drove a chariot with a team of four white horses \"(quadriga)\"\u2014an honour reserved for Jupiter himself. When Marcus Manlius, whose defense of the Capitol against the invading Gauls had earned him the name \"Capitolinus\", was accused of regal pretensions, he was executed as a traitor by being cast from the Tarpeian Rock. His house on the Capitoline Hill was razed, and it was decreed that no patrician should ever be allowed to live there. Capitoline Jupiter represented a continuity of royal power from the Regal period, and conferred power to the magistrates who paid their respects to him.\nDuring the Conflict of the Orders, Rome's plebeians demanded the right to hold political and religious office. During their first \"secessio\" (similar to a general strike), they withdrew from the city and threatened to found their own. When they agreed to come back to Rome they vowed the hill where they had retreated to Jupiter as symbol and guarantor of the unity of the Roman \"res publica\". Plebeians eventually became eligible for all the magistracies and most priesthoods, but the high priest of Jupiter \"(Flamen Dialis)\" remained the preserve of patricians.\nFlamen and Flaminica Dialis.\nJupiter was served by the patrician Flamen Dialis, the highest-ranking member of the \"flamines\", a college of fifteen priests in the official public cult of Rome, each of whom was devoted to a particular deity. His wife, the Flaminica Dialis, had her own duties, and presided over the sacrifice of a ram to Jupiter on each of the \"nundinae\", the \"market\" days of a calendar cycle, comparable to a week. The couple were required to marry by the exclusive patrician ritual \"confarreatio\", which included a sacrifice of spelt bread to Jupiter Farreus (from \"far\", \"wheat, grain\").\nThe office of Flamen Dialis was circumscribed by several unique ritual prohibitions, some of which shed light on the sovereign nature of the god himself. For instance, the \"flamen\" may remove his clothes or \"apex\" (his pointed hat) only when under a roof, in order to avoid showing himself naked to the sky\u2014that is, \"as if under the eyes of Jupiter\" as god of the heavens. Every time the Flaminica saw a lightning bolt or heard a clap of thunder (Jupiter's distinctive instrument), she was prohibited from carrying on with her normal routine until she placated the god.\nSome privileges of the \"flamen\" of Jupiter may reflect the regal nature of Jupiter: he had the use of the curule chair, and was the only priest \"(sacerdos)\" who was preceded by a lictor and had a seat in the senate. Other regulations concern his ritual purity and his separation from the military function; he was forbidden to ride a horse or see the army outside the sacred boundary of Rome \"(pomerium).\" Although he served the god who embodied the sanctity of the oath, it was not religiously permissible \"(fas)\" for the Dialis to swear an oath. He could not have contacts with anything dead or connected with death: corpses, funerals, funeral fires, raw meat. This set of restrictions reflects the fulness of life and absolute freedom that are features of Jupiter.\nAugurs.\nThe \"augures publici\", augurs were a college of \"sacerdotes\" who were in charge of all inaugurations and of the performing of ceremonies known as \"auguria\". Their creation was traditionally ascribed to Romulus. They were considered the only official interpreters of Jupiter's will, thence they were essential to the very existence of the Roman State as Romans saw in Jupiter the only source of state authority.\nFetials.\nThe fetials were a college of 20 men devoted to the religious administration of international affairs of state. Their task was to preserve and apply the fetial law \"(ius fetiale)\", a complex set of procedures aimed at ensuring the protection of the gods in Rome's relations with foreign states. Iuppiter Lapis is the god under whose protection they act, and whom the chief fetial \"(pater patratus)\" invokes in the rite concluding a treaty. If a declaration of war ensues, the fetial calls upon Jupiter and Quirinus, the heavenly, earthly and chthonic gods as witnesses of any potential violation of the \"ius\". He can then declare war within 33 days.\nThe action of the fetials falls under Jupiter's jurisdiction as the divine defender of good faith. Several emblems of the fetial office pertain to Jupiter. The \"silex\" was the stone used for the fetial sacrifice, housed in the Temple of Iuppiter Feretrius, as was their sceptre. Sacred herbs \"(sagmina)\", sometimes identified as vervain, had to be taken from the nearby citadel \"(arx)\" for their ritual use.\nJupiter and religion in the secessions of the plebs.\nThe role of Jupiter in the conflict of the orders is a reflection of the religiosity of the Romans. On one side, the patricians were able to naturally claim the support of the supreme god as they held the auspices of the State. On the other side, the plebs (plebeians) argued that, as Jupiter was the source of justice, they had his favor because their cause was just.\nThe first secession was caused by the excessive debt burden on the plebs. The legal institute of the \"nexum\" permitted a debtor to become a slave of his creditor. The plebs argued the debts had become unsustainable because of the expenses of the wars wanted by the patricians. As the senate did not accede to the proposal of a total debt remission advanced by dictator and augur Manius Valerius Maximus the plebs retired on the Mount Sacer, a hill located three Roman miles to the North-northeast of Rome, past the Nomentan bridge on river Anio. The place is windy and was usually the site of rites of divination performed by haruspices. The senate in the end sent a delegation composed of ten members with full powers of making a deal with the plebs, among whom were Menenius Agrippa and Manius Valerius. It was Valerius, according to the inscription found at Arezzo in 1688 and written on the order of Augustus as well as other literary sources, that brought the plebs down from the Mount, after the secessionists had consecrated it to \"Jupiter Territor\" and built an altar (\"ara\") on its summit. The fear of the wrath of Jupiter was an important element in the solution of the crisis. The consecration of the Mount probably referred to its summit only. The ritual requested the participation of both an augur (presumably Manius Valerius himself) and a pontifex.\nThe second secession was caused by the autocratic and arrogant behaviour of the \"decemviri\", who had been charged by the Roman people with writing down the laws in use till then kept secret by the patrician magistrates and the \"sacerdotes\". All magistracies and the tribunes of the plebs had resigned in advance. The task resulted in the XII Tables, which though concerned only private law. The plebs once again retreated to the Sacer Mons: this act besides recalling the first secession was meant to seek the protection of the supreme god. The secession ended with the resignation of the \"decemviri\" and an amnesty for the rebellious soldiers who had deserted from their camp near Mount Algidus while warring against the Volscians, abandoning the commanders. The amnesty was granted by the senate and guaranteed by the \"pontifex maximus\" Quintus Furius (in Livy's version) (or Marcus Papirius) who also supervised the nomination of the new tribunes of the plebs, then gathered on the Aventine Hill. The role played by the \"pontifex maximus\" in a situation of vacation of powers is a significant element underlining the religious basis and character of the \"tribunicia potestas\".\nMyths and legends.\nA dominant line of scholarship has held that Rome lacked a body of myths in its earliest period, or that this original mythology has been irrecoverably obscured by the influence of the Greek narrative tradition. After the influence of Greek culture on Roman culture, Latin literature and iconography reinterpreted the myths of Zeus in depictions and narratives of Jupiter. In the legendary history of Rome, Jupiter is often connected to kings and kingship.\nBirth.\nJupiter is depicted as the twin of Juno in a statue at Praeneste that showed them nursed by Fortuna Primigenia. An inscription that is also from Praeneste, however, says that Fortuna Primigenia was Jupiter's first-born child. Jacqueline Champeaux sees this contradiction as the result of successive different cultural and religious phases, in which a wave of influence coming from the Hellenic world made Fortuna the daughter of Jupiter. The childhood of Zeus is an important theme in Greek religion, art and literature, but there are only rare (or dubious) depictions of Jupiter as a child.\nNuma Pompilius.\nFaced by a period of bad weather endangering the harvest during one early spring, King Numa resorted to the scheme of asking the advice of the god by evoking his presence. He succeeded through the help of Picus and Faunus, whom he had imprisoned by making them drunk. The two gods (with a charm) evoked Jupiter, who was forced to come down to earth at the Aventine (hence named \"Iuppiter Elicius\", according to Ovid). After Numa skilfully avoided the requests of the god for human sacrifices, Jupiter agreed to his request to know how lightning bolts are averted, asking only for the substitutions Numa had mentioned: an onion bulb, hairs and a fish. Moreover, Jupiter promised that at the sunrise of the following day he would give to Numa and the Roman people pawns of the \"imperium\". The following day, after throwing three lightning bolts across a clear sky, Jupiter sent down from heaven a shield. Since this shield had no angles, Numa named it \"ancile\"; because in it resided the fate of the \"imperium\", he had many copies made of it to disguise the real one. He asked the smith Mamurius Veturius to make the copies, and gave them to the Salii. As his only reward, Mamurius expressed the wish that his name be sung in the last of their \"carmina\". Plutarch gives a slightly different version of the story, writing that the cause of the miraculous drop of the shield was a plague and not linking it with the Roman \"imperium\".\nTullus Hostilius.\nThroughout his reign, King Tullus had a scornful attitude towards religion. His temperament was warlike, and he disregarded religious rites and piety. After conquering the Albans with the duel between the Horatii and Curiatii, Tullus destroyed Alba Longa and deported its inhabitants to Rome. As Livy tells the story, omens \"(prodigia)\" in the form of a rain of stones occurred on the Alban Mount because the deported Albans had disregarded their ancestral rites linked to the sanctuary of Jupiter. In addition to the omens, a voice was heard requesting that the Albans perform the rites. A plague followed and at last the king himself fell ill. As a consequence, the warlike character of Tullus broke down; he resorted to religion and petty, superstitious practices. At last, he found a book by Numa recording a secret rite on how to evoke \"Iuppiter Elicius\". The king attempted to perform it, but since he executed the rite improperly the god threw a lightning bolt which burned down the king's house and killed Tullus.\nTarquin the Elder.\nWhen approaching Rome (where Tarquin was heading to try his luck in politics after unsuccessful attempts in his native Tarquinii), an eagle swooped down, removed his hat, flew screaming in circles, replaced the hat on his head and flew away. Tarquin's wife Tanaquil interpreted this as a sign that he would become king based on the bird, the quadrant of the sky from which it came, the god who had sent it and the fact it touched his hat (an item of clothing placed on a man's most noble part, the head).\nThe Elder Tarquin is credited with introducing the Capitoline Triad to Rome, by building the so-called Capitolium Vetus. Macrobius writes this issued from his Samothracian mystery beliefs.\nCult.\nSacrifices.\nSacrificial victims (\"hostiae\") offered to Jupiter were the ox (castrated bull), the lamb (on the Ides, the \"ovis idulis\") and the wether (a castrated goat or castrated ram) (on the Ides of January). The animals were required to be white. The question of the lamb's gender is unresolved; while a sacrificial lamb for a male deity was usually male, for the vintage-opening festival the flamen Dialis sacrificed a ewe lamb to Jupiter. This rule seems to have had many exceptions, as the sacrifice of a ram on the Nundinae by the \"flaminica Dialis\" demonstrates.\nDuring one of the crises of the Punic Wars, Jupiter was offered every animal born that year.\nTemples.\nTemple of Capitoline Jupiter.\nThe Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus stood on the Capitoline Hill in Rome. Jupiter was worshiped there as an individual deity, and with Juno and Minerva as part of the Capitoline Triad. The building was supposedly begun by king Tarquinius Priscus, completed by the last king (Tarquinius Superbus) and inaugurated in the early days of the Roman Republic (13 September 509 BC). It was topped with the statues of four horses drawing a quadriga, with Jupiter as charioteer. A large statue of Jupiter stood within; on festival days, its face was painted red. In (or near) this temple was the \"Iuppiter Lapis\": the Jupiter Stone, on which oaths could be sworn.\nJupiter's Capitoline Temple probably served as the architectural model for his provincial temples.\nWhen Hadrian built Aelia Capitolina on the site of Jerusalem, a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus was erected in the place of the destroyed Temple in Jerusalem.\nOther temples in Rome.\nThere were two temples in Rome dedicated to \"Iuppiter Stator\"; the first one was built and dedicated in 294 BC by Marcus Atilius Regulus after the third Samnite War. It was located on the \"Via Nova\", below the \"Porta Mugonia\", ancient entrance to the Palatine. Legend attributed its founding to Romulus. There may have been an earlier shrine \"(fanum)\", since the Jupiter cult is attested epigraphically. Ovid places the temple's dedication on 27 June, but it is unclear whether this was the original date, or the rededication after the restoration by Augustus.\nA second temple of \"Iuppiter Stator\" was built and dedicated by Quintus Caecilus Metellus Macedonicus after his triumph in 146 BC near the Circus Flaminius. It was connected to the restored temple of \"Iuno Regina\" with a portico (\"porticus Metelli\"). Augustus constructed the Temple of Jupiter Tonans near that of Jupiter Capitolinus between 26 and 22\u00a0BC.\n\"Iuppiter Victor\" had a temple dedicated by Quintus Fabius Maximus Gurges during the third Samnite War in 295 BC. It was probably on the Quirinal, on which an inscription reading \"Diovei Victore\" has been found, but was eclipsed by the imperial period by the Temple of Jupiter Invictus on the Palatine, which was often referred to by the same name. Inscriptions from the imperial age have revealed the existence of an otherwise-unknown temple of \"Iuppiter Propugnator\" on the Palatine.\nIuppiter Latiaris and Feriae Latinae.\nThe cult of \"Iuppiter Latiaris\" was the most ancient known cult of the god: it was practised since very remote times near the top of the \"Mons Albanus\" on which the god was venerated as the high protector of the Latin League under the hegemony of Alba Longa.\nAfter the destruction of Alba by king Tullus Hostilius the cult was forsaken. The god manifested his discontent through the prodigy of a rain of stones: the commission sent by the Roman senate to inquire was also greeted by a rain of stones and heard a loud voice from the grove on the summit of the mount requesting the Albans perform the religious service to the god according to the rites of their country. In consequence of this event the Romans instituted a festival of nine days (\"nundinae\"). Nonetheless a plague ensued: in the end Tullus Hostilius himself was affected and lastly killed by the god with a lightning bolt. The festival was reestablished on its primitive site by the last Roman king Tarquin the Proud under the leadership of Rome.\nThe \"feriae Latinae\", or \"Latiar\" as they were known originally, were the common festival (\"panegyris\") of the so-called Priscan Latins and of the Albans. Their restoration aimed at grounding Roman hegemony in this ancestral religious tradition of the Latins. The original cult was reinstated unchanged as is testified by some archaic features of the ritual: the exclusion of wine from the sacrifice, the offers of milk and cheese, and the ritual use of rocking among the games. Rocking is one of the most ancient rites mimicking ascent to Heaven and is very widespread. At the \"Latiar\" the rocking took place on a tree and the winner was of course the one who had swung the highest. This rite was said to have been instituted by the Albans to commemorate the disappearance of king Latinus, in the battle against Mezentius king of Caere: the rite symbolised a search for him both on earth and in heaven. The rocking as well as the customary drinking of milk was also considered to commemorate and ritually reinstate infancy. The Romans in the last form of the rite brought the sacrificial ox from Rome and every participant was bestowed a portion of the meat, a rite known as \"carnem petere\". Other games were held in every participant borough. In Rome a race of chariots (\"quadrigae\") was held starting from the Capitol: the winner drank a liquor made with absynth. This competition has been compared to the Vedic rite of the vajapeya: in it seventeen chariots run a phoney race which must be won by the king in order to allow him to drink a cup of \"madhu\", i. e. \"soma\". The feasting lasted for at least four days, possibly six according to Niebuhr, one day for each of the six Latin and Alban \"decuriae\". According to different records 47 or 53 boroughs took part in the festival (the listed names too differ in Pliny \"Naturalis historia\" III 69 and Dionysius of Halicarnassus AR V 61). The \"Latiar\" became an important feature of Roman political life as they were \"feriae conceptivae\", i. e. their date varied each year: the consuls and the highest magistrates were required to attend shortly after the beginning of the administration, originally on the Ides of March: the Feriae usually took place in early April. They could not start campaigning before its end and if any part of the games had been neglected or performed unritually the \"Latiar\" had to be wholly repeated. The inscriptions from the imperial age record the festival back to the time of the decemvirs.\nWissowa remarks the inner linkage of the temple of the Mons Albanus with that of the Capitol apparent in the common association with the rite of the triumph: since 231 BC some triumphing commanders had triumphed there first with the same legal features as in Rome.\nReligious calendar.\nIdes.\nThe Ides (the midpoint of the month, with a full moon) was sacred to Jupiter, because on that day heavenly light shone day and night. Some (or all) Ides were \"Feriae Iovis\", sacred to Jupiter. On the Ides, a white lamb (\"ovis idulis\") was led along Rome's Sacred Way to the Capitoline Citadel and sacrificed to him. Jupiter's two \"epula Iovis\" festivals fell on the Ides, as did his temple foundation rites as \"Optimus Maximus\", \"Victor\", \"Invictus\" and (possibly) \"Stator\".\nNundinae.\nThe \"nundinae\" recurred every ninth day, dividing the calendar into a market cycle analogous to a week. Market days gave rural people \"(pagi)\" the opportunity to sell in town and to be informed of religious and political edicts, which were posted publicly for three days. According to tradition, these festival days were instituted by the king Servius Tullius. The high priestess of Jupiter \"(Flaminica Dialis)\" sanctified the days by sacrificing a ram to Jupiter.\nFestivals.\nDuring the Republican era, more fixed holidays on the Roman calendar were devoted to Jupiter than to any other deity.\nViniculture and wine.\nFestivals of viniculture and wine were devoted to Jupiter, since grapes were particularly susceptible to adverse weather. Dum\u00e9zil describes wine as a \"kingly\" drink with the power to inebriate and exhilarate, analogous to the Vedic Soma.\nThree Roman festivals were connected with viniculture and wine.\nThe rustic \"Vinalia altera\" on 19 August asked for good weather for ripening the grapes before harvest. When the grapes were ripe, a sheep was sacrificed to Jupiter and the \"flamen Dialis\" cut the first of the grape harvest.\nThe Meditrinalia on 11 October marked the end of the grape harvest; the new wine was pressed, tasted and mixed with old wine to control fermentation. In the \"Fasti Amiternini\", this festival is assigned to Jupiter. Later Roman sources invented a goddess \"Meditrina\", probably to explain the name of the festival.\nAt the \"Vinalia urbana\" on 23 April, new wine was offered to Jupiter. Large quantities of it were poured into a ditch near the temple of Venus Erycina, which was located on the Capitol.\nRegifugium and Poplifugium.\nThe \"Regifugium\" (\"King's Flight\") on 24 February has often been discussed in connection with the \"Poplifugia\" on 5 July, a day holy to Jupiter. The \"Regifugium\" followed the festival of \"Iuppiter Terminus\" (Jupiter of Boundaries) on 23 February. Later Roman antiquarians misinterpreted the \"Regifugium\" as marking the expulsion of the monarchy, but the \"king\" of this festival may have been the priest known as the \"rex sacrorum\" who ritually enacted the waning and renewal of power associated with the New Year (1 March in the old Roman calendar). A temporary vacancy of power (construed as a yearly \"interregnum\") occurred between the \"Regifugium\" on 24 February and the New Year on 1 March (when the lunar cycle was thought to coincide again with the solar cycle), and the uncertainty and change during the two winter months were over. Some scholars emphasize the traditional political significance of the day.\nThe \"Poplifugia\" (\"Routing of Armies\"), a day sacred to Jupiter, may similarly mark the second half of the year; before the Julian calendar reform, the months were named numerically, \"Quintilis\" (the fifth month) to \"December\" (the tenth month). The \"Poplifugia\" was a \"primitive military ritual\" for which the adult male population assembled for purification rites, after which they ritually dispelled foreign invaders from Rome.\nEpula Iovis.\nThere were two festivals called \"epulum Iovis\" (\"Feast of Jove\"). One was held on 13 September, the anniversary of the foundation of Jupiter's Capitoline temple. The other (and probably older) festival was part of the Plebeian Games \"(Ludi Plebei)\", and was held on 13 November. In the 3rd century BC, the \"epulum Iovis\" became similar to a lectisternium.\nLudi.\nThe most ancient Roman games followed after one day (considered a \"dies ater\", or \"black day\", i. e. a day which was traditionally considered unfortunate even though it was not \"nefas\", see also article Glossary of ancient Roman religion) the two \"Epula Iovis\" of September and November.\nThe games of September were named \"Ludi Magni\"; originally they were not held every year, but later became the annual \"Ludi Romani\" and were held in the Circus Maximus after a procession from the Capitol. The games were attributed to Tarquinius Priscus, and linked to the cult of Jupiter on the Capitol. Romans themselves acknowledged analogies with the triumph, which Dum\u00e9zil thinks can be explained by their common Etruscan origin; the magistrate in charge of the games dressed as the \"triumphator\" and the \"pompa circensis\" resembled a triumphal procession. Wissowa and Mommsen argue that they were a detached part of the triumph on the above grounds (a conclusion which Dum\u00e9zil rejects).\nThe \"Ludi Plebei\" took place in November in the Circus Flaminius.\nMommsen argued that the \"epulum\" of the Ludi Plebei was the model of the Ludi Romani, but Wissowa finds the evidence for this assumption insufficient. The \"Ludi Plebei\" were probably established in 534 BC. Their association with the cult of Jupiter is attested by Cicero.\nLarentalia.\nThe \"feriae\" of 23 December were devoted to a major ceremony in honour of Acca Larentia (or \"Larentina\"), in which some of the highest religious authorities participated (probably including the Flamen Quirinalis and the pontiffs). The Fasti Praenestini marks the day as \"feriae Iovis\", as does Macrobius. It is unclear whether the rite of \"parentatio\" was itself the reason for the festival of Jupiter, or if this was another festival which happened to fall on the same day. Wissowa denies their association, since Jupiter and his \"flamen\" would not be involved with the underworld or the deities of death (or be present at a funeral rite held at a gravesite).\nName and epithets.\nThe Latin name \"Iuppiter\" originated as a vocative compound of the Old Latin vocative *\"Iou\" and \"pater\" (\"father\") and came to replace the Old Latin nominative case *\"Ious\". Jove is a less common English formation based on \"Iov-\", the stem of oblique cases of the Latin name. Linguistic studies identify the form *\"Iou-pater\" as deriving from the Proto-Italic vocable *\"Djous Pat\u0113r\", and ultimately the Indo-European vocative compound *\"Dy\u0113u-p\u0259ter\" (meaning \"O Father Sky-god\"; nominative: *\"Dy\u0113us-p\u0259t\u0113r\").\nOlder forms of the deity's name in Rome were \"Dieus-pater\" (\"day/sky-father\"), then \"Di\u00e9spiter\". The 19th-century philologist Georg Wissowa asserted these names are conceptually- and linguistically-connected to \"Diovis\" and \"Diovis Pater\"; he compares the analogous formations \"Vedius\"-\"Veiove\" and \"fulgur Dium\", as opposed to \"fulgur Summanum\" (nocturnal lightning bolt) and \"flamen Dialis\" (based on \"Dius\", \"dies\"). The Ancient later viewed them as entities separate from Jupiter. The terms are similar in etymology and semantics (\"dies\", \"daylight\" and \"Dius\", \"daytime sky\"), but differ linguistically. Wissowa considers the epithet \"Dianus\" noteworthy. \"Dieus\" is the etymological equivalent of ancient Greece's \"Zeus\" and of the Teutonics' \"Ziu\" (genitive \"Ziewes\"). The Indo-European deity is the god from which the names and partially the theology of Jupiter, Zeus and the Indo-Aryan Vedic Dyaus Pita derive or have developed.\nThe Roman practice of swearing by Jove to witness an oath in law courts is the origin of the expression \"by Jove!\"\u2014archaic, but still in use. The name of the god was also adopted as the name of the planet Jupiter; the adjective \"jovial\" originally described those born under the planet of Jupiter (reputed to be jolly, optimistic, and buoyant in temperament).\nJove was the original namesake of Latin forms of the weekday now known in English as Thursday (originally called \"Iovis Dies\" in Latin). These became \"jeudi\" in French, \"jueves\" in Spanish, \"joi\" in Romanian, \"gioved\u00ec\" in Italian, \"dijous\" in Catalan, \"Xoves\" in Galician, \"Joibe\" in Friulian and \"Dij\u00f3u\" in Proven\u00e7al.\nMajor epithets.\nThe epithets of a Roman god indicate his theological qualities. The study of these epithets must consider their origins (the historical context of an epithet's source).\nJupiter's most ancient attested forms of cult belong to the State cult: these include the mount cult (see section above note n. 22). In Rome this cult entailed the existence of particular sanctuaries the most important of which were located on \"Mons Capitolinus\" (earlier \"Tarpeius\"). The mount had two tops that were both destined to the discharge of acts of cult related to Jupiter. The northern and higher top was the \"arx\" and on it was located the observation place of the augurs (\"auguraculum\") and to it headed the monthly procession of the \"sacra Idulia\". On the southern top was to be found the most ancient sanctuary of the god: the shrine of \"Iuppiter Feretrius\" allegedly built by Romulus, restored by Augustus. The god here had no image and was represented by the sacred flintstone (\"silex\"). The most ancient known rites, those of the \"spolia opima\" and of the fetials which connect Jupiter with Mars and Quirinus are dedicated to \"Iuppiter Feretrius\" or \"Iuppiter Lapis\". The concept of the sky god was already overlapped with the ethical and political domain since this early time. According to Wissowa and Dum\u00e9zil \"Iuppiter Lapis\" seems to be inseparable from \"Iuppiter Feretrius\", in whose tiny temple on the Capitol the stone was lodged.\nAnother most ancient epithet is \"Lucetius\": although the Ancients, followed by some modern scholars such as Wissowa, interpreted it as referring to sunlight, the \"carmen Saliare\" shows that it refers to lightning. A further confirmation of this interpretation is provided by the sacred meaning of lightning which is reflected in the sensitivity of the \"flaminica Dialis\" to the phenomenon. To the same atmospheric complex belongs the epithet \"Elicius\": while the ancient erudites thought it was connected to lightning, it is in fact related to the opening of the reservoirs of rain, as is testified by the ceremony of the \"Nudipedalia\", meant to propitiate rainfall and devoted to Jupiter. and the ritual of the \"lapis manalis\", the stone which was brought into the city through the \"Porta Capena\" and carried around in times of drought, which was named \"Aquaelicium\". Other early epithets connected with the atmospheric quality of Jupiter are \"Pluvius\", \"Imbricius\", \"Tempestas\", \"Tonitrualis\", \"tempestatium divinarum potens\", \"Serenator\", \"Serenus\" and, referred to lightning, \"Fulgur\", \"Fulgur Fulmen\", later as nomen agentis \"Fulgurator\", \"Fulminator\": the high antiquity of the cult is testified by the neutre form \"Fulgur\" and the use of the term for the \"bidental\", the lightning well dug on the spot hit by a lightning bolt.\nA group of epithets has been interpreted by Wissowa (and his followers) as a reflection of the agricultural or warring nature of the god, some of which are also in the list of eleven preserved by Augustine. The agricultural ones include \"Opitulus\", \"Almus\", \"Ruminus\", \"Frugifer\", \"Farreus\", \"Pecunia\", \"Dapalis\", \"Epulo\". Augustine gives an explanation of the ones he lists which should reflect Varro's: \"Opitulus\" because he brings \"opem\" (means, relief) to the needy, \"Almus\" because he nourishes everything, \"Ruminus\" because he nourishes the living beings by breastfeeding them, \"Pecunia\" because everything belongs to him.\nDum\u00e9zil maintains the cult usage of these epithets is not documented and that the epithet Ruminus, as Wissowa and Latte remarked, may not have the meaning given by Augustine but it should be understood as part of a series including \"Rumina\", \" Ruminalis ficus\", \"Iuppiter Ruminus\", which bears the name of Rome itself with an Etruscan vocalism preserved in inscriptions, series that would be preserved in the sacred language (cf. \"Rumach\" Etruscan for Roman). However many scholars have argued that the name of Rome, \"Ruma\", meant in fact woman's breast. Diva Rumina, as Augustine testifies in the cited passage, was the goddess of suckling babies: she was venerated near the \"ficus ruminalis\" and was offered only libations of milk. Here moreover Augustine cites the verses devoted to Jupiter by Quintus Valerius Soranus, while hypothesising \"Iuno\" (more adept in his view as a breastfeeder), i.e. Rumina instead of Ruminus, might be nothing else than \"Iuppiter\": \"Iuppiter omnipotens regum rerumque deumque Progenitor genetrixque deum...\".\nIn Dum\u00e9zil's opinion \"Farreus\" should be understood as related to the rite of the \"confarreatio\" the most sacred form of marriage, the name of which is due to the spelt cake eaten by the spouses, rather than surmising an agricultural quality of the god: the epithet means the god was the guarantor of the effects of the ceremony, to which the presence of his flamen is necessary and that he can interrupt with a clap of thunder.\nThe epithet \"Dapalis\" is on the other hand connected to a rite described by Cato and mentioned by Festus. Before the sowing of autumn or spring the peasant offered a banquet of roast beef and a cup of wine to Jupiter: it is natural that on such occasions he would entreat the god who has power over the weather, however Cato's prayer is one of simple offer with no request. The language suggests another attitude: Jupiter is invited to a banquet which is supposedly abundant and magnificent. The god is honoured as \"summus\". The peasant may hope he shall receive a benefit, but he does not say it. This interpretation finds support in the analogous urban ceremony of the \"epulum Iovis\", from which the god derives the epithet of \"Epulo\" and which was a magnificent feast accompanied by flutes.\nEpithets related to warring are in Wissowa's view \"Iuppiter Feretrius\", \"Iuppiter Stator\", \"Iuppiter Victor\" and \"Iuppiter Invictus\". \"Feretrius\" would be connected with war by the rite of the first type of \"spolia opima\" which is in fact a dedication to the god of the arms of the defeated king of the enemy that happens whenever he has been killed by the king of Rome or his equivalent authority. Here too Dum\u00e9zil notes the dedication has to do with regality and not with war, since the rite is in fact the offer of the arms of a king by a king: a proof of such an assumption is provided by the fact that the arms of an enemy king captured by an officer or a common soldier were dedicated to Mars and Quirinus respectively.\n\"Iuppiter Stator\" was first attributed by tradition to Romulus, who had prayed to the god for his almighty help at a difficult time during the battle with the Sabines of king Titus Tatius. Dum\u00e9zil opines the action of Jupiter is not that of a god of war who wins through fighting: Jupiter acts by causing an inexplicable change in the morale of the fighters of the two sides. The same feature can be detected also in the certainly historical record of the battle of the third Samnite War in 294 BC, in which consul Marcus Atilius Regulus vowed a temple to \"Iuppiter Stator\" if \"Jupiter will stop the rout of the Roman army and if afterwards the Samnite legions shall be victoriously massacred...It looked as if the gods themselves had taken side with Romans, so much easily did the Roman arms succeed in prevailing...\". In a similar manner one can explain the epithet \"Victor\", whose cult was founded in 295 BC on the battlefield of Sentinum by Quintus Fabius Maximus Gurges and who received another vow again in 293 by consul Lucius Papirius Cursor before a battle against the Samnite \"legio linteata\". The religious meaning of the vow is in both cases an appeal to the supreme god by a Roman chief at a time of need for divine help from the supreme god, albeit for different reasons: Fabius had remained the only political and military responsible of the Roman State after the \"devotio\" of P. Decius Mus, Papirius had to face an enemy who had acted with impious rites and vows, i.e. was religiously reprehensible.\nMore recently Dario Sabbatucci has given a different interpretation of the meaning of \"Stator\" within the frame of his structuralistic and dialectic vision of Roman calendar, identifying oppositions, tensions and equilibria: January is the month of Janus, at the beginning of the year, in the uncertain time of winter (the most ancient calendar had only ten months, from March to December). In this month Janus deifies kingship and defies Jupiter. Moreover, January sees also the presence of Veiovis who appears as an anti-Jupiter, of Carmenta who is the goddess of birth and like Janus has two opposed faces, \"Prorsa\" and \"Postvorta\" (also named Antevorta and Porrima), of Iuturna, who as a gushing spring evokes the process of coming into being from non-being as the god of passage and change does. In this period the preeminence of Janus needs compensating on the Ides through the action of Jupiter \"Stator\", who plays the role of anti-Janus, i.e. of moderator of the action of Janus.\nEpithets denoting functionality.\nSome epithets describe a particular aspect of the god, or one of his functions:\nSyncretic or geographical epithets.\nSome epithets of Jupiter indicate his association with a particular place. Epithets found in the provinces of the Roman Empire may identify Jupiter with a local deity or site (see syncretism).\nIn addition, many of the epithets of Zeus can be found applied to Jupiter, by \"interpretatio romana\". Thus, since the hero Trophonius (from Lebadea in Boeotia) is called Zeus Trophonius, this can be represented in English (as it would be in Latin) as Jupiter Trophonius. Similarly, the Greek cult of Zeus Meilichios appears in Pompeii as Jupiter Meilichius. Except in representing actual cults in Italy, this is largely 19th-century usage; modern works distinguish Jupiter from Zeus.\nTheology.\nSources.\nMarcus Terentius Varro and Verrius Flaccus were the main sources on the theology of Jupiter and archaic Roman religion in general. Varro was acquainted with the \"libri pontificum\" (\"books of the Pontiffs\") and their archaic classifications. On these two sources depend other ancient authorities, such as Ovid, Servius, Aulus Gellius, Macrobius, patristic texts, Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Plutarch.\nOne of the most important sources which preserve the theology of Jupiter and other Roman deities is \"The City of God against the Pagans\" by Augustine of Hippo. Augustine's criticism of traditional Roman religion is based on Varro's lost work, \"Antiquitates Rerum Divinarum\". Although a work of Christian apologetics, \"The City of God\" provides glimpses into Varro's theological system and authentic Roman theological lore in general. According to Augustine, Varro drew on the pontiff Mucius Scaevola's tripartite theology:\nJovian theology.\nGeorg Wissowa stressed Jupiter's uniqueness as the only case among Indo-European religions in which the original god preserved his name, his identity and his prerogatives. In this view, Jupiter is the god of heaven and retains his identification with the sky among the Latin poets (his name is used as a synonym for \"sky\".) In this respect, he differs from his Greek equivalent Zeus (who is considered a personal god, warden and dispenser of skylight). His name reflects this idea; it is a derivative of the Indo-European word for \"bright, shining sky\". His residence is found atop the hills of Rome and of mountains in general; as a result, his cult is present in Rome and throughout Italy at upper elevations. Jupiter assumed atmospheric qualities; he is the wielder of lightning and the master of weather. However, Wissowa acknowledges that Jupiter is not merely a naturalistic, heavenly, supreme deity; he is in continual communication with man by means of thunder, lightning and the flight of birds (his auspices). Through his vigilant watch he is also the guardian of public oaths and compacts and the guarantor of good faith in the State cult. The Jovian cult was common to the Italic people under the names \"Iove\", \"Diove\" (Latin) and \"Iuve\", \"Diuve\" (Oscan, in Umbrian only \"Iuve\", \"Iupater\" in the Iguvine Tables).\nWissowa considered Jupiter also a god of war and agriculture, in addition to his political role as guarantor of good faith (public and private) as \"Iuppiter Lapis\" and \"Dius Fidius\", respectively. His view is grounded in the sphere of action of the god (who intervenes in battle and influences the harvest through weather).\nIn Georges Dum\u00e9zil's view, Jovian theology (and that of the equivalent gods in other Indo-European religions) is an evolution from a naturalistic, supreme, celestial god identified with heaven to a sovereign god, a wielder of lightning bolts, master and protector of the community (in other words, of a change from a naturalistic approach to the world of the divine to a socio-political approach).\nIn Vedic religion, Dyaus Pitar remained confined to his distant, removed, passive role and the place of sovereign god was occupied by Varuna and Mitra. In Greek and Roman religion, instead, the homonymous gods \"*Diou-\" and \"\u0394\u03b9\u03dd-\" evolved into atmospheric deities; by their mastery of thunder and lightning, they expressed themselves and made their will known to the community. In Rome, Jupiter also sent signs to the leaders of the state in the form of auspices in addition to thunder. The art of augury was considered prestigious by ancient Romans; by sending his signs, Jupiter (the sovereign of heaven) communicates his advice to his terrestrial colleague: the king (\"rex\") or his successor magistrates. The encounter between the heavenly and political, legal aspects of the deity are well represented by the prerogatives, privileges, functions and taboos proper to his \"flamen\" (the \"flamen Dialis\" and his wife, the \"flaminica Dialis\").\nDum\u00e9zil maintains that Jupiter is not himself a god of war and agriculture, although his actions and interest may extend to these spheres of human endeavour. His view is based on the methodological assumption that the chief criterion for studying a god's nature is not to consider his field of action, but the quality, method and features of his action. Consequently, the analysis of the type of action performed by Jupiter in the domains in which he operates indicates that Jupiter is a sovereign god who may act in the field of politics (as well as agriculture and war) in his capacity as such, i.e. in a way and with the features proper to a king. Sovereignty is expressed through the two aspects of absolute, magic power (epitomised and represented by the Vedic god Varuna) and lawful right (by the Vedic god Mitra). However, sovereignty permits action in every field; otherwise, it would lose its essential quality. As a further proof, Dum\u00e9zil cites the story of Tullus Hostilius (the most belligerent of the Roman kings), who was killed by Jupiter with a lightning bolt (indicating that he did not enjoy the god's favour).\nVarro's definition of Jupiter as the god who has under his jurisdiction the full expression of every being (\"penes Iovem sunt summa\") reflects the sovereign nature of the god, as opposed to the jurisdiction of Janus (god of passages and change) on their beginning (\"penes Ianum sunt prima\").\nRelation to other gods.\nCapitoline Triad.\nThe Capitoline Triad was introduced to Rome by the Tarquins. Dum\u00e9zil thinks it might have been an Etruscan (or local) creation based on Vitruvius' treatise on architecture, in which the three deities are associated as the most important. It is possible that the Etruscans paid particular attention to Menrva (Minerva) as a goddess of destiny, in addition to the royal couple Uni (Juno) and Tinia (Jupiter). In Rome, Minerva later assumed a military aspect under the influence of Athena Pallas (Polias). Dum\u00e9zil argues that with the advent of the Republic, Jupiter became the only king of Rome, no longer merely the first of the great gods.\nArchaic Triad.\nThe Archaic Triad is a hypothetical theological structure (or system) consisting of the gods Jupiter, Mars and Quirinus. It was first described by Wissowa, and the concept was developed further by Dum\u00e9zil. The three-function hypothesis of Indo-European society advanced by Dum\u00e9zil holds that in prehistory, society was divided into three classes:\nAt least for the three main functions, people in each station in life had their religious counterparts the divine figures of the sovereign god, the warrior god, and the industrius god; there were almost always two separate gods for class\u00a01, and sometimes more than one for class\u00a03. Over time gods or, groups of gods might be consolidated or split, and it is unclear that there were ever any strict separations of all function.\nThe sovereign function\u00a0(1) embodied in Jupiter entailed omnipotence; thence, a domain extended over every aspect of nature and life.\nThe three functions are interrelated with one another, overlapping to some extent; the sovereign function, although including a part that is essentially religious in nature, is involved in many ways in areas pertaining to the other two. Therefore, Jupiter is the \"magic player\" in the founding of the Roman state and the fields of war, agricultural plenty, human fertility, and wealth.\nThis hypothesis has not found widespread support among scholars.\nJupiter and Minerva.\nApart from being protectress of the arts and craft as Minerva Capta, who was brought from Falerii, Minerva's association to Jupiter and relevance to Roman state religion is mainly linked to the Palladium, a wooden statue of Athena that could move the eyes and wave the spear. It was stored in the \"penus interior\", inner penus of the \"aedes Vestae\", temple of Vesta and considered the most important among the \"pignora imperii\", pawns of dominion, empire. In Roman traditional lore it was brought from Troy by Aeneas. Scholars though think it was last taken to Rome in the third or second century BC.\nJuno and Fortuna.\nThe divine couple received from Greece its matrimonial implications, thence bestowing on Juno the role of tutelary goddess of marriage (\"Iuno Pronuba\").\nThe couple itself though cannot be reduced to a Greek apport. The association of Juno and Jupiter is of the most ancient Latin theology. Praeneste offers a glimpse into original Latin mythology: the local goddess Fortuna is represented as milking two infants, one male and one female, namely Jove (Jupiter) and Juno. It seems fairly safe to assume that from the earliest times they were identified by their own proper names and since they got them they were never changed through the course of history: they were called Jupiter and Juno. These gods were the most ancient deities of every Latin town. Praeneste preserved divine filiation and infancy as the sovereign god and his paredra Juno have a mother who is the primordial goddess Fortuna Primigenia. Many terracotta statuettes have been discovered which represent a woman with a child: one of them represents exactly the scene described by Cicero of a woman with two children of different sex who touch her breast. Two of the votive inscriptions to Fortuna associate her and Jupiter: \" Fortunae Iovi puero...\" and \"Fortunae Iovis puero...\"\nIn 1882 though R. Mowat published an inscription in which Fortuna is called \"daughter of Jupiter\", raising new questions and opening new perspectives in the theology of Latin gods. Dum\u00e9zil has elaborated an interpretative theory according to which this \"aporia\" would be an intrinsic, fundamental feature of Indoeuropean deities of the primordial and sovereign level, as it finds a parallel in Vedic religion. The contradiction would put Fortuna both at the origin of time and into its ensuing diachronic process: it is the comparison offered by Vedic deity Aditi, the \"Not-Bound\" or \"Enemy of Bondage\", that shows that there is no question of choosing one of the two apparent options: as the mother of the Aditya she has the same type of relationship with one of his sons, Dak\u1e63a, the minor sovereign. who represents the \"Creative Energy\", being at the same time his mother and daughter, as is true for the whole group of sovereign gods to which she belongs. Moreover, Aditi is thus one of the heirs (along with Savitr) of the opening god of the Indoiranians, as she is represented with her head on her two sides, with the two faces looking opposite directions. The mother of the sovereign gods has thence two solidal but distinct modalities of duplicity, i.e. of having two foreheads and a double position in the genealogy. Angelo Brelich has interpreted this theology as the basic opposition between the primordial absence of order (chaos) and the organisation of the cosmos.\nJanus.\nThe relation of Jupiter to Janus is problematic. Varro defines Jupiter as the god who has \"potestas\" (power) over the forces by which anything happens in the world. Janus, however, has the privilege of being invoked first in rites, since in his power are the beginnings of things (\"prima\"), the appearance of Jupiter included.\nSaturn.\nThe Latins considered Saturn the predecessor of Jupiter. Saturn reigned in Latium during a mythical Golden Age reenacted every year at the festival of Saturnalia. Saturn also retained primacy in matters of agriculture and money. Unlike the Greek tradition of Cronus and Zeus, the usurpation of Saturn as king of the gods by Jupiter was not viewed by the Latins as violent or hostile; Saturn continued to be revered in his temple at the foot of the Capitol Hill, which maintained the alternative name \"Saturnius\" into the time of Varro.\nA. Pasqualini has argued that Saturn was related to \"Iuppiter Latiaris\", the old Jupiter of the Latins, as the original figure of this Jupiter was superseded on the Alban Mount, whereas it preserved its gruesome character in the ceremony held at the sanctuary of the Latiar Hill in Rome which involved a human sacrifice and the aspersion of the statue of the god with the blood of the victim.\nFides.\nThe abstract personification Fides (\"Faith, Trust\") was one of the oldest gods associated with Jupiter. As guarantor of public faith, Fides had her temple on the Capitol (near that of Capitoline Jupiter).\nDius Fidius.\n\"Dius Fidius\" is considered a theonym for Jupiter, and sometimes a separate entity also known in Rome as Semo Sancus Dius Fidius. Wissowa argued that while Jupiter is the god of the \"Fides Publica Populi Romani\" as \"Iuppiter Lapis\" (by whom important oaths are sworn), Dius Fidius is a deity established for everyday use and was charged with the protection of good faith in private affairs. Dius Fidius would thus correspond to \"Zeus Pistios\". The association with Jupiter may be a matter of divine relation; some scholars see him as a form of Hercules. Both Jupiter and Dius Fidius were wardens of oaths and wielders of lightning bolts; both required an opening in the roof of their temples.\nThe functionality of Sancus occurs consistently within the sphere of \"fides\", oaths and respect for contracts and of the divine-sanction guarantee against their breach. Wissowa suggested that Semo Sancus is the \"genius\" of Jupiter, but the concept of a deity's \"genius\" is a development of the Imperial period.\nSome aspects of the oath-ritual for Dius Fidius (such as proceedings under the open sky or in the \"compluvium\" of private residences), and the fact the temple of Sancus had no roof, suggest that the oath sworn by Dius Fidius predated that for \"Iuppiter Lapis\" or \"Iuppiter Feretrius\".\nGenius.\nAugustine quotes Varro who explains the \"genius\" as \"the god who is in charge and has the power to generate everything\" and \"the rational spirit of all (therefore, everyone has their own)\". Augustine concludes that Jupiter should be considered the \"genius\" of the universe.\nG. Wissowa advanced the hypothesis that Semo Sancus is the genius of Jupiter. W. W. Fowler has cautioned that this interpretation looks to be an anachronism and it would only be acceptable to say that Sancus is a \"Genius Iovius\", as it appears from the Iguvine Tables.\nCensorinus cites Granius Flaccus as saying that \"the Genius was the same entity as the Lar\" in his lost work \"De Indigitamentis\". probably referring to the \"Lar Familiaris\". Mutunus Tutunus had his shrine at the foot of the Velian Hill near those of the Di Penates and of Vica Pota, who were among the most ancient gods of the Roman community, according to Wissowa.\nDum\u00e9zil opines that the attribution of a Genius to the gods should be earlier than its first attestation of 58 BC, in an inscription which mentions the \"Iovis Genius\".\nA connection between Genius and Jupiter seems apparent in Plautus' comedy \"Amphitryon\", in which Jupiter takes up the appearance of Alcmena's husband in order to seduce her: J. Hubeaux sees there a reflection of the story that Scipio Africanus' mother conceived him with a snake that was in fact Jupiter transformed. Scipio himself claimed that only he would rise to the mansion of the gods through the widest gate.\nAmong the Etruscan \"Penates\" there is a \"Genius Iovialis\" who comes after \"Fortuna\" and \"Ceres\" and before \"Pales\". Genius Iovialis is one of the \"Penates\" of the humans and not of Jupiter though, as these were located in region I of Martianus Capella's division of Heaven, while Genius appears in regions V and VI along with Ceres, Favor (possibly a Roman approximation to an Etruscan male manifestation of Fortuna) and Pales. This is in accord with the definition of the Penates of man being Fortuna, Ceres, Pales and Genius Iovialis and the statement in Macrobius that the Larentalia were dedicated to Jupiter as the god whence the souls of men come from and to whom they return after death.\nSummanus.\nThe god of nighttime lightning has been interpreted as an aspect of Jupiter, either a chthonic manifestation of the god or a separate god of the underworld. A statue of Summanus stood on the roof of the Temple of Capitoline Jupiter, and \"Iuppiter Summanus\" is one of the epithets of Jupiter. Dum\u00e9zil sees the opposition Dius Fidius versus Summanus as complementary, interpreting it as typical to the inherent ambiguity of the sovereign god exemplified by that of Mitra and Varuna in Vedic religion. The complementarity of the epithets is shown in inscriptions found on \"puteal\"s or \"bidental\"s reciting either \"fulgur Dium conditum\" or \"fulgur Summanum conditum\" in places struck by daytime versus nighttime lightning bolts respectively. This is also consistent with the etymology of \"Summanus\", deriving from \"sub\" and \"mane\" (the time before morning).\nLiber.\n\"Iuppiter\" was associated with Liber through his epithet of \"Liber\" (association not yet been fully explained by scholars, due to the scarcity of early documentation).\nIn the past, it was maintained that Liber was only a progressively-detached hypostasis of Jupiter; consequently, the vintage festivals were to be attributed only to \"Iuppiter Liber\". Such a hypothesis was rejected as groundless by Wissowa, although he was a supporter of Liber's Jovian origin. Olivier de Cazanove contends that it is difficult to admit that Liber (who is present in the oldest calendars\u2014those of Numa\u2014in the \"Liberalia\" and in the month of \"Liber\" at Lavinium) was derived from another deity. Such a derivation would find support only in epigraphic documents, primarily from the Osco-Sabellic area. Wissowa sets the position of \"Iuppiter Liber\" within the framework of an agrarian Jupiter. The god also had a temple in this name on the Aventine in Rome, which was restored by Augustus and dedicated on 1 September. Here, the god was sometimes named \"Liber\" and sometimes \"Libertas\". Wissowa opines that the relationship existed in the concept of creative abundance through which the supposedly-separate Liber might have been connected to the Greek god Dionysos, although both deities might not have been originally related to viticulture.\nOther scholars assert that there was no Liber (other than a god of wine) within historical memory. Olivier de Cazanove argues that the domain of the sovereign god Jupiter was that of sacred, sacrificial wine (\"vinum inferium\"), while that of Liber and Libera was confined to secular wine (\"vinum spurcum\"); these two types were obtained through differing fermentation processes. The offer of wine to Liber was made possible by naming the \"mustum\" (grape juice) stored in amphoras \"sacrima\".\nSacred wine was obtained by the natural fermentation of juice of grapes free from flaws of any type, religious (e. g. those struck by lightning, brought into contact with corpses or wounded people or coming from an unfertilised grapeyard) or secular (by \"cutting\" it with old wine). Secular (or \"profane\") wine was obtained through several types of manipulation (e.g. by adding honey, or \"mulsum\"; using raisins, or \"passum\"; by boiling, or \"defrutum\"). However, the \"sacrima\" used for the offering to the two gods for the preservation of grapeyards, vessels and wine was obtained only by pouring the juice into amphors after pressing. The \"mustum\" was considered \"spurcum\" (dirty), and thus unusable in sacrifices. The amphor (itself not an item of sacrifice) permitted presentation of its content on a table or could be added to a sacrifice; this happened at the \"auspicatio vindamiae\" for the first grape and for ears of corn of the \"praemetium\" on a dish (\"lanx\") at the temple of Ceres.\nDum\u00e9zil, on the other hand, sees the relationship between Jupiter and Liber as grounded in the social and political relevance of the two gods (who were both considered patrons of freedom). The \"Liberalia\" of March were, since earliest times, the occasion for the ceremony of the donning of the \"toga virilis\" or \"libera\" (which marked the passage into adult citizenship by young people). Augustine relates that these festivals had a particularly obscene character: a \"phallus\" was taken to the fields on a cart, and then back in triumph to town. In Lavinium they lasted a month, during which the population enjoyed bawdy jokes. The most honest \"matronae\" were supposed to publicly crown the \"phallus\" with flowers, to ensure a good harvest and repeal the \"fascinatio\" (evil eye). In Rome representations of the sex organs were placed in the temple of the couple \"Liber Libera\", who presided over the male and female components of generation and the \"liberation\" of the semen. This complex of rites and beliefs shows that the divine couple's jurisdiction extended over fertility in general, not only that of grapes. The etymology of \"Liber\" (archaic form \"Loifer, Loifir\") was explained by \u00c9mile Benveniste as formed on the IE theme *leudh- plus the suffix -es-; its original meaning is \"the one of germination, he who ensures the sprouting of crops\".\nThe relationship of Jupiter with freedom was a common belief among the Roman people, as demonstrated by the dedication of the \"Mons Sacer\" to the god after the first secession of the \"plebs\". Later inscriptions also show the unabated popular belief in Jupiter as bestower of freedom in the imperial era.\nVeiove.\nScholars have been often puzzled by Ve(d)iove (or Veiovis, or Vedius) and unwilling to discuss his identity, claiming our knowledge of this god is insufficient. Most, however, agree that Veiove is a sort of special Jupiter or anti-Iove, or even an underworld Jupiter. In other words, Veiove is indeed the Capitoline god himself, who takes up a different, diminished appearance (\"iuvenis\" and \"parvus\", young and gracile), in order to be able to discharge sovereign functions over places, times and spheres that by their own nature are excluded from the direct control of Jupiter as Optimus Maximus. This conclusion is based on information provided by Gellius, who states his name is formed by adding prefix \"ve\" (here denoting \"deprivation\" or \"negation\") to \"Iove \" (whose name Gellius posits as rooted in the verb \"iuvo\" \"I benefit\"). D. Sabbatucci has stressed the feature of bearer of instability and antithesis to cosmic order of the god, who threatens the kingly power of Jupiter as \"Stator\" and \"Centumpeda\" and whose presence occurs side by side to Janus' on 1 January, but also his function of helper to the growth of the young Jupiter. In 1858 Ludwig Preller suggested that Veiovis may be the sinister double of Jupiter.\nThe god (under the name \"Vetis\") is placed in the last case (number 16) of the outer rim of the Piacenza Liver\u2014before \"Cilens\" (Nocturnus), who ends (or begins in the Etruscan vision) the disposition of the gods. In Martianus Capella's division of heaven, he is found in region XV with the \"dii publici\"; as such, he numbers among the infernal (or antipodal) gods. The location of his two temples in Rome\u2014near those of Jupiter (one on the Capitoline Hill, in the low between the \"arx\" and the Capitolium, between the two groves where the asylum founded by Romulus stood, the other on the Tiber Island near that of \"Iuppiter Iurarius\", later also known as temple of Aesculapius)\u2014may be significant in this respect, along with the fact that he is considered the father of Apollo, perhaps because he was depicted carrying arrows. He is also considered to be the unbearded Jupiter. The dates of his festivals support the same conclusion: they fall on 1 January, 7 March and 21 May, the first date being the recurrence of the Agonalia, dedicated to Janus and celebrated by the king with the sacrifice of a ram. The nature of the sacrifice is debated; Gellius states \"capra\", a female goat, although some scholars posit a ram. This sacrifice occurred \"rito humano\", which may mean \"with the rite appropriate for human sacrifice\". Gellius concludes by stating that this god is one of those who receive sacrifices so as to persuade them to refrain from causing harm.\nThe arrow is an ambivalent symbol; it was used in the ritual of the devotio (the general who vowed had to stand on an arrow). It is perhaps because of the arrow and of the juvenile looks that Gellius identifies Veiove with Apollo and as a god who must receive worship in order to obtain his abstention from harming men, along with Robigus and Averruncus. The ambivalence in the identity of Veiove is apparent in the fact that while he is present in places and times which may have a negative connotation (such as the \"asylum\" of Romulus in between the two groves on the Capitol, the Tiberine island along with Faunus and Aesculapius, the kalends of January, the nones of March, and 21 May, a statue of his nonetheless stands in the \"arx\". Moreover, the initial particle \"ve-\" which the ancient supposed were part of his name is itself ambivalent as it may have both an accrescitive and diminutive value.\nMaurice Besnier has remarked that a temple to \"Iuppiter\" was dedicated by \"praetor\" Lucius Furius Purpureo before the battle of Cremona against the Celtic Cenomani of Cisalpine Gaul. An inscription found at Brescia in 1888 shows that \"Iuppiter Iurarius\" was worshipped there and one found on the south tip of Tiber Island in 1854 that there was a cult to the god on the spot too. Besnier speculates that Lucius Furius had evoked the chief god of the enemy and built a temple to him in Rome outside the \"pomerium\". On 1 January, the \"Fasti Praenestini\" record the festivals of Aesculapius and Vediove on the Island, while in the \"Fasti\" Ovid speaks of \"Jupiter\" and his grandson. Livy records that in 192 BC, \"duumvir\" Q. Marcus Ralla dedicated to Jupiter on the Capitol the two temples promised by L. Furius Purpureo, one of which was that promised during the war against the Gauls. Besnier would accept a correction to Livy's passage (proposed by Jordan) to read \"aedes Veiovi\" instead of \"aedes duae Iovi\". Such a correction concerns the temples dedicated on the Capitol: it does not address the question of the dedication of the temple on the Island, which is puzzling, since the place is attested epigraphically as dedicated to the cult of \"Iuppiter Iurarius\", in the \"Fasti Praenestini\" of \"Vediove\" and to Jupiter according to Ovid. The two gods may have been seen as equivalent: \"Iuppiter Iurarius\" is an awesome and vengeful god, parallel to the Greek \"Zeus Orkios\", the avenger of perjury.\nA. Pasqualini has argued that Veiovis seems related to \"Iuppiter Latiaris\", as the original figure of this Jupiter would have been superseded on the Alban Mount, whereas it preserved its gruesome character in the ceremony held on the sanctuary of the Latiar Hill, the southernmost hilltop of the Quirinal in Rome, which involved a human sacrifice. The gens Iulia had gentilician cults at Bovillae where a dedicatory inscription to Vediove has been found in 1826 on an ara. According to Pasqualini it was a deity similar to Vediove, wielder of lightning bolts and chthonic, who was connected to the cult of the founders who first inhabited the Alban Mount and built the sanctuary. Such a cult once superseded on the Mount would have been taken up and preserved by the Iulii, private citizens bound to the \"sacra Albana\" by their Alban origin.\nVictoria.\nVictoria was connected to \"Iuppiter Victor\" in his role as bestower of military victory. Jupiter, as a sovereign god, was considered as having the power to conquer anyone and anything in a supernatural way; his contribution to military victory was different from that of Mars (god of military valour). Victoria appears first on the reverse of coins representing Venus (driving the quadriga of Jupiter, with her head crowned and with a palm in her hand) during the first Punic War. Sometimes, she is represented walking and carrying a trophy.\nA temple was dedicated to the goddess afterwards on the Palatine, testifying to her high station in the Roman mind. When Hieron of Syracuse presented a golden statuette of the goddess to Rome, the Senate had it placed in the temple of Capitoline Jupiter among the greatest (and most sacred) deities.\nAlthough Victoria played a significant role in the religious ideology of the late Republic and the Empire, she is undocumented in earlier times. A function similar to hers may have been played by the little-known Vica Pota.\nTerminus.\nJuventas and Terminus were the gods who, according to legend, refused to leave their sites on the Capitol when the construction of the temple of Jupiter was undertaken. Therefore, they had to be reserved a \"sacellum\" within the new temple. Their stubbornness was considered a good omen; it would guarantee youth, stability and safety to Rome on its site. This legend is generally thought by scholars to indicate their strict connection with Jupiter. An inscription found near Ravenna reads \"Iuppiter Ter.\", indicating that Terminus is an aspect of Jupiter.\nTerminus is the god of boundaries (public and private), as he is portrayed in literature. The religious value of the boundary marker is documented by Plutarch, who ascribes to king Numa the construction of temples to Fides and Terminus and the delimitation of Roman territory. Ovid gives a vivid description of the rural rite at a boundary of fields of neighbouring peasants on 23 February (the day of the Terminalia. On that day, Roman pontiffs and magistrates held a ceremony at the sixth mile of the Via Laurentina (ancient border of the Roman \"ager\", which maintained a religious value). This festival, however, marked the end of the year and was linked to time more directly than to space (as attested by Augustine's apologia on the role of Janus with respect to endings). Dario Sabbatucci has emphasised the temporal affiliation of Terminus, a reminder of which is found in the rite of the \"regifugium\". Dum\u00e9zil, on the other hand, views the function of this god as associated with the legalistic aspect of the sovereign function of Jupiter. Terminus would be the counterpart of the minor Vedic god Bagha, who oversees the just and fair division of goods among citizens.\nIuventas.\nAlong with \"Terminus\", \" Iuventas\" (also known as \"Iuventus\" and \"Iuunta\") represents an aspect of Jupiter (as the legend of her refusal to leave the Capitol Hill demonstrates. Her name has the same root as Juno (from \"Iuu-\", \"young, youngster\"); the ceremonial litter bearing the sacred goose of Juno Moneta stopped before her \"sacellum\" on the festival of the goddess. Later, she was identified with the Greek Hebe. The fact that Jupiter is related to the concept of youth is shown by his epithets \"Puer\", \"Iuuentus\" and \"Ioviste\" (interpreted as \"the youngest\" by some scholars). Dum\u00e9zil noted the presence of the two minor sovereign deities Bagha and Aryaman beside the Vedic sovereign gods Varuna and Mitra (though more closely associated with Mitra); the couple would be reflected in Rome by \"Terminus\" and \"Iuventas\". Aryaman is the god of young soldiers. The function of \"Iuventas\" is to protect the \"iuvenes\" (the \"novi togati\" of the year, who are required to offer a sacrifice to Jupiter on the Capitol) and the Roman soldiers (a function later attributed to Juno). King Servius Tullius, in reforming the Roman social organisation, required that every adolescent offer a coin to the goddess of youth upon entering adulthood.\nIn Dum\u00e9zil's analysis, the function of \"Iuventas\" (the personification of youth), was to control the entrance of young men into society and protect them until they reach the age of \"iuvenes\" or \"iuniores\" (i.e. of serving the state as soldiers).\nA temple to \"Iuventas\" was promised in 207 BC by consul Marcus Livius Salinator and dedicated in 191 BC.\nPenates.\nThe Romans considered the Penates as the gods to whom they owed their own existence. As noted by Wissowa \"Penates\" is an adjective, meaning \"those of or from the \"penus\"\" the innermost part, most hidden recess; Dum\u00e9zil though refuses Wissowa's interpretation of \"penus\" as the storeroom of a household. As a nation the Romans honoured the \"Penates publici\": Dionysius calls them \"Trojan gods\" as they were absorbed into the Trojan legend. They had a temple in Rome at the foot of the Velian Hill, near the Palatine, in which they were represented as a couple of male youth. They were honoured every year by the new consuls before entering office at Lavinium, because the Romans believed the Penates of that town were identical to their own.\nThe concept of \"di Penates\" is more defined in Etruria: Arnobius (citing a Caesius) states that the Etruscan Penates were named Fortuna, Ceres, Genius Iovialis and Pales; according to Nigidius Figulus, they included those of Jupiter, of Neptune, of the infernal gods and of mortal men. According to Varro the Penates reside in the recesses of Heaven and are called \"Consentes\" and \"Complices\" by the Etruscans because they rise and set together, are twelve in number and their names are unknown, six male and six females and are the cousellors and masters of Jupiter. Martianus states they are always in agreement among themselves. While these last gods seem to be the Penates of Jupiter, Jupiter himself along with Juno and Minerva is one of the Penates of man according to some authors.\nThis complex concept is reflected in Martianus Capella's division of heaven, found in Book I of his \"De Nuptiis Mercurii et Philologiae\", which places the \"Di Consentes Penates\" in region I with the \"Favores Opertanei\"; \"Ceres\" and \"Genius\" in region V; \"Pales\" in region VI; \"Favor\" and \"Genius\" (again) in region VII; \"Secundanus Pales\", \"Fortuna\" and \"Favor Pastor\" in region XI. The disposition of these divine entities and their repetition in different locations may be due to the fact that \"Penates\" belonging to different categories (of Jupiter in region I, earthly or of mortal men in region V) are intended. \"Favor(es)\" may be the Etruscan masculine equivalent of \"Fortuna\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40256", "revid": "48588462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40256", "title": "Trusted client", "text": "In computing, a trusted client is a device or program controlled by the user of a service, but with restrictions designed to prevent its use in ways not authorized by the provider of the service. That is, the client is a device that vendors trust and then sell to the consumers, whom they do not trust. Examples include video games played over a computer network or the Content Scramble System (CSS) in DVDs.\nTrusted client software is considered fundamentally insecure: once the security is broken by one user, the break is trivially copyable and available to others. As computer security specialist Bruce Schneier states, \"Against the average user, anything works; there's no need for complex security software. Against the skilled attacker, on the other hand, nothing works.\" Trusted client hardware is somewhat more secure, but not a complete solution.\nTrusted clients are attractive to business as a form of vendor lock-in: sell the trusted client at a loss and charge more than would be otherwise economically viable for the associated service. One early example was radio receivers that were subsidized by broadcasters, but restricted to receiving only their radio station. Modern examples include video recorders being forced by law to include Macrovision copy protection, the DVD region code system and region-coded video game consoles.\nTrusted computing aims to create computer hardware which assists in the implementation of such restrictions in software, and attempts to make circumvention of these restrictions more difficult.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40257", "revid": "8982464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40257", "title": "Laplace resonance", "text": ""}
