{"id": "30119", "revid": "44905917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30119", "title": "History of Tanzania", "text": "The modern-day African Great Lakes state of Tanzania dates formally from 1964, when it was formed out of the union of the much larger mainland territory of Tanganyika and the coastal archipelago of Zanzibar. The former was a colony and part of German East Africa from the 1880s to 1919 when, under the League of Nations, it became a British mandate. It served as a British mir II]], providing financial help, munitions, and soldiers. In 1947, Tanganyika became a United Nations Trust Territory under British administration, a status it kept until its independence in 1961. The island of Zanzibar thrived as a trading hub, successively controlled by the Portuguese, the Sultanate of Oman, and then as a British protectorate by the end of the nineteenth century.\nJulius Nyerere, independence leader and \"baba wa taifa\" (\"father of the nation\") for Tanganyika, ruled the country for decades, while Abeid Amaan Karume, governed Zanzibar as its president and Vice President of the United Republic of Tanzania. Following Nyerere's retirement in 1985, various political and economic reforms began. He was succeeded in office by President Ali Hassan Mwinyi.\nPrehistory.\nEarly Stone Age.\nTanzania is home to some of the oldest hominid settlements unearthed by archaeologists. Prehistoric stone tools and fossils have been found in and around Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanzania, an area often referred to as \"The Cradle of Mankind\". Acheulian stone tools were discovered there in 1931 by Louis Leakey, after he had correctly identified the rocks brought back by Hans Reck to Germany from his 1913 Olduvai expedition as stone tools. The same year, Louis Leakey found older, more primitive stone tools in Olduvai Gorge. These were the first examples of the oldest human technology ever discovered in Africa, and were subsequently known throughout the world as Oldowan after Olduvai Gorge.\nThe first hominid skull in Olduvai Gorge was discovered by Mary Leakey in 1959, and named Zinj or Nutcracker Man, the first example of \"Paranthropus boisei\", and is thought to be more than 1.8 million years old. Other finds including \"Homo habilis\" fossils were subsequently made. At nearby Laetoli the oldest known hominid footprints, the Laetoli footprints, were discovered by Mary Leakey in 1978, and estimated to be approximately 3.6 million years old and probably made by \"Australopithecus afarensis\". The oldest hominid fossils ever discovered in Tanzania also come from Laetoli and are the 3.6 to 3.8 million year old remains of \"Australopithecus afarensis\"\u2014Louis Leakey had found what he thought was a baboon tooth at Laetoli in 1935 (which was not identified as afarensis until 1979), a fragment of hominid jaw with three teeth was found there by Kohl-Larsen in 1938\u201339, and in 1974\u201375 Mary Leakey recovered 42 teeth and several jawbones from the site.\nMiddle Stone Age.\nMumba Cave in northern Tanzania includes a Middle Stone Age (MSA) to Later Stone Age (LSA) archaeological sequence. The MSA represents the time period in Africa during which many archaeologists see the origins of modern human behavior.\nLater Stone Age and Pastoral Neolithic.\nReaching back approximately 10,000 years in the Later Stone Age, Tanzania is believed to have been populated by hunter-gatherer communities, probably Khoisan-speaking people. Between approximately 4,000 to 3,000 years ago, during a time period known as the Pastoral Neolithic, pastoralists who relied on cattle, sheep, goats, and donkeys came into Tanzania from the north. Two archaeological cultures are known from this time period, the Savanna Pastoral Neolithic (whose peoples may have spoken a Southern Cushitic language) and the Elmenteitan (whose peoples may have spoken a Southern Nilotic language). Luxmanda is the largest and southernmost-known Pastoral Neolithic site in Tanzania.\nIron Age.\nApproximately 2000 years ago, Bantu-speaking people began to arrive from western Africa in a series of migrations collectively referred to as the Bantu expansion. These groups brought and developed ironworking skills, agriculture, and new ideas of social and political organization. They absorbed many of the Cushitic peoples who had preceded them, as well as most of the remaining Khoisan-speaking inhabitants. Later, Nilotic pastoralists arrived, and continued to immigrate into the area through to the eighteenth century.\nOne of Tanzania's most important Iron Age archeological sites is Engaruka in the Great Rift Valley, which includes an irrigation and cultivation system.\nEarly coastal history.\nTravellers and merchants from the Persian Gulf and Western India have visited the East African coast since early in the first millennium CE. Greek texts such as the \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\" and Ptolemy's Geography list a string of market places (emporia) along the coast. Finds of Roman-era coins along the coast confirm the existence of trade, and Ptolomey's Geography refers to a town of Rhapta as \"metropolis\" of a political entity called Azania. Archaeologists have not yet succeeded in identifying the location of Rhapta, although many believe it lies deeply buried in the silt of the delta of the Rufiji River. A long documentary silence follows these ancient texts, and it is not until Arab geographical treatises were written about the coast that our information resumes.\nRemains of those towns' material culture demonstrate that they arose from indigenous roots, not from foreign settlement. And the language that was spoken in them, Swahili (now Tanzania's national language), is a member of the Bantu language family that spread from the northern Kenya coast well before significant Arab presence was felt in the region. By the beginning of the second millennium CE the Swahili towns conducted a thriving trade that linked Africans in the interior with trade partners throughout the Indian Ocean. From c. 1200 to 1500 CE, the town of Kilwa, on Tanzania's southern coast, was perhaps the wealthiest and most powerful of these towns, presiding over what some scholars consider the \"golden age\" of Swahili civilization. In the early 14th century, Ibn Battuta, a Berber traveller from North Africa, visited Kilwa and proclaimed it one of the best cities in the world. Islam was practised on the Swahili coast as early as the eighth or ninth century CE.\nIn 1498, Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama became the first known European to reach the African Great Lakes coast; he stayed for 32 days. In 1505 the Portuguese captured the island of Zanzibar. Portuguese control lasted until the early eighteenth century, when Arabs from Oman established a foothold in the region. Assisted by Omani Arabs, the indigenous coastal dwellers succeeded in driving the Portuguese from the area north of the Ruvuma River by the early eighteenth century. Claiming the coastal strip, Omani Sultan Seyyid Said moved his capital to Zanzibar City in 1840. He focused on the island and developed trade routes that stretched as far as Lake Tanganyika and Central Africa. During this time, Zanzibar became the centre for the Indian Ocean slave trade. Due to the Arab and Persian domination at this later time, many Europeans misconstrued the nature of Swahili civilization as a product of Arab colonization. However, this misunderstanding has begun to dissipate over the past 40 years as Swahili civilization is becoming recognized as principally African in origin.\nTanganyika (1850\u20131890).\nTanganyika as a geographical and political entity did not take shape before the period of High Imperialism; its name only came into use after German East Africa was transferred to the United Kingdom as a mandate by the League of Nations in 1920. What is referred to here, therefore, is the history of the region that was to become Tanzania. A part of the Great Lakes region, namely the western shore of Lake Victoria consisted of many small kingdoms, most notably Karagwe and Buzinza, which were dominated by their more powerful neighbors Rwanda, Burundi, and Buganda.\nEuropean exploration of the interior began in the mid-19th century. In 1848 the German missionary Johannes Rebmann became the first European to see Mount Kilimanjaro. British explorers Richard Burton and John Speke crossed the interior to Lake Tanganyika in June 1857. In January 1866, the Scottish explorer and missionary David Livingstone, who crusaded against the slave trade, went to Zanzibar, from where he sought the source of the Nile, and established his last mission at Ujiji on the shores of Lake Tanganyika. After having lost contact with the outside world for years, he was \"found\" there on 10 November 1871. Henry Morton Stanley, who had been sent in a publicity stunt to find him by the New York Herald newspaper, greeted him with the now famous words \"Dr Livingstone, I presume?\" In 1877, the first of a series of Belgian expeditions arrived on Zanzibar. In the course of these expeditions, in 1879 a station was founded in Kigoma on the eastern bank of Lake Tanganyika, soon to be followed by the station of Mpala on the opposite western bank. Both stations were founded in the name of the Comite D'Etudes Du Haut Congo, a predecessor organization of the Congo Free State. German colonial interests were first advanced in 1884. Karl Peters, who formed the Society for German Colonization, concluded a series of treaties by which tribal chiefs ceded territory to the society. Prince Otto von Bismarck's government in 1885 granted imperial protection to the German East Africa Company established by Peters with Bismark's encouragement.\nAt the Berlin Conference of 1885, the fact that Kigoma had been established and supplied from Zanzibar and Bagamoyo led to the inclusion of German East Africa into the territory of the Conventional Basin of the Congo, to Belgium's advantage. At the table in Berlin, contrary to widespread perception, Africa was not partitioned; rather, rules were established among the colonial powers and prospective colonial powers as how to proceed in the establishment of colonies and protectorates. While the Belgian interest soon concentrated on the Congo River, the British and Germans focused on Eastern Africa and in 1886 partitioned continental East Africa between themselves; the Sultanate of Zanzibar, now reduced to the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba, remained independent, for the moment. The Congo Free State was eventually to give up its claim on Kigoma (its oldest station in Central Africa) and on any territory to the east of Lake Tanganyika, to Germany.\nGerman East Africa.\n\"A History of Tanzania\" references that the Germans established a direct rule where German administrators controlled all aspects of the colony\u2019s government. At the top of the administration was a governor who enforced laws, created local decrees, and controlled the military. The governor appointed district officers who were in charge of everything in their districts. Their responsibilities included collecting taxes, awarding punishment, and commanding the local police force. Lands with high populations often had economic potential. In these areas, the Germans forced out the occupants so they could develop these fertile lands for themselves. All resistance to the Germans in the interior ceased and they could now set out to organize German East Africa. They continued brutally to exercise their authority with disregard and contempt for existing local structures and traditions. While the German colonial administration brought cash crops, railroads, and roads to Tanganyika, European rule provoked African resistance. Between 1891 and 1894, the Hehe\u2014led by Chief Mkwawa\u2014resisted German expansion, but were eventually defeated. After a period of guerrilla warfare, Mkwawa was cornered and committed suicide in 1898.\nMaji Maji resistance.\nWidespread discontent re-emerged, and in 1902 a movement against forced labour for a cotton scheme rejected by the local population started along the Rufiji River. The tension reached a breaking point in July 1905 when the Matumbi of Nandete led by Kinjikitile Ngwale revolted against the local administrators (akida) and suddenly the revolt grew wider from Dar Es Salaam to the Uluguru Mountains, the Kilombero Valley, the Mahenge and Makonde plateaux, the Ruvuma in the southernmost part and Kilwa, Songea, Masasi, and from Kilosa to Iringa down to the eastern shores of Lake Nyasa. The resistance culminated in the Maji Maji Resistance of 1905\u20131907. The resistance, which temporarily united a number of southern tribes ended only after an estimated 300,000 Africans had died from fighting or starvation. Research has shown that traditional hostilities played a large part in the resistance.\nGermans had occupied the area since 1897 and totally altered many aspects of everyday life. They were actively supported by the missionaries who tried to destroy all signs of indigenous beliefs, notably by razing the 'mahoka' huts where the local population worshiped their ancestors' spirits and by ridiculing their rites, dances and other ceremonies. This would not be forgotten or forgiven; the first battle which broke out at Uwereka in September 1905 under the Governorship of Count Gustav Adolf von G\u00f6tzen turned instantly into an all-out war with indiscriminate murders and massacres perpetrated by all sides against farmers, settlers, missionaries, planters, villages, indigenous people and peasants. Known as the Maji-Maji war with the main brunt borne by the Ngoni people, this was a merciless rebellion and by far the bloodiest in Tanganyika.\nWorld War I.\nBefore the outbreak of the war, German East Africa had been prepared to resist any attack that could be made without extensive preparation. For the first year of hostilities, the Germans were strong enough to conduct offensive operations in their neighbours' territories by, for example, repeatedly attacking railways in British East Africa. The strength of German forces at the beginning of the war is uncertain. Lieutenant-General Jan Smuts, the commander of British forces in east Africa beginning in 1916, estimated them at 2,000 Germans and 16,000 Askaris. The white adult male population in 1913 numbered over 3,500 (exclusive of the German garrison). In addition, the indigenous population of over 7,000,000 formed a reservoir of manpower from which a force might be drawn, limited only by the supply of German officers and equipment. \"There is no reason to doubt that the Germans made the best of this material during the ... nearly eighteen months which separated the outbreak of war from the invasion in force of their territory.\"\nThe geography of German East Africa also was a severe impediment to British and allied forces. The coastline offered few suitable points for landing and was backed by unhealthy swamps. The line of lakes and mountains to the west proved to be impenetrable. Belgian forces from the Belgian Congo had to be moved through Uganda. On the south, the Ruvuma River was fordable only its upper reaches. In the north, only one practicable pass about five miles wide existed between the Pare Mountains and Mount Kilimanjaro, and here the German forces had been digging in for eighteen months.\nGermany commenced hostilities in 1914 by unsuccessfully attacking from the town of Tanga. The British then attacked the town in November 1914 but were thwarted by General Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck's forces at the Battle of Tanga. The British Royal Navy occupied Mafia Island in January 1915. However, the \"attack on Tanga and the numerous smaller engagements that followed [showed] the strength ... of [German forces] and made it evident that a powerful force must be organized before the conquest of [German East Africa] could be ... undertaken. Such an enterprise had ... to await more favourable conditions on European battlefields and elsewhere. But in July, 1915, the last German troops in S.W. Africa capitulated ... and the nucleus of the requisite force ... became available.\" British forces from the northeast and southwest and Belgian forces from the northwest steadily attacked and defeated German forces beginning in January 1916. In October 1916, General Smuts wrote, \"With the exception of the Mahenge Plateau [the Germans] have lost every healthy or valuable part of their Colony\".\nCut-off from Germany, General Von Lettow by necessity conducted a guerilla campaign throughout 1917, living off the land and dispersing over a wide area. In December, the remaining German forces evacuated the colony by crossing the Ruvuma River into Portuguese Mozambique. Those forces were estimated at 320 German troops and 2,500 Askaris. 1,618 Germans and 5,482 Askaris were killed or captured during the last six months of 1917. In November 1918, his remaining force surrendered near present-day Mbala, Zambia consisting of 155 Europeans, 1,165 Askaris, 2,294 African porters etc., and 819 African women.\nUnder the Treaty of Versailles, Germany relinquished all her overseas possessions, including German East Africa. Britain lost 3,443 men in battle plus 6,558 men to disease. The equivalent numbers for Belgium were 683 and 1,300. Germany lost 734 Europeans and 1,798 Africans.\nVon Lettow's scorched earth policy and the requisition of buildings meant a complete collapse of the Government's education system, though some mission schools managed to retain a semblance of instruction. Unlike the Belgian, British, French and Portuguese colonial masters in central Africa, Germany had developed an educational program for her Africans that involved elementary, secondary and vocational schools. \"Instructor qualifications, curricula, textbooks, teaching materials, all met standards unmatched anywhere in tropical Africa.\" In 1924, ten years after the beginning of the First World War and six years into British rule, the visiting American Phelps-Stokes Commission reported: In regards to schools, the Germans have accomplished marvels. Some time must elapse before education attains the standard it had reached under the Germans. But by 1920, the Education Department consisted of 1 officer and 2 clerks with a budget equal to 1% of the country's revenue\u2014less than the amount appropriated for the maintenance of Government House.\nBritish administration after World War I.\nIn 1919, the population was estimated at 3,500,000.\nThe first British civilian administrator after the end of World War I was Sir Horace Archer Byatt CMG, appointed by Royal Commission on 31 January 1919. The colony was renamed Tanganyika Territory in January 1920. In September 1920 by the Tanganyika Order in Council, 1920, the initial boundaries of the territory, the Executive Council, and the offices of governor and commander-in-chief were established. The governor legislated by proclamation or ordinance until 1926.\nBritain and Belgium signed an agreement regarding the border between Tanganyika and Ruanda-Urundi in 1924.\nThe administration of the Territory continued to be carried out under the terms of the mandate until its transfer to the Trusteeship System under the Charter of the United Nations by the Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946.\nBritish rule through indigenous authorities.\nGovernor Byatt took measures to revive African institutions by encouraging limited local rule. He authorized the formation in 1922 of political clubs such as the Tanganyika Territory African Civil Service Association, which in 1929 became the Tanganyika African Association and later constituted the core of the nationalist movement. Under the Native Authority Ordinances of 1923, limited powers were granted to certain recognized chiefs who could also exercise powers granted by local customary law.\nSir Donald Cameron became the governor of Tanganyika in 1925. \"His work ... was of great significance in the development of colonial administrative policy, being associated especially with the vigorous attempt to establish a system of 'Indirect Rule' through the traditional indigenous authorities.\" He was a major critic of Governor Byatt's policies about indirect rule, as evidenced by his \"Native Administration Memorandum No. 1, Principles of Native Administration and their Application\".\nIn 1926, the Legislative Council was established with seven unofficial (including two Indians) and thirteen official members, whose function was to advise and consent to ordinances issued by the governor. In 1945, the first Africans were appointed to the council. The council was reconstituted in 1948 under Governor Edward Twining, with 15 unofficial members (7 Europeans, 4 Africans, and 4 Indians) and 14 official members. Julius Nyerere became one of the unofficial members in 1954. The council was again reconstituted in 1955 with 44 unofficial members (10 Europeans, 10 Africans, 10 Indians, and 14 government representatives) and 17 official members.\nGovernor Cameron in 1929 enacted the Native Courts Ordinance No. 5, which removed those courts from the jurisdiction of the colonial courts and provided for a system of appeals with final resort to the governor himself.\nRailway development.\nIn 1928, the Tabora to Mwanza railway line was opened to traffic. The line from Moshi to Arusha opened in 1930.\n1931 census.\nIn 1931 a census established the population of Tanganyika at 5,022,640 natives, in addition to 32,398 Asians and 8,228 Europeans.\nHealth and education initiatives.\nUnder British rule, efforts were undertaken to fight the Tsetse fly (a carrier of sleeping sickness), and to fight malaria and bilharziasis; more hospitals were built.\nIn 1926, the colonial administration provided subsidies to schools run by missionaries, and at the same time established its authority to exercise supervision and to establish guidelines. Yet in 1935, the education budget for the entire country of Tanganyika amounted to only US$290,000, although it is unclear how much this represented at the time in terms of purchasing power parity.\nTanganyika wheat scheme.\nThe British Government decided to develop wheat growing to help feed a war-ravaged and severely rationed Britain and eventually Europe at the hoped-for Allied victory at the end of the Second World War. An American farmer in Tanganyika, Freddie Smith, was in charge, and David Gordon Hines was the accountant responsible for the finances. The scheme had on the Ardai plains just outside Arusha; on Mount Kilimanjaro; and towards Ngorongoro to the west. All the machinery was lend/lease from the US, including 30 tractors, 30 ploughs, and 30 harrows. There were western agricultural and engineering managers. Most of the workers were Italian prisoners of war from Somalia and Ethiopia: excellent, skilled engineers and mechanics. The Ardai plains were too arid to be successful, but there were good crops in the Kilimanjaro and Ngorongoro areas.\nWorld War II.\nTwo days after Nazi Germany invaded Poland, the United Kingdom declared war and the British forces in Tanganyika were ordered to intern the German males living in Tanganyika. The British government feared that these Axis country citizens would attempt to help the Axis forces and some of the Germans living in Dar es Salaam did attempt to flee the country but were stopped and later interned by Roald Dahl and a small group of Tanganyikan soldiers of the King's African Rifles.\nDuring the war about 100,000 people from Tanganyika joined the Allied forces. and were part of the 375,000 British colonial troops who fought against the Axis forces. Tanganyikans fought in units of the King's African Rifles and fought in the East African Campaign in Somalia and Abyssinia against the Italians, in Madagascar against the Vichy French during the Madagascar Campaign, and in Burma against the Japanese during the Burma Campaign. Tanganyika became an important source of food and Tanganyika's export income greatly increased from the pre-war years of the Great Depression. However, despite the additional income, the war caused inflation within the country.\nTransition to independence.\nIn 1947, Tanganyika became a United Nations trust territory under British control. \"Its geography, topography, climate, geopolitics, patterns of settlement and history made Tanganyika the most significant of all UN Trust Territories.\" But two-thirds of the population lived in one-tenth of the territory because of water shortages, soil erosion, unreliable rainfall, tsetse fly infestations, and poor communications and transportation infrastructures.\nMulti-ethnic population.\nIn 1957, only 15 towns had more than 5,000 inhabitants, with the capital Dar es Salaam having the country's highest population of 128,742. Tanganyika was a multi-racial territory, which made it unique in the trusteeship world. Its total non-African population in 1957 was 123,310 divided as follows: 95,636 Asians and Arabs (subdivided as 65,461 Indians, 6,299 Pakistanis, 4,776 Goans, and 19,100 Arabs), 3,114 Somalis, and 3,782 \"coloured\" and \"other\" individuals. The white population, which included the Europeans (British, Italians, Greeks, and Germans) and white South Africans, totalled 20,598 individuals. Tanganyika's ethnic and economic make-up posed problems for the British. Their policy was geared to ensuring the continuance of the European presence as necessary to support the country's economy. But the British also had to remain responsive to the political demands of the Africans.\nMany Africans were government servants, business employees, labourers, and producers of important cash crops during this period. But the vast majority were subsistence farmers who produced barely enough to survive. The standards of housing, clothing, and other social conditions were \"equally quite poor.\" The Asians and Arabs were the middle class and tended to be wholesale and retail traders. The white population were missionaries, professional and government servants, and owners and managers of farms, plantations, mines, and other businesses. \"White farms were of primary importance as producers of exportable agricultural crops.\"\nCo-operative farming started.\nBritain, through its colonial officer David Gordon Hines, encouraged the development of farming co-operatives to help convert subsistence farmers to cash husbandry. The subsistence farmers sold their produce to Indian traders at poor prices. By the early 1950s, there were over 400 co-operatives nationally. Co-operatives formed \"unions\" for their areas and developed cotton ginneries, coffee factories, and tobacco dryers. A major success for Tanzania was the Moshi coffee auctions that attracted international buyers after the annual Nairobi auctions.\nThe disastrous Tanganyika groundnut scheme began in 1946 and was abandoned in 1951.\nUN trust territory.\nAfter Tanganyika became a UN trust territory, the British felt extra pressure for political progress. The British principle of \"gradualism\" was increasingly threatened and was abandoned entirely during the last few years before independence. Five UN missions visited Tanganyika, the UN received several hundred written petitions, and a handful of oral presentations made it to the debating chambers in New York City between 1948 and 1960. The UN and the Africans who used the UN to achieve their purposes were very influential in driving Tanganyika towards independence. The Africans attended public gatherings in Tanganyika with UN representatives. There were peasants, urban workers, government employees, and local chiefs and nobles who personally approached the UN about local matters needing immediate action. And finally, there were Africans at the core of the political process who had the power to mould the future. Their goal was political advancement for Africans, with many supporting the nationalist movement, which had its roots in the African Association (AA). It was formed in 1929 as a social organization for African government servants in Dar es Salaam and Zanzibar. The AA was renamed the Tanganyika African Association (TAA) in 1948 and ceased being concerned with events in Zanzibar.\nAfrican nationalism.\nBeginning in 1954, African nationalism centered on the Tanganyika African National Union (TANU), which was a political organization formed by Julius Nyerere in that year as the successor to the TAA. The TANU won the Legislative Council elections in 1958, 1959, and 1960, with Nyerere becoming chief minister after the 1960 election. Internal self-government started on 1 May 1961 followed by independence on 9 December 1961.\nZanzibar.\nZanzibar today refers to the island of that name, also known as Unguja, and the neighboring island of Pemba. Both islands fell under Portuguese domination in the 16th and early 17th centuries but were retaken by Omani Arabs in the early 18th century. The height of Arab rule came during the reign of Sultan Seyyid Said, who moved his capital from Muscat to Zanzibar, established a ruling Arab elite, and encouraged the development of clove plantations, using the island's slave labor. Zanzibar and Pemba were world-famous for their trade in spices and became known as the Spice Islands; in the early 20th century, they produced approximately 90% of the world's supply of cloves. Zanzibar was also a major transit point in the African Great Lakes and Indian Ocean slave trade. Zanzibar attracted ships from as far away as the United States, which established a consulate in 1833. The United Kingdom's early interest in Zanzibar was motivated by both commerce and the determination to end the Zanzibar slave trade. In 1822, the British signed the first of a series of treaties with Sultan Said to curb this trade, but not until 1876 was the sale of slaves finally prohibited. The Heligoland-Zanzibar Treaty of 1890 made Zanzibar and Pemba a British protectorate, and the Caprivi Strip in Namibia became a German protectorate. British rule through a Sultan remained largely unchanged from the late 19th century until 1957, when elections were held for a largely advisory Legislative Council.\nIndependence and Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar.\nIn 1954, Julius Nyerere, a school teacher who was then one of only two Tanganyikans educated to university level, organized a political party\u2014the Tanganyika African National Union (TANU). On 9 December 1961, Tanganyika became independent, though retaining the British monarch as Queen of Tanganyika, and Nyerere became Prime Minister, under a new constitution. On 9 December 1962, a republican constitution was implemented with \"Mwalimu\" Julius Kambarage Nyerere as Tanganyika's first president.\nZanzibar received its independence from the United Kingdom on 10 December 1963, as a constitutional monarchy under its Sultan. On 12 January 1964, the African majority revolted against the sultan and a new government was formed with the ASP leader, Abeid Karume, as President of Zanzibar and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. In the first few days of what would come to be known as the Zanzibar Revolution, between 5,000 and 15,000 Arabs and Indians were murdered. During a series of riots, followers of the radical John Okello carried out thousands of rapes and destroyed homes and other property. Within a few weeks, a fifth of the population had died or fled.\nIt was at this time that the Tanganyika army revolted and Britain was asked by Julius Nyerere to send in troops. Royal Marines Commandos were sent by air from England via Nairobi and 40 Commando came ashore from the aircraft carrier HMS Bulwark. Several months were spent with Commandos touring the country disarming military outposts. When the successful operation ended, the Royal Marines left to be replaced by Canadian troops.\nOn 26 April 1964, Tanganyika united with Zanzibar to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar. The country was renamed the United Republic of Tanzania on 29 October of that year. The name Tanzania is a blend of \"Tanganyika\" and \"Zanzibar\" and previously had no significance. Under the terms of this union, the Zanzibar Government retains considerable local autonomy.\nRecent history.\nTo form a sole ruling party in both parts of the union, Julius Nyerere merged TANU with the Zanzibar ruling party, the Afro-Shirazi Party (ASP) of Zanzibar to form the CCM (Chama cha Mapinduzi-CCM Revolutionary Party), on February 5, 1977. The merger was reinforced by principles enunciated in the 1982 union constitution and reaffirmed in the constitution of 1984.\nNyerere believed multiple political parties, in a country with hundreds of ethnic groups, were a threat to national unity and therefore sought ways to ensure a one party system. In a post-colonial and unstable social environment, Nyerere 'well aware of the divisiveness of ethnic chauvinism moved to excise tribalism from national politics'. To further his aim for national unity Nyerere established Kiswahili as the national language.\nNyerere introduced African socialism, or \"Ujamaa\", literal meaning 'family-hood'. Nyerere's government had made Ujamaa the philosophy that would guide Tanzania's national development; 'the government deliberately de-emphasized urban areas to deconcentrate and ruralize industrial growth (Darkoh, 1994). The main urban area of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, was for several long decades the main victim of this de-emphasis, largely because it 'remained for Nyerere a reminder of a colonial legacy.\nScope of the state expanded rapidly into virtually every sector. In 1967, nationalizations transformed the government into the largest employer in the country. It was involved in everything from retailing to import-export trade and even baking. This created an environment ripe for corruption. Cumbersome bureaucratic procedures multiplied and excessive tax rates set by officials further damaged the economy. Enormous amounts of public funds were misappropriated and put to unproductive use. Purchasing power declined at an unprecedented rate and even essential commodities became unavailable. A system of permits (vibali) allowed officials to collect huge bribes in exchange for the vibali. A foundation for systemic corruption had been laid. Officials became widely known as Wabenzi (\"people of the Benz\"). By mid-1979, corruption had reached epidemic proportions as the economy collapsed.\nNyerere's Tanzania had a close relationship with the People's Republic of China, the United Kingdom and Germany. In 1979 Tanzania declared war on Uganda after the Soviet-backed Uganda invaded and tried to annex the northern Tanzanian province of Kagera. Tanzania not only expelled Ugandan forces, but, enlisting the country's population of Ugandan exiles, also invaded Uganda itself. On April 11, 1979, the Ugandan president Idi Amin was forced to leave the capital, Kampala, ending the Uganda-Tanzania War. The Tanzanian army took the city with the help of the Ugandan and Rwandan guerrillas. Amin fled into exile.\nIn October 1985, Nyerere handed over power to Ali Hassan Mwinyi, but retained control of the ruling party, Chama cha Mapinduzi (CCM), as Chairman until 1990, when he handed that responsibility to Mwinyi.\nIn 1990, a coalition of ethnic and cultural groups of Zanzibar demanded a referendum on independence. They declared that the merger with the mainland Tanzania, based on the now dead ideology of socialism, had transformed Zanzibar from a bustling economic power to a poor, neglected appendage. Their demands were neglected.\nHowever, the ruling party comfortably won the elections amid widespread irregularities and its candidate Benjamin William Mkapa was subsequently sworn in as the new president of Tanzania in the country's ever multi-party election on 23 November 1995. Contested elections in late 2000 led to a massacre in Zanzibar in January 2001, with the government shooting into crowds of protesters, killing 35 and injuring 600. In December 2005, Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete was elected the fourth president for a five-year term.\nOne of the deadly 1998 U.S. embassy bombings occurred in Dar Es Salaam; the other was in Nairobi, Kenya. In 2004, the undersea earthquake on the other side of the Indian Ocean caused tsunamis along Tanzania's coastline in which 11 people were killed. An oil tanker also temporarily ran aground in the Dar Es Salaam harbour, damaging an oil pipeline.\nIn 2008, a power surge cut off power to Zanzibar, resulting in the 2008 Zanzibar Power blackout.\nIn 2015, after the ten-year term of president Jakaya Kikwete, the presidential election was won by John Magufuli. In October 2020, president Magufoli was re-elected in an election contested by the opposition. \nThe Chama cha Mapinduzi (CCM) party has held power since independence in 1961. It is the longest-serving ruling party in Africa. Every president of Tanzania has represented the party. According to Human Rights Watch, since the election of Magufuli in December 2015 Tanzania has witnessed a marked decline in respect for free expression, association and assembly.\nOn 19 March 2021, Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan became the new president after the sudden death of Magufuli. She is the first female president of Tanzania.\nRecent archaeological discoveries.\nIn February 2021, Polish archaeologists from Jagiellonian University announced the discovery of ancient rock art with anthropomorphic figures in a good condition at the Amak\u2019hee 4 rockshelter site in Swaga Swaga Game Reserve in Tanzania.\nThe paintings found at the rock shelter were made with a reddish dye and included buffalo heads, a giraffe head and neck, and domesticated cattle. They have been dated back to approximately several hundred years ago. Archaeologists estimated that these paintings may describe a ritual of the Sandawe people, although their present religion does not contain elements of anthropomorphization of buffaloes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30120", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30120", "title": "Geography of Tanzania", "text": " \nTanzania comprises many lakes, national parks, and Africa's highest point, Mount Kilimanjaro (). Northeast Tanzania is mountainous, while the central area is part of a large plateau covered in grasslands. The country also contains the southern portion of Lake Victoria on its northern border with Uganda and Kenya.\nAdministratively, Tanzania is divided into 31 regions, with twenty-five on the mainland, three on Unguja (known informally as Zanzibar Island), and two on Pemba Island.\nStatistics.\nLocation: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between Kenya and Mozambique.\nGeographic coordinates: \nContinent: Africa\nArea:\n\"note:\" includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Unguja\n* Australia comparative: slightly smaller than South Australia\n* Canada comparative: approximately the size of British Columbia\n* United States comparative: approximately three times the size of New Mexico\n* EU comparative: slightly more than three times the size of Poland\nLand boundaries:\nCoastline: \nMaritime claims:\nTerrain: plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north, south\nElevation extremes:\nNatural resources:\nhydropower, tin, phosphates, iron ore, coal, diamonds, gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel\nLand use:\nIrrigated land: (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources: (2011)\nNatural hazards:\nEnvironment - current issues:\nsoil degradation; deforestation; desertification; destruction of coral reef threatens marine habitats; recent droughts affected marginal agriculture; wildlife threatened by illegal hunting and trade, especially for ivory\nEnvironment - international agreements:\nPhysical Geography.\nNortheast Tanzania exhibits a mountainous terrain and includes Mount Meru, an active volcano, Mount Kilimanjaro, a dormant volcano, and the Usambara and Pare mountain ranges. Kilimanjaro attracts thousands of tourists each year. West of those mountains is the Gregory Rift, which is the eastern arm of the Great Rift Valley. On the floor of the rift are a number of large salt lakes, including Natron in the north, Manyara in the south, and Eyasi in the southwest. The rift also encompasses the Crater Highlands, which includes the Ngorongoro Conservation Area and the Ngorongoro Crater. Just to the south of Lake Natron is Ol Doinyo Lengai with an elevation of , the world's only active volcano to produce natrocarbonatite lava. To the west of the Crater Highlands lies Serengeti National Park, which is famous for its lions, leopards, elephants, rhinoceroses, and buffalo plus the annual migration of millions of white bearded wildebeest. Just to the southeast of the park is Olduvai Gorge, where many of the oldest hominid fossils and artifacts have been found.\nFurther northwest is Lake Victoria on the Kenya\u2013Uganda\u2013Tanzania border. This is the largest lake in Africa by surface area and is traditionally named as the source of the Nile River. Southwest of this, separating Tanzania from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is Lake Tanganyika. This lake is estimated to be the second deepest lake in the world after Lake Baikal in Siberia. The western portion of the country between Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika, and Malawi consists of flat land that has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Central Zambezian miombo woodlands ecoregion. Just upstream from the Kalambo Falls, there is one of the most important archaeological sites in Africa. Tanzania's Southern Highlands are in the southwestern part of the country, around the northern end of Lake Malawi. Mbeya is the largest city in the Southern Highlands.\nThe centre of Tanzania is a large plateau, which is part of the East African Plateau. The southern half of this plateau is grassland within the Eastern miombo woodlands ecoregion, the majority of which is covered by the huge Selous National Park. Further north the plateau is arable land and includes the national capital, Dodoma.\nThe eastern coast contains Tanzania's largest city and former capital, Dar es Salaam. Just north of this city lies the Zanzibar Archipelago, a semi-autonomous territory of Tanzania which is famous for its spices. The coast is home to areas of East African mangroves, mangrove swamps that are an important habitat for wildlife on land and in the water. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,256km\u00b2 of tidal flats in Tanzania, making it the 26th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nWatersheds.\nEastern and central Tanzania are drained by rivers that empty into the Indian Ocean. The major rivers are, from north to south, the Pangani, Wami, Ruvu, Rufiji, Matandu, Mbwemkuru, and the Ruvuma River, which forms the southern border with Mozambique.\nMost of Northern Tanzania drains into Lake Victoria, which empties into the Nile River.\nThe western portion of Tanzania is in the watershed of Lake Tanganyika, which drains into the Congo River. The Malagarasi River is the largest tributary of Lake Tanganyika.\nPart of southwestern Tanzania drains into Lake Malawi, which empties south into the Zambezi River.\nThe Southern Eastern Rift area of north-central Tanzania is made up of several endorheic basins, which have no outlet to the sea and drain into salt and/or alkaline lakes. Lake Rukwa in west-central Tanzania, is another endorheic basin.\nClimate.\nTanzania has a mainly tropical climate but has regional variations due to topography. In the highlands, temperatures range between during cold and hot seasons respectively and a subtropical highland climate is found. The rest of the country has temperatures rarely falling lower than . The hottest period extends between November and February () while the coldest period occurs between May and August ().\nSeasonal rainfall is driven mainly by the migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone. It migrates southwards through Tanzania in October to December, reaching the south of the country in January and February, and returning northwards in March, April, and May. This causes the north and east of Tanzania to experience two distinct wet periods \u2013 the short rains (or \"Vuli\") in October to December and the long rains (or \"Masika\") from March to May \u2013 while the southern, western, and central parts of the country experience one wet season that continues October through to April or May. Some inland areas of Tanzania have a hot semi-arid climate.\nAcross Tanzania, the onset of the long rains averages 25 March and the cessation averages 21 May. A warmer-than-normal South Atlantic Ocean coupled with a cooler-than-normal Eastern Indian Ocean often causes the onset to be delayed.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Tanzania, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30121", "revid": "49784051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30121", "title": "Demographics of Tanzania", "text": " \nDemographic features of the population of Tanzania include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.\nThe population distribution in Tanzania is extremely uneven. Most people live on the northern border or the eastern coast, with much of the remainder of the country being sparsely populated.1252 Density varies from in the Katavi Region to in Dar es Salaam.6 Approximately 70 percent of the population is rural, although this percentage has been declining since at least 1967. Dar es Salaam is the \"de facto\" capital and largest city. Dodoma, located in the centre of Tanzania, is the \"de jure\" capital, although action to move government buildings to Dodoma has stalled.\nThe population consists of about 125 ethnic groups. The Sukuma, Nyamwezi, Chagga, and Haya peoples have more than 1 million members each.4\nOver 100 languages are spoken in Tanzania, making it the most linguistically diverse country in East Africa. Among the languages spoken in Tanzania are all four of Africa's language families: Bantu, Cushitic, Nilotic, and Khoisan. Swahili and English are Tanzania's official languages. Swahili belongs to the Bantu branch of the Niger-Congo family. The Sandawe people speak a language that may be related to the Khoe languages of Botswana and Namibia, while the language of the Hadzabe people, although it has similar click consonants, is arguably a language isolate. The language of the Iraqw people is Cushitic. Other languages are Indian languages and Portuguese (spoken by Goans and Mozambicans).\nNon-Africans residing on the mainland and Zanzibar account for 1 percent of the total population. The Asian community including Hindus, Sikhs, Shi'a and Sunni Muslims, Parsis, and Goans, exceed 60,000. An estimated 70,000 Arabs and 20,000 Europeans (90 percent of which are from the British diaspora) reside in Tanzania. Over 100,000 people living in Tanzania are of Asian or European ancestry.\nBased on 1999\u20132003 data, over 74,000 Tanzanian-born people were living in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, with 32,630 residing in the United Kingdom; 19,960 in Canada; 12,225 in the United States; 1,714 in Australia; 1,180 in the Netherlands; and 1,012 in Sweden.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the 2012 census, the total population was 44,928,923 compared to 12,313,469 in 1967,1 resulting in an annual growth rate of 2.9 percent. The under 15 age group represented 44.1 percent of the population, with 35.5 percent being in the 15\u201335 age group, 52.2 percent being in the 15\u201364 age group, and 3.8 percent being older than 64.\nAccording to the 2012 revision of the World Population Prospects, children below the age of 15 constituted 44.8 percent of the total population, with 52.0 percent aged 15\u201364 and 3.1 percent aged 65 or older.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (01.07.2013) (Estimates) (Projections based on the 2002 Population Census.): \nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Projections based on the 2012 Population Census.): \nVital statistics.\nThe Tanzanian Demographic and Health Survey 2010 estimated that the infant mortality rate for 2005\u201310 was 51. Registration of other vital events in Tanzania is not complete. The https:// prepared the following estimates.\nCensus Data and Demographic and Health Surveys.\nSource:\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nRegional fertility rates.\nFertility rates are estimated by Surveys (TDHS) and Census in different times.\nTDHS surveys estimated these fertility rates: 6.3 (1991\u201392), 5.8 (1996), 5.7 (2004\u201305), 5.4 (2010)\nand 2002 Census said 6.3 \nEthnic groups.\nmainland - African 99% (of which 95% are Bantu consisting of more than 130 tribes), other 1% (consisting of Asian, European, and Arab); Zanzibar - Arab, African, mixed Arab and African. Around 100,000 people living in Tanzania are from Europe or Asia.\nReligion.\nMost Tanzanians are nowadays Christians and Muslims. The numerical relationship between followers of the two religions is regarded as politically sensitive and questions about religious affiliation have not been included in census questionnaires since 1967.\nFor many years estimates have been repeated that about a third of the population each follows Islam, Christianity and traditional religions.\nAs there is likely no longer such a large percentage of traditional religionists, a range of competing estimates has been published giving one side or the other a large share or trying to show equal shares.\nEstimates from the Pew Report Islam and Christianity (2010) were 60% Christian and 36% Muslim.\nThe remainder of the population are Hindus, Buddhists, animists, and unaffiliated. Most Christians are Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican or Pentecostal, though a number of other churches, as Seventh-Day Adventist, and Eastern Orthodox Christians are also represented in the country. Most Tanzanian Muslims are Sunni Muslims, though there are also populations of Ibadi, Shia, Ahamadiya, Bohora. Muslims are concentrated in coastal areas and in mainland areas along former caravan trade routes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30122", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30122", "title": "Politics of Tanzania", "text": "The politics of Tanzania takes place in a framework of a unitary presidential democratic republic, whereby the President of Tanzania is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The party system is dominated by the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (\"Revolutionary State Party\"). The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nSince 2014, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (\"Revolutionary State Party\") has under the presidencies of John Magufuli and Samia Suluhu Hassan overseen democratic backsliding and the development of a single-party state, as the party has repressed the opposition and prevented free and fair elections from taking place. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Tanzania a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nPolitical conditions.\nFull independence came in December 1961 and Julius Kambarage Nyerere (1922\u20131999), a socialist leader who led Tanganyika from colonial rule, was elected President in 1961. One of Africa\u2019s most respected figures, Julius Nyerere was seen as a politician of principle and intelligence. Known as \"Mwalimu\" (teacher), he proposed a widely acclaimed vision of education.\nFrom independence in 1961 until the mid-1980s, Tanzania was a one-party state, with a socialist model of economic development. Beginning in the mid-1980s, under the administration of President Ali Hassan Mwinyi, Tanzania undertook a number of political and economic reforms. In January and February 1992, the government decided to adopt multiparty democracy. Legal and constitutional changes led to the registration of 11 political parties. Two parliamentary by-elections in early 1994, both won by Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), were the first-ever multiparty elections in Tanzanian history.\nIn October 2000, Tanzania held its second multi-party general elections. The ruling CCM party\u2019s candidate, Benjamin W. Mkapa, defeated his three main rivals, winning the presidential election with 71% of the vote. In the parliamentary elections, CCM won 202 of the 232 elected seats. In the Zanzibar presidential election, Abeid Amani Karume, the son of former President Abeid Karume, defeated CUF candidate Seif Shariff Hamad. The election was marred by irregularities, and subsequent political violence claimed at least 23 lives in January 2001, mostly on Pemba island, where police used tear gas and bullets against demonstrators. Hundreds were injured, and state forces were reported to have attacked boats of refugees fleeing to Kenya. Also, 16 CUF members were expelled from the Union Parliament after boycotting the legislature to protest the Zanzibar election results.\nIn October 2001, the CCM and the CUF parties signed a reconciliation agreement that called for electoral reforms and set up a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the deaths that occurred in January 2001 on Pemba. The agreement also led to the President appointment of an additional CUF official to become a member of the Union Parliament. Changes to the Zanzibar Constitution in April 2002 allowed both the CCM and CUF parties to nominate members to the Zanzibar Electoral Commission. In May 2003, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission conducted by-elections to fill vacant seats in the parliament, including those seats vacated by the CUF boycott. Observers considered these by-elections, the first major test of the reconciliation agreement, to be free, fair, and peaceful. President Mkapa, Vice President Ali Mohamed Shein, Prime Minister Frederick Sumaye, and National Assembly members will serve until the next general elections in 2005. Similarly, Zanzibar President Karume and members of the Zanzibar House of Representatives also will complete their terms of office in 2005.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], Tanzania was ranked Partly Free by Freedom House. The 2011 Democracy Index marked Tanzania as a \"hybrid regime\", ranking it 90th out of 167, an improvement from 92nd the year before, but preceding a decline on a number of metrics as shown in subsequent Freedom House studies. By 2018, many of the factors taken into account by Freedom House had undergone a small but significant decline, with the most recent reports citing a marked deterioration in the rights of civil society and reduced the abilities of political opposition to criticize the Magufuli regime. In Freedom House's 2025 report, Tanzania dropped to a score of 35, receiving the designation of \"Not Free\". Freedom House cites the change as due to the government's alteration to ethnic Masaai voter registrations as an attempt to expel communities belonging to the group from a planned game reserve.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch since the election of President John Magufuli in December 2015, Tanzania has witnessed a marked decline in respect for free expression, association and assembly.\nOn 19 March 2021, Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan became the new president after the sudden death of President John Magufuli. She is the first female President of Tanzania.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch of the Tanzanian government is responsible for implementing and enforcing the laws and policies of the country. It is headed by the President of the United Republic of Tanzania, who serves as both the head of state and the head of government. The President is elected for a term of five years, and can be re-elected for a maximum of two terms. In the event a serving president dies or is incapacitated and the Vice President serves three-fourths of the current term, they cannot run for a second term.\nThe president appoints a prime minister who serves as the government's leader in the National Assembly. The president selects his cabinet from among National Assembly members. The Constitution also empowers him to nominate 10 non-elected members of Parliament, who also are eligible to become cabinet members.\nThe President is assisted in their duties by the Vice President, who is also directly elected by the people. The Vice President may also be assigned specific responsibilities by the President.\nThe executive branch is further divided into ministries, each of which is responsible for a specific area of government policy. The ministers are appointed by the President and are responsible for the day-to-day operations of their respective ministries. Each ministry is headed by a Permanent Secretary, who is the chief administrative officer of the ministry.\nOther important officials in the executive branch include the Attorney General, who is the principal legal adviser to the government, and the Chief Secretary, who is the head of the civil service and is responsible for ensuring the smooth functioning of the government.\nThe executive branch in Tanzania is responsible for overseeing the country's economic development, foreign affairs, defense, and internal security. It plays a key role in implementing policies aimed at promoting economic growth, improving living standards, and reducing poverty. It also works to maintain peace and stability within the country, and to build strong partnerships with other countries in the region and beyond.\nLegislative branch.\nThe unicameral National Assembly of Tanzania or Bunge has 393 seats \u2014 264 elected by popular vote, 113 allocated to women chosen by their parties in proportion to their share of the electoral vote, 10 nominated by the president, five members chosen by the Zanzibar House of Representatives, and the Attorney General as an ex officio member \u2014 all members serving five-year terms. In addition to enacting laws that apply to the entire United Republic of Tanzania, the Assembly enacts laws that apply only to the mainland. Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives to make laws especially for Zanzibar (the Zanzibar House of Representatives has 70 seats, directly elected by universal suffrage to serve five-year terms).\nWikipedia has a list of current members of the Bunge arranged in two ways, alphabetically by member and alphabetically by constituency.\nTanzania's National Assembly members are elected concurrently by direct popular vote for 5-year terms. The unicameral National Assembly elected in 2000 had 295 members. These 295 members included the Attorney General, five members elected from the Zanzibar House of Representatives to participate in the Parliament, the 48 special women's seats which were made up of 20% of the seats a particular party had in the House, 181 constituents seats of members of Parliament from the mainland, and 50 seats from Zanzibar, as well as seats for the 10 members of Parliament nominated by the President. The ruling CCM holds about 86% of the seats in the Assembly elected in 2005, and held 93% of seats in the previous Assembly elected in 2000.\nLaws passed by the National Assembly are valid for Zanzibar only in specifically designated union matters. Zanzibar's House of Representatives has jurisdiction over all non-union matters. There are currently 76 members in the House of Representatives in Zanzibar, including 50 elected by the people, 10 appointed by the president of Zanzibar, 5 exofficio members, and an attorney general appointed by the president. In May 2002, the government increased the number of special seats allocated to women from 10 to 15, which will increase the number of House of Representatives members to 81. Ostensibly, Zanzibar's House of Representatives can make laws for Zanzibar without the approval of the union government as long as it does not involve union-designated matters. The terms of office for Zanzibar's president and House of Representatives also are 5 years. The semiautonomous relationship between Zanzibar and the union is a relatively unique system of government.\nJudicial branch.\nTanzania has a five-level judiciary, which comprises the jurisdictions of tribal, Islamic, and British common law.\nIn mainland Tanzania, appeal is from the Primary Courts through the District Courts and Resident Magistrate Courts, to the High Courts, ending in the federal Court of Appeal. The Zanzibar court system parallels the legal system of Mainland Tanzania, and all cases tried in Zanzibari courts, except for those involving constitutional issues and Islamic law, can be appealed to the Court of Appeals of the union.\nThe Judges of the Court of Appeal and the High Court are appointed by the President. Judges of more junior courts are appointed by the Chief Justice.\nA commercial court was established in September 1999 as a division of the High Court.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFor administrative purposes, Tanzania is divided into 30 regions\u201425 in the mainland and 5 on Zanzibar. Ninety-nine districts have been created to further increase local authority. These districts are also now referred to as local government authorities. Currently there are 114 councils operating in 99 districts, 22 are urban and 92 are rural. The 22 urban units are classified further as city (Dar es Salaam and Mwanza), municipal (Arusha, Bukoba, Dodoma, Iringa, Kigoma-Ujiji, Lindi, Moshi, Mbeya, Morogoro, Musoma, Mtwara-Mikindani, Singida, Shinyanga, Tabora, and Tanga), and town councils.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30123", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30123", "title": "Economy of Tanzania", "text": "The economy of Tanzania is a lower-middle income economy that is centered around manufacturing, tourism, agriculture, and financial services. Tanzania's economy has been transitioning from a planned economy to a market economy since 1985. Although the total GDP has increased since these reforms began, GDP per capita dropped sharply at first, and only exceeded the pre-transition figure in around 2007.\nThe value of Tanzania's GDP at current prices reached USD 174.7 billion in 2022. Tanzania has the 2nd largest economy in East Africa after Kenya, and the 7th largest in Sub-Saharan Africa.\nIt has sustained relatively high economic growth compared to global trends, as is characteristic of African nations. According to World Bank data, the last 5 years have seen the slowest growth since 2000. The medium-term outlook is so far positive, with growth projected at 8 percent in 2020/21, which is supported by large infrastructure spending.\nThe World Bank (WB) expects the economic growth of Tanzania to slow to 2.5% in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic which has affected the labor market, the production capacity, and productivity. Tourism has halted, and exports of manufacturing and agricultural goods slumped.\nOn 7 September 2021, the IMF approved US$567.25 million in emergency financial assistance to support Tanzania\u2019s efforts in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic by addressing the urgent health, humanitarian, and economic costs.\nHistory.\nSignificant measures have been taken to liberalize the Tanzanian economy along market lines and encourage both foreign and domestic private investment. Beginning in 1986, the Government of Tanzania embarked on an adjustment program to dismantle the socialist (Ujamaa) economic controls and encourage more active participation of the private sector in the economy. The program included a comprehensive package of policies which reduced the budget deficit and improved monetary control, substantially depreciated the overvalued exchange rate, liberalized the trade regime, removed most price controls, eased restrictions on the marketing of food crops, freed interest rates, and initiated a restructuring of the financial sector. Tanzania accepted austerity measures required by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank-imposed structural adjustment policies.114\nCurrent GDP per capita of Tanzania grew more than 40 percent between 1998 and 2007. In May 2009, the IMF approved an Exogenous Shock Facility for Tanzania to help the country cope with the global economic crisis Tanzania is also engaged in a Policy Support Instrument (PSI) with the IMF, which commenced in February 2007 after Tanzania completed its second three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), the first having been completed in August 2003. The PRGF was the successor program to the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, which Tanzania also participated in from 1996 to 1999. The IMF's PSI program provides policy support and signaling to participating low-income countries and is intended for countries that have usually achieved a reasonable growth performance, low underlying inflation, an adequate level of official international reserves, and have begun to establish external and net domestic debt sustainability.\nTanzania also embarked on a major restructuring of state-owned enterprises. The program has so far divested 335 out of some 425 parastatal entities. Overall, real economic growth has averaged about 4 percent a year, much better than the previous 20 years, but not enough to improve the lives of average Tanzanians. Also, the economy remains overwhelmingly donor-dependent. Moreover, Tanzania has an external debt of $7.9 billion. The servicing of this debt absorbs about 40 percent of total government expenditures. Tanzania has qualified for debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. Debts worth over $6 billion were canceled following implementation of the Paris Club 7 Agreement.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Tanzania at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of shillings.\nAs of 2025, the mean urban wage in Tanzania was estimated to be TZS 494,812 ($189), whereas the mean rural wage was estimated at TZS 367,034 ($140); both of these were a small increase from respectively TZS 425,608 and 317,779 in 2020. In July 2025, the minimum wage for public officials was raised from TZS 370,000 to TZS 500,000.\nTanzania has a substantial degree of inequality. According to the WID, the top 1% of Tanzanians gained 17.90% of the total income in 2023, whereas the bottom 50% gained 14.10%. The most recent Gini coefficient (for the year 2018) is 40.5.\nThe economy saw a GDP growth of 5.5% in 2024. Except for a low point of 2% in 2020, the growth varied between 4.5% and 7.7% for every year since 1999.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023. Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAgriculture.\nThe Tanzanian economy is heavily based on agriculture, which accounts for 28.7 percent of gross domestic product, provides 85 percent of exports, and accounts for half of the employed workforce; The agricultural sector grew 4.3 percent in 2012, less than half of the Millennium Development Goal target of 10.8 percent. 16.4 percent of the land is arable, with 2.4 percent of the land planted with permanent crops.\nThis strong dependence on agriculture, makes Tanzania's economy highly vulnerable to weather shocks and fluctuating commodity prices. 76% of Tanzania's population subsist thanks to agriculture and, due to the lack of knowledge and infrastructure to develop and implement some kind of agricultural technology, any droughts, floods, or temperature shocks can severely damage the living standards of those people and create huge increases in unemployment, hunger, and malnutrition rates, as well as, in really severe case, mortality rates due to starvation.\nTanzania produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like tobacco (107 thousand tons, 8th largest producer in the world), coffee (55 thousand tons), tea (36 thousand tons) and sisal (33 thousand tons).\nIndustry.\nIndustries are a major and growing component of the Tanzanian economy, contributing 22.2 percent of GDP in 2013. This component includes mining and quarrying, manufacturing, electricity and natural gas, water supply, and construction.\nMining.\nMining contributed 3.3 percent of GDP in 2013. The vast majority of the country's mineral export revenue comes from gold, accounting for 89 percent of the value of those exports in 2013. It also exports sizable quantities of gemstones, including diamonds and tanzanite. All of Tanzania's coal production, which totalled 106,000 short tons in 2012, is used domestically.\nMinerals.\nOther minerals exploited in Tanzania include;\nModern gold mining in Tanzania started in the German colonial period, beginning with gold discoveries near Lake Victoria in 1894. The first gold mine in what was then Tanganyika, the Sekenke Gold Mine, began operation in 1909, and gold mining in Tanzania experienced a boom between 1930 and World War II. By 1967, gold production in the country had dropped to insignificance but was revived in the mid-1970s, when the gold price rose once more. In the late 1990s, foreign mining companies started investing in the exploration and development of gold deposits in Tanzania, leading to the opening of a number of new mines, like the Golden Pride mine, which opened in 1999 as the first modern gold mine in the country, or the Buzwagi mine, which opened in 2009.\nNickel reserves amounting to 290,000 tonnes were discovered in October 2012 by Ngwena Company Limited, a subsidiary of the Australian mining company IMX Resources. An initial investment of around USD $38 million has been made since exploration began in 2006, and nickel should start being mined at the end of 2015.\nChinese firms have been showing major interest in Tanzania's mineral deposits; an announcement was made in late 2011 of a plan by the Sichuan Hongda Group, to invest about US$3 billion to develop the Mchuchuma coal and Liganga iron ore projects in the south of the country. It was also announced in August 2012 that China National Gold Corp are in talks to purchase mining assets in Tanzania from African Barrick Gold, in a deal that could be worth more than \u00a32 billion\u00a0stg.\nIn November 2012, the Tanzanian government announced investigations into allegations that mining investors in the country were harassing and on some occasions, killing residents around mining sites.\nElectricity.\nThe government-owned Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) dominates the electric supply industry in Tanzania. The country generated 6.013 billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of electricity in 2013, a 4.2 percent increase over the 5.771 billion kWh generated in 2012. Generation increased by 63 percent between 2005 and 2012; however, only 15 percent of Tanzanians had access to electric power in 2011. Almost 18 percent of the electricity generated in 2012 was lost because of theft and transmission and distribution problems. The electrical supply varies, particularly when droughts disrupt hydropower electric generation; rolling blackouts are implemented as necessary. The unreliability of the electrical supply has hindered the development of Tanzanian industry. In 2013, 49.7 percent of Tanzania's electricity generation came from natural gas, 28.9 percent from hydroelectric sources, 20.4 percent from thermal sources, and 1.0 percent from outside the country. The government is building a gas pipeline from Mnazi Bay to Dar es Salaam, with a scheduled completion in 2015. This pipeline is expected to allow the country to double its electricity generation capacity to 3,000 megawatts by 2016. The government's goal is to increase capacity to at least 10,000 megawatts by 2025.\nNatural gas.\nAccording to PFC Energy, 25 to 30 trillion cubic feet of recoverable natural gas resources have been discovered in Tanzania since 2010. The value of natural gas actually produced in 2013 was US$52.2 million, a 42.7 percent increase over 2012.\nCommercial production of gas from the Songo Songo Island field in the Indian Ocean commenced in 2004, thirty years after it was discovered there. Over 35 billion cubic feet of gas was produced from this field in 2013, with proven, probable, and possible reserves totalling 1.1 trillion cubic feet. The gas is transported by pipeline to Dar es Salaam. As of 27 August 2014, TANESCO owed the operator of this field, Orca Exploration Group Inc., US$50.4 million, down from US$63.8 million two months earlier.\nA newer natural gas field in Mnazi Bay in 2013 produced about one-seventh of the amount produced near Songo Songo Island but has proven, probable, and possible reserves of 2.2 trillion cubic feet. Virtually all of that gas is being used for electricity generation in Mtwara.\nThe Indian Ocean, off the coast of Mozambique and Tanzania, is proving to be a rich hunting ground for natural gas exploration. According to US Geological Survey estimates, the combined gas reserves of Mozambique and Tanzania could be as high as 250 trillion cubic feet. In Mozambique alone, proven gas reserves have increased dramatically from a mere 4.6 trillion cubic feet in 2013 to 98.8 trillion cubic feet as of mid-2015. Given continued offshore discoveries and the size of discoveries to date, continued growth in proven gas reserves is likely to continue into the foreseeable future.\nIn 2014, Tanzania's natural gas production was 19 billion cubic feet (Bcf), a 30% decline from five years prior, but increased in mid-2015 following the commencement of operations at the Mnazi Bay Concession and a new pipeline to Dar es Salaam. Significant gas discoveries, including 16 to 17 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) by the BG Group and partners, and 22 Tcf by Statoil with ExxonMobil, have positioned Tanzania to potentially become an LNG exporter. However, development plans, including an LNG plant agreed upon in 2014 with international companies and the Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC), have not advanced to sanctioning.\nNew exploration on more frontier blocks, however, will likely be slowed as oil and gas prices fall and companies apply increasing caution to investing in frontier markets with nascent industries, poor infrastructure and long lead times.\nThe exploration and development of natural gas in Tanzania have boosted its economic framework. In 2024, the Ntorya gas field received a 25-year development license, a major step in harnessing Tanzania's natural gas. Managed by ARA Petroleum Tanzania Limited (APT), this field is expected to begin producing substantial gas quantities for domestic use within a year. Initial production is projected at 40 million cubic feet per day, with potential expansion to 140 million cubic feet per day in future years.\nExternal trade and investment.\nTanzania's history of political stability has encouraged foreign direct investment. The government has committed itself to improve the investment climate including redrawing tax codes, floating the exchange rate, licensing foreign banks, and creating an investment promotion centre to cut red tape. Its economy is currently being managed according to the Tanzania Mini-Tiger Plan. Tanzania has mineral resources and a largely untapped tourism sector, which might make it a viable market for foreign investment.\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Tanzania was valued at $588 million in 2005 by the World Bank.\nZanzibar.\nZanzibar's economy is based primarily on the production of cloves (90% grown on the island of Pemba), the principal foreign exchange earner. Exports have suffered from the downturn in the clove market.\nThe Government of Zanzibar has been more aggressive than its mainland counterpart in instituting economic reforms and has legalized foreign exchange bureaus on the islands. This has loosened up the economy and dramatically increased the availability of consumer commodities. Furthermore, with external funding, the government plans to make the port of Zanzibar a free port. Rehabilitation of current port facilities and plans to extend these facilities will be the precursor to the free port. The island's manufacturing sector is limited mainly to import substitution industries, such as cigarettes, shoes, and process agricultural products. In 1992, the government designated two export-producing zones and encouraged the development of offshore financial services. Zanzibar still imports much of its staple requirements, petroleum products, and manufactured articles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment ministries, agencies and sites"}
{"id": "30124", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30124", "title": "Telecommunications in Tanzania", "text": "Telecommunications in Tanzania include radio, television, fixed and Mobile phones which remain the most widely used communication devices in Tanzania, supported by an expanding mobile network infrastructure and affordable prepaid services. Internet service are available in mainland of the country and the semiautonomous of Zanzibar archipelago.\nRegulation and licensing.\nIn 2005, mainland Tanzania, but not the semiautonomous Zanzibar archipelago, modified its licensing system for electronic communications, modelling it on the approach successfully pioneered in Malaysia in the late 1990s where traditional \"vertical\" licenses (the right to operate a telecom or a broadcasting network, and right to provide services on that network) are replaced by \"horizontal\" licenses (the right to operate telecom and broadcasting networks, with a separate license required to provide services on each network). Called the \"Converged Licensing Framework (CLF)\", this reform was the first of its kind put into practice on the African continent, and allows investors to concentrate on their area of expertise (i.e. network facility, network services, application services, and content services) across a larger number of previously separate sectors (i.e. telecommunications, broadcasting, Internet). This reform should, among other things, facilitate the arrival of telephone services over cable television networks, television services over telecommunications networks, and Internet services over all types of networks.\nUnder the Converged Licensing Framework four categories of license are available:\nAt the end of 2013 there were:\nA complete list of licensed operators and contractors is available from the Tanzania Communication Regulatory Authority (TCRA) website.\nRadio and television.\nThere are government restrictions on broadcasting in tribal languages.\nThe semiautonomous Zanzibari government controls the content of all public and private radio and television broadcasts in its islands. Even in the case of state television broadcast from the mainland, there was a delay in the feed, allowing Zanzibari censors to intervene. However, Zanzibari radio stations operate relatively independently, often reading the content of national dailies, including articles critical of the Zanzibari government.\nTelephones.\nSome of the mobile phone companies operating in Tanzania with market share as of December 2022 as published by the Tanzania Communication Regulatory Authority are:\nInternet.\nInternet services have been available since 1995, but there was no international fiber connectivity available until 2009. Before then, connectivity to the rest of the world, including to neighboring countries, was obtained using satellite networks. The SEACOM and the Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System submarine fiber cable projects were implemented in July 2009 and July 2010, respectively, and brought higher speed Internet connectivity to Tanzania with lower latency and lower cost. This resulted in more than an eight-fold improvement in download speeds from between 90 and 200\u00a0kbit/s in mid to late 2008 to between 1.5 and 1.8\u00a0Mbit/s in late 2009 with further improvements to between 3.6 and 4.2\u00a0Mbit/s in 2013.\nInternet service providers.\nSome of the Internet Service Providers operating in Tanzania are:\nData operators.\nSome of the data operators in Tanzania are:\nCensorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet; however, the government monitors websites that criticize the government. Police also monitor the Internet to combat illegal activities.\nFreedom of speech.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech, but does not explicitly provide for freedom of the press. A permit is required for reporting on police or prison activities, and journalists need special permission to attend meetings in the Zanzibar House of Representatives. Anyone publishing information accusing a Zanzibari representative of involvement in illegal activities is liable to a fine of not less than TSh\u00a0250,000/ (US$158), three years' imprisonment, or both. Nothing in the law specifies whether this penalty stands if the allegation is proven true. Media outlets often practice self-censorship to avoid conflict with the government.\nThe law generally prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence without a search warrant, but the government does not consistently respect these prohibitions. It is widely believed that security forces monitor telephones and correspondence of some citizens and foreign residents. The actual nature and extent of this practice is unknown.\nUnder the \"Electronic and Postal Communications (Online Content) Regulations 2018\", blogs, online forums, and internet radio and television operations, must register with the government as an online content provider, and pay an annual fee. The fee is roughly equivalent to the annual income in Tanzania. Online content providers may not post obscene or explicit content, hate speech, content that \"causes annoyance\", incites harm or crime, or threatens national security and public safety. Violators may be fined or have their licences revoked.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30125", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30125", "title": "Transport in Tanzania", "text": " Tanzania\u2019s transport system comprises road, rail, air, and maritime infrastructure, serving both domestic mobility and international trade through key ports like Dar es Salaam . The road network is long, of which is classified as trunk road and as regional road. The rail network consists of of track. Commuter rail service is in Dar es Salaam only. There are 28 airports, with Julius Nyerere International being the largest and the busiest. Ferries connect Mainland Tanzania with the islands of Zanzibar. Several other ferries are active on the countries' rivers and lakes.\nRoads.\nThe Tanzania National Roads Agency (TANROADS) - an Executive Agency under the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications - came into operation in July 2000 and is the agency responsible for the maintenance and development of the trunk and regional road network in Mainland Tanzania. The total classified road network in Mainland Tanzania was estimated to be based on the Road Act 2007. The Ministry of Works through TANROADS is managing the national road network of about , comprising of trunk road and of regional road. The remaining network of about of urban, district and feeder roads is under the responsibility of the Prime Minister's Office Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG).\nIn 2007, there were of roads, of which including was paved. The road network ranked 51st worldwide by length.\nTrunk roads.\n The remainder of the road to Dar es Salaam is paved. The long Mkapa Bridge is on this stretch of road, spanning the Rufiji River.\nTrunk roads in Tanzania were marked by numbers following the two-tier number system with prefixes A- and B-, as is practiced in the rest of East Africa. Following is the list of Tanzanian trunk roads. Meanwhile, Tanzania has introduced a numbering system for trunk roads using numbers starting with \"T\" but so far the \"A\" designations are visible if at all.\nInternational highways.\nThe Cairo-Cape Town Highway, Highway 4 in the Trans-African Highway network, runs between the northern town of Namanga on the Kenyan border and the Zambian border town of Tunduma in the southwest, via Arusha, Dodoma, Iringa, and Mbeya. The section between the entrance to Tarangire National Park and Iringa has been recently paved between Babati-Kondoa-Dodoma-Iringa. There is no longer a need to traverse a longer eastern route from Arusha to Iringa via Moshi and Morogoro is paved. This route is versus for the Arusha-Dodoma-Iringa route.\nIn the southwest, from Iringa to Tunduma, the Cairo-Cape Town Highway follows the Tanzam Highway linking Zambia and Dar es Salaam.\nRail transport.\nIn 2008 Tanzania had of rail, ranking it 46th in the world by length It includes of Metre gauge and of gauge track. On 31 March 2015 the Tanzanian government announced it would use $14.2 billion of commercial loans to build new rail infrastructure across the country before 2021 and make the country a regional transport hub.\nTanzania Railways.\nProposals have been made for a railway to link Mtwara to iron ore deposits in the west, possibly connecting to Mbeya.\nThe central line between Kigoma and Dar es Salaam carries international freight and passengers in transit from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Rwanda to the Indian Ocean, and the branch from Tabora to Mwanza carries freight and passengers between Uganda and the Indian Ocean.\nIsaka Dry Port is a small town and station on the Mwanza Line at its intersection with the paved highway to Kigali. It has been developed into a so-called 'dry port' for trans-shipping Burundian and Rwandan road freight onto freight trains for the seaport of Dar es Salaam. There are proposals to build a railway from Isaka to Rwanda/Burundi.\nTAZARA Railway.\nThe Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA), formerly also called \"TanZam Railway\" operates of narrow-gauge track (matching Zambian/Southern African networks) between Dar es Salaam and Kapiri Mposhi in Zambia, of which is in Tanzania and in Zambia). It is not a part of Tanzania Railways Corporation, and because of the difference in gauge there is no rail connection between the networks. There is a container trans-shipment yard to transfer freight containers between TAZARA and Tanzania Railways Corporation at Kidatu near Morogoro. This allows containers to be shipped from as far as Uganda and Kenya via the Lake Victoria train ferries and the Kidatu yard to the Southern African rail network via Zambia.\nAir transport.\nAirports.\nAir travel is regulated by the Tanzania Civil Aviation Authority. The Tanzania Airports Authority operates 25 airports out of the 58 aerodromes on the Tanzania mainland. Kilimanjaro International is managed by the state-owned Kilimanjaro Airport Development Company, whilst airports in the semi-autonomous Zanzibar Archipelago are under the jurisdiction of the Zanzibar Airports Authority. Fifteen airports offer the airport of entry service.\nAir services, both chartered and scheduled, are provided by local airlines such as the flag carrier Air Tanzania, Precision Air and Coastal Aviation. Prior to the launch of Fastjet, a low-cost carrier, air travel was and still is unaffordable for the vast majority due to high fares. The lowest fare offered by Fastjet for a single journey is US$20 (excluding tax) and its domestic route network is limited to only five destinations as the Airbus A319 requires of runway for takeoff.\nThe government is cognizant of the importance of air travel to the economy and has therefore rehabilitated airports at strategic locations such as Kigoma to capture the market from neighboring countries. It intends to construct Kajunguti International Airport in the northwest to serve the African Great Lakes region. Other major airports under planning and consideration are Msalato International and Serengeti International, which will serve the capital Dodoma and the Serengeti National Park respectively.\nAirstrips.\nThere are a considerable number of both public and private airstrips. Tanzania Airports Authority manages 32 airstrips, such as Morogoro and Singida.\nThe Tanzania National Parks Authority operates 26 airstrips in national parks. Seronera Airstrip is the busiest in the country. Sixty-one airstrips are operated by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism.\nPrivate organisations own 93 aerodromes such as the Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation operating Songo Songo Airstrip.\nMaritime transport.\nPorts and harbours.\nThere is an abundance of coastal and lake waterways. In the central areas there are no navigable lakes or rivers. There is a strong maritime tradition going back centuries. Zanzibar was once the chief port on the East African, Indian Ocean coast. Its hinterland reached into Central Africa as far as the middle Congo River. Swahili traders used dhows to conduct trade though many ports along the coast. This tradition continues today with motorized craft. In 2010, the government announced plans to develop a new port at Mbegani, near Bagamoyo as a deepwater harbour with a two-berth container terminal.\nFerries.\nFor about 80 years, the Lake Victoria ferries have carried rail wagons and vehicles from Uganda to Tanzania. The ferries are jointly run by the railway companies of Tanzania and Uganda and are the main means of transport between Tanzania and Uganda as well as between northern Tanzania and southwestern Kenya. Other ferry services link the Zanzibar archipelago and Tanzanian ports.\nOnce a rival to Lake Victoria as a waterway, the Lake Tanganyika ferries are no longer as busy and train ferries no longer operate. Trade has suffered from wars in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Small ferries link communities along the Tanzanian shore (some with no road access), and commercial traffic runs between Kigoma and Bujumbura, Burundi and Mpulungu, Zambia, including the MV Liemba.\nCommunities along the northeast shore (some without road access) are linked by ferry, and Malawian steamer and boat services have run the length of the lake for about 120 years.\nMerchant marine.\nIn 2008 the merchant fleet consisted of nine Tanzanian-flagged vessels and one registered in Honduras. The small number of ships may be attributed to the few exports, the relative insufficiency of its coast guard and naval forces, and the single major port in Dar es Salaam. The nine domestically flagged ships are one cargo ship, four passenger/cargo ships, and four oil tankers.\nOther modes.\nPipeline transport.\nIn 2008 there were of gas pipeline, of oil pipeline, and an pipeline for refined petroleum products. The privately owned Tazama Pipeline accounts for a large portion of the crude oil transportation capability. It currently handles 600,000 tons of crude oil per year, but was designed to handle 1.1 million tons.\nSkyline logging.\nA cable logging system exists in Lushoto District, whereby logs are transported from the Usambara Mountains downhill.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30126", "revid": "151172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30126", "title": "Military of Tanzania", "text": ""}
{"id": "30127", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30127", "title": "Foreign relations of Tanzania", "text": "Tanzania's first president, Julius Nyerere also was one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement, and, during the Cold War era, Tanzania played an important role in regional and international organisations, such as the Non-Aligned Movement, the front-line states, the G-77, and the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) (now the African Union). One of Africa's best-known elder statesmen, Nyerere was personally active in many of these organisations, and served chairman of the OAU (1984\u201385) and chairman of six front-line states concerned with eliminating apartheid in Southern Africa. Nyerere was also involved with peace negotiations in Burundi until his death. Nyerere's death, on 14 October 1999, is still commemorated annually.\nTanzania, officially known as the \"United Republic of Tanzania\", enjoys good relations with its neighbours in the region and in recent years has been an active participant in efforts to promote the peaceful resolution of disputes. Tanzania is helping to broker peace talks to end conflict in Burundi and supports the Lusaka agreement concerning the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In March 1996, Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya revived discussion of economic and regional cooperation. These talks culminated with the signing of an East African Cooperation Treaty in September 1999, which should in time lead to economic integration through the development of the East African Community. Tanzania is the only country in East Africa which also is a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).\nHistorically, Tanzania has played an active role in hosting refugees from neighbouring countries including Mozambique, DR Congo, Burundi, and Rwanda. This normally has been done in partnership with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Tanzania maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational trips made by presidents of Tanzania.\nJohn Magufuli.\nJohn Magufuli made a 10 International trips to 8 countries during his presidency. Magufuli famously was the first Tanzania president to not travel outside of Africa. The president cracked down on large foreign delegations and usually sent his Vice-President Samia Suluhu Hassan to represent him. The president served six years and made the least international official visits than any of his predecessors.\nAll his visits were bilateral except he attended one African Union Heads of State Summit in Ethiopia and another East African Community heads of state summit in Uganda.\nSamia Suluhu.\nSamia Suluhu made her first international trip in April 2021 since she began her presidency on 19 March 2021. Once president she aimed to regain the country's former position in the international community and began to embark on foreign trips.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30128", "revid": "50931778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30128", "title": "Thailand", "text": "Country in Southeast Asia\nThailand, officially the Kingdom of Thailand, and formerly known as Siam until 1939, is a country located in mainland Southeast Asia. It shares land borders with Myanmar to the west and northwest, Laos to the east and northeast, Cambodia to the southeast, and Malaysia to the south. Its maritime boundaries include the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea, as well as maritime borders with Vietnam, Indonesia, and India. Thailand has a population of nearly 66 million people, covers an area of approximately 513,115\u00a0km2 (198,115 sq mi). The country's capital and largest city is Bangkok.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that humans have inhabited the area of present-day Thailand for at least 40,000 years. Indigenous ethnic groups include the Mon, Khmer, and Malay people. The Tai people are believed to have originated from the \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 region since the 5th century and began migrating into the territory of modern Thailand between the 8th and 10th centuries origin of the Tai people. During the classical historical period, major kingdoms such as Sukhothai, Lan Na, and Ayutthaya were established. The Sukhothai Kingdom is regarded as the beginning of Thai history, while the Ayutthaya Kingdom, founded in 1350 CE, became a regional power replacing the Khmer Empire. European contact began in 1511 CE when Portuguese envoys arrived in Ayutthaya. The Ayutthaya Kingdom flourished until its complete destruction during the 1765\u20131767 Burmese\u2013Siamese War by the Burmese forces under the Konbaung dynasty in 1767.\nAfter the fall of Ayutthaya, King Taksin reunified the kingdom and established the Thonburi Kingdom, which lasted only 15 years before he was overthrown by Phutthayotfa Chulalok (Rama I), the founder of the Chakri dynasty. King Rama I established the Rattanakosin Kingdom and moved the capital to Bangkok in 1782. During the era of Western imperialism, Siam remained the only country in Southeast Asia to avoid colonization by European powers, although it ceded territory, trade rights, and legal privileges through several unequal treaties. The governance system evolved into an absolute monarchy centralized under the rule of King Chulalongkorn (Rama V). Siam adapted to international relations during the imperialist era and joined World War I on the side of the Allies, a political decision aimed at revising the effects of unequal treaties and enhancing Siam's international status.\nFollowing the Siamese revolution of 1932 by the Khana Ratsadon (lit.\u2009'People's Party'), Siam transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a parliamentary constitutional monarchy and was officially renamed Thailand. During World War II, the country was under the military dictatorship of Plaek Phibunsongkhram and allied with the Empire of Japan as part of the Axis powers, but Thailand did not become a defeated nation due to the underground Free Thai Movement's \"Declaration of Peace\", which was recognized by the Allies. During the Cold War, Thailand became a key major non-NATO ally of the United States and played a major role in countering communism in the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and other proxy wars. Thailand also joined the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). Despite brief periods of liberal democracy in the 1970s and 1990s, Thailand alternated between liberal democracy and military dictatorship.\nSince the 2000s, Thailand has experienced political conflict between supporters and opponents of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra (in office 2001\u20132006), leading to the 2006 and 2014 coup d'\u00e9tats. Today, Thailand operates under the 2017 Constitution and a coalition government following the 2019 Thai general election, as well as political demonstrations demanding democracy and monarchy reform. The current constitutional structure still allows \"de facto\" political influence by the Royal Thai Armed Forces. Thailand has also faced border tensions from the 2008\u20132011 Cambodian\u2013Thai border crisis extending to the 2025 Cambodia\u2013Thailand border crisis involving territorial disputes and military clashes.\nCurrently, Thailand is recognized as a developing country and holds significant geopolitical importance in Southeast Asia. It is a unitary state governed under a parliamentary system with a bicameral legislature comprising the elected House of Representatives and the appointed Senate. Thailand is a member of the United Nations, a major non-NATO ally of the United States, and a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), as well as a regional power. The Royal Thai Armed Forces are among the largest military forces in Southeast Asia. Thailand's economy is the second-largest in the region and the 23rd globally by purchasing power parity, ranking 29th by gross domestic product. Thailand is classified as a newly industrialized country, with manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism being the main economic sectors.\nEtymology.\nThailand was known by outsiders before 1939 as \"Siam\". According to George C\u0153d\u00e8s, the word \"Thai\" (\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22) means 'free man' in the Thai language, \"differentiating the Thai from the natives encompassed in Thai society as serfs\". According to Chit Phumisak, Thai () simply means 'people' or 'human being'; his investigation shows that some rural areas used the word \"Thai\" instead of the usual Thai word \"khon\" (\u0e04\u0e19) for people. According to Michel Ferlus, the ethnonyms Thai-Tai (or Thay-Tay) would have evolved from the etymon \"*k(\u0259)ri:\" 'human being'.\nThais often refer to their country using the polite form \"prathet Thai\" (). They also use the more colloquial term \"mueang Thai\" () or simply \"Thai;\" the word \"mueang\", archaically referring to a city-state, is commonly used to refer to a city or town as the centre of a region. \"Ratcha Anachak Thai\" () means 'kingdom of Thailand' or 'kingdom of Thai'.\nEtymologically, its components are: \"ratcha\" (, \"r\u0101jan\", 'king, royal, realm'), \"ana-\" (Pali \"\u0101\u1e47\u0101\" 'authority, command, power', itself from the Sanskrit , \"\u0101j\u00f1\u0101\", of the same meaning), and \"-chak\" (from Sanskrit \"cakra-\" 'wheel', a symbol of power and rule).\nThe Thai National Anthem (), written by Luang Saranupraphan during the patriotic 1930s, refers to the Thai nation as \"prathet Thai\" (). The first line of the national anthem is: \"prathet thai ruam lueat nuea chat chuea thai\" (), 'Thailand is founded on blood and flesh'.\nThe former name \"Siam\" may have originated from Sanskrit \u0936\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092e (\"\u015by\u0101ma\", 'dark') or Mon \u101b\u102c\u1019\u100a (\"rhma\u00f1\u00f1a\", 'stranger'), probably the same root as \"Shan\" and \"Assam\". The word \"\u015ay\u00e2ma\" is possibly not the true origin, but a pre-designed deviation from its proper, original meaning. Another theory is the name derives from the Chinese calling this region 'Xian'.\nThe ancient Khmers used the word \"Siam\" to refer to people settled in the west Chao Phraya River valley surrounding the ancient city of Nakhon Pathom in the present-day central Thailand; it may probably originate from the name of Lord Krishna, which also called \"Shyam\", as in the Wat Sri Chum Inscription, dated 13th century CE, mentions Phra Maha Thera Sri Sattha came to restore Phra Pathommachedi at the city of Lord Krishna (Nakhon Pathom) in the early era of the Sukhothai Kingdom.\nThe signature of King Mongkut (r. 1851\u20131868) reads \"SPPM\" (\"Somdet Phra Poramenthra Maha\") \"Mongkut Rex Siamensium\" (Mongkut, King of the Siamese). This usage of the name in the country's first international treaty gave the name \"Siam\" official status, until 24 June 1939 when it was changed to \"Thailand\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory and origins.\nThere is evidence of continuous human habitation in present-day Thailand from 20,000 years ago to the present day. The earliest evidence of rice growing is dated at 2,000 BCE. Areas comprising what is now Thailand participated in the Maritime Jade Road, as ascertained by archeological research. The trading network existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BCE to 1000 CE. Bronze appeared c.\u20091,250\u20131,000 BCE. The site of Ban Chiang in northeast Thailand currently ranks as the earliest known centre of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia. Iron appeared around 500 BCE.\nThe Kingdom of Funan was the first and most powerful Southeast Asian kingdom at the time (2nd century BCE). The Mon people established the principalities of Dvaravati and Kingdom of Hariphunchai in the 6th century. The Khmer people established the Khmer empire, centred in Angkor, in the 9th century. Tambralinga, a Malay state controlling trade through the Malacca Strait, rose in the 10th century. The Indochina peninsula was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India from the time of the Kingdom of Funan to that of the Khmer Empire.\nThe Thai people are of the Tai ethnic group, characterised by common linguistic roots. Chinese chronicles first mention the Tai peoples in the 6th century BCE. While there are many assumptions regarding the origin of Tai peoples, David K. Wyatt, a historian of Thailand, argued that their ancestors who at present inhabit Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, India, and China came from the \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 area between the 5th and the 8th century.\nThai people began migrating into present-day Thailand gradually from the 6th to 11th century, which Mon and Khmer people occupied at the time. Thus Thai culture was influenced by Indian, Mon, and Khmer cultures. Tai people intermixed with various ethnic and cultural groups in the region, resulting in many groups of present-day Thai people. Genetic evidences suggested that ethnolinguistics could not accurately predict the origins of the Thais. Sujit Wongthes argued that Thai is not a race or ethnicity but a culture group.\nAccording to French historian George C\u0153d\u00e8s, \"The Thai first enter history of Farther India in the eleventh century with the mention of \"Syam\" slaves or prisoners of war in Champa epigraphy\", and \"in the twelfth century, the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat\" where \"a group of warriors\" are described as \"Syam\", though Cham accounts do not indicate the origins of \"Syam\" or what ethnic group they belonged to. The origins and ethnicity of the \"Syam\" remain unclear, with some literature suggesting that \"Syam\" refers to the Shan people, the Bru people, or the Brau people. However, mainland Southeast Asian sources from before the fourteenth century primarily used the word \"Syam\" as an ethnonym, referring to those who belonged to a separate cultural category different from the Khmer, Cham, Bagan, or Mon. This contrasts with the Chinese sources, where \"Xian\" was used as a toponym.\nEarly Tai confederate cities (691 BCE \u2013 13th century CE).\nTheoretically, Tai-Kadai-speaking people formed as early as the 12th century BCE in the middle of the Yangtze basin. Some groups later migrated south to Guangxi. However, after several bloody centuries against Chinese influence in Guangxi between 333 BCE and the 11th century, hundreds of thousands of Tais were killed, thus, Tai people began to move southwestward along the rivers and over the lower passes into the mountain north of Southeast Asia and river valleys in present-day Assam of India. Some evidence indicates that the ancestors of Tai people migrated en masse southwestwards out of Yunnan only after the 1253 Mongol invasion of Dali; however, it is not generally accepted.\nTais defeated indigenous tribes and emerged as the new power in the new region. As a result, several Tai city-states were established, scattered from \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 in present-day northwestern Vietnam and highland Southeast Asia to northeastern India.\nAccording to the \"Simhanavati legend\" given in several chronicles, the first Tai city-state in northern Thailand, Singhanavati, was founded around the 7th century. However, several modern geology and archaeology studies found that its centre, Yonok Nahaphan, dates from 691 BCE\u2013545 CE; this roughly coincides with the establishment of Shan States, another Tai's federated principalities in the present-day northeast Myanmar. as well as Muang Sua (Luang Prabang) in the east.\nAfter Singhanavati was submerged below Chiang Saen Lake due to an earthquake in 545, the survivors then founded a new seat at Wieng\u2013Prueksha. The kingdom lasted for another 93 years.\nIn addition to Singhanavati, another northern principality probably related to the Tai people, Ngoenyang, was established as the successor of Singhanavati in 638 by Lavachakkaraj, also centred in Wieng\u2013Prueksha (present-day Mae Sai District, Chiang Rai). Its seat was moved to Chiang Mai in 1262 by King Mangrai, which considered the foundation of the Lan Na kingdom. Mangrai unified the surrounding area and also created a network of states through political alliances to the east and north of the Mekong. His dynasty would rule the kingdom continuously for the next two centuries. Lan Na expanded its territory southward and annexed the Mon Hariphunchai of Dvaravati in 1292.\nIn the late tenth century, Tai people began to migrate further south to the present-day upper central Thailand. Around the 1100s period, several cities in this area, such as Songkwae, Sawankhalok, and Chakangrao, were ruled by the Tai people, eventually launching several battles against the pre-existing Mon of Lavo, who had been falling under Chenla and Khmer influences since the 7th century, thus bringing the establishment of the Tai people's independent state, Sukhothai Kingdom, in the upper Chao Phraya River valley in 1238.\nThe earliest conflict between Tai people and the preexisting ethnics was recorded in the mid-4th century when the ruler of\u00a0Singhanavati, Pangkharat, forcibly lost the seat at Yonok to King Khom from Umongasela (present-day Fang). He then fled to Vieng Si Tuang (; present-day Wiang Phang Kham, Mae Sai district) but had to send tributes to Yonok annually until his son, Phrom, took back Yonok and expelled King Khom from Umongasela. Phrom also marched the troops south to occupy Chakangrao from the enemy as well as founding the city of Songkwae. Some historians suggest that Lavo's capital, Lopburi, was once seized by Phrom. In contrast, Tai people instead established relationships with Mon via royal intermarriages.\nMon and Lavo Kingdoms (5th century CE \u2013 13th century CE).\nThe Chao Phraya River in what is now central Thailand had once been the home of the Mon Dvaravati culture, which prevailed from the seventh century to the tenth century. Samuel Beal discovered the polity among the Chinese writings on Southeast Asia as \"Duoluobodi\". During the early 20th century, archaeological excavations led by George Coed\u00e8s found Nakhon Pathom Province to be a centre of Dvaravati culture. The two most important sites were Nakorn Pathom and U Thong (in modern Suphan Buri Province). The inscriptions of Dvaravati were in Sanskrit and Mon using the script derived from the Pallava alphabet of the South Indian Pallava dynasty.\nIt is believed that the Dvaravati borrowed Theravada Buddhism through its contacts with Sri Lanka, while the ruling class participated in Hindu rites. Dvaravati art, including the Buddha sculptures and stupas, showed strong similarities to those of the Gupta Empire of India. The eastern parts of the Chao Phraya valley were subjected to a more Khmer and Hindu influence as the inscriptions are found in Khmer and Sanskrit.\nDvaravati was a network of city-states paying tribute to more powerful ones according to the mandala political model. Dvaravati culture expanded into Isan as well as south as far as the Kra Isthmus. Dvaravati culture lost its influence around the tenth century when they submitted to the more unified Lavo-Khmer polity.\nAround the tenth century, the city-states of Dvaravati merged into the mandalas of: Lavo (modern Lopburi) and Suvarnabhumi (modern Suphan Buri). According to a legend in the Northern Chronicles, in 903, a king of Tambralinga invaded and took Lavo and installed a Malay prince on the Lavo throne. The Malay prince was married to a Khmer princess who had fled an Angkorian dynastic bloodbath. The son of the couple contested the Khmer throne and became Suryavarman I (1006\u20131050), thus bringing Lavo under Khmer domination through marital union. Suryavarman I also expanded into the Khorat Plateau (later styled \"Isan\"), constructing many temples.\nAfter the Angkor lost Lavo to Suphannabhum princes in 1052, the younger prince Chandrachota claimed the throne. His son, Narai I, moved Lavo's seat to Ayodhya in the 1080s. This resulted in the throne of Lavo's Lavaburi being vacant from 1087 to 1106 (or ruled by unknown kings), Si Satchanalai king, Kesariraja who is of Mon's Chaliang and Tai's Chiang Saen lineages, took over the seat. An attempt to re-expand influence to Lavo by the Angkor occurred in 1181 when Jayavarman VII appointed his lineage Narupatidnavarman to govern Lavapura. Due to this political pressure, a Tai ruler Sri Thammasokkarat\n(), who was also from Si Satchanalai, fled to Nakhon Si Thammarat. Sri Thammasokkarat married to princess of Dhanyapura (Dong Mae Nang Mueang in the present-day Nakhon Sawan province), and their descendants ruled Tambralinga until the late 13th century. The Customs of Cambodia of Zhou Daguan, as an official delegation sent by the Yuan dynasty to Angkor from 1296 to 1297, says the Siamese people exerted significant influence over Lavo's Lavapura and appeared in huge numbers in the Angkorian capital of Ya\u015bodharapura.\nPrang Sam Yot was built during this period. However, Lavapura was probably taken back by a Tai royal from Phraek Si Racha (; present-day Sankhaburi) in the 13th century. During this era, Angkor's power waned due to the weak rule and feuding began in the Angkor.\nAll of the turmoil, as mentioned earlier, also led to the independence declaration of the Sukhothai Kingdom in 1238.\nThe earliest evidence mentioning the Siamese.\nThe earliest evidence to mention the Siam people are stone inscriptions found in Angkor Borei of Funan (K.557 and K.600), dated 661 CE, the slave's name is mentioned as \"Ku Sayam\" meaning \"Sayam female slaves\" (Ku is a prefix used to refer to female slaves in the pre-Angkorian era), and the Tak\u00e9o inscriptions (K.79) written in 682 during the reign of Bhavavarman II of Chenla also mention Siam Nobel: \"S\u0101ra\u1e47noya Po\u00f1a Sayam\", which was transcribed into English as: \"the rice field that was given to the po\u00f1a (noble rank) who was called Sayam (Siam)\".\nThe Song Huiyao Jigao (960\u20131279) indicate Siamese people settled in the west central Thailand and their state was called \"Xi\u0101n gu\u00f3\" (), while the eastern plain belonged to the Mon of Lavo (), who later fell under the Chenla and Khmer hegemony around the 7th\u20139th centuries. Those Mon political entities, which also included Haripu\u00f1jaya in the north and several city-states in the northeast, are collectively called Dvaravati.\nHowever, the states of Siamese and Lavo were later merged via the royal intermarriage and became Ayutthaya Kingdom in the mid-14th century, while the southwestern Isan principalities, centred in Phanom Rung and Phimai, later pledged allegiance to Siamese's Ayutthaya during the reign of Borommarachathirat II (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; 1424\u20131448). The remaining principal city-states in Isan region became Lan Xang around 1353 after the twin cities of Muang Sua (Luang Prabang) and \"Vieng Chan Vieng Kham\" (Vientiane) became independent following the death of the Sukhothai king Ram Khamhaeng.\nAccording to the Wat Kud Tae inscription (K.1105), dated c. 7th century, during the period that the eastern Mon entity, Lavo, was strongly influenced by the Chenla, the Siamese in the west also established a royal intermarriage with Chenla as Sri Chakatham, prince of Sambhuka (\u0e28\u0e32\u0e21\u0e20\u0e39\u0e01\u0e30, in the present-day Ratchaburi province), married to a princess of Isanavarman I, and two mandalas then became an ally. After Chenla sieged Funan and moved the centre to Angkor, both Siamese and the Angkorian eventually marched the troops to attack Vijaya of Champa in 1201 during the reign of Jayavarman VII, as recorded in the Cho-Dinh inscription (C.3).\nSukhothai Kingdom (1238 CE \u2013 14th century CE).\nAfter the decline of the Khmer Empire and Kingdom of Pagan in the early 13th century, various states thrived in their place. The domains of Tai people existed from the northeast of present-day India to the north of present-day Laos and to the Malay Peninsula. During the 13th century, Tai people had already settled in the core land of Dvaravati and Lavo Kingdom to Nakhon Si Thammarat in the south. There are, however, no records detailing the arrival of the Tais.\nAround 1240, Pho Khun Bang Klang Hao, a local Tai ruler, rallied the people to rebel against the Khmer. He later crowned himself the first king of Sukhothai Kingdom in 1238. Mainstream Thai historians count Sukhothai as the first kingdom of Thai people. Sukhothai expanded furthest during the reign of Ram Khamhaeng (r.\u20091279\u00a0\u2013\u00a01298). However, it was mostly a network of local lords who swore fealty to Sukhothai, not directly controlled by it. He is believed have invented Thai script and Thai ceramics were an important export in his era. Sukhothai embraced Theravada Buddhism in the reign of Maha Thammaracha I (1347\u20131368).\nAyutthaya Kingdom (1351\u20131767).\nAccording to the most widely accepted version of its origin, the Ayutthaya Kingdom rose from the earlier, nearby Lavo Kingdom and Suvarnabhumi with Uthong as its first king. Ayutthaya was a patchwork of self-governing principalities and tributary provinces owing allegiance to the King of Ayutthaya under the mandala system. Its initial expansion was through conquest and political marriage.\nBefore the end of the 15th century, Ayutthaya invaded the Khmer Empire three times and sacked its capital Angkor. Ayutthaya then became a regional power in place of the Khmer. Constant interference of Sukhothai effectively made it a vassal state of Ayutthaya and it was finally incorporated into the kingdom. Borommatrailokkanat brought about bureaucratic reforms which lasted into the 20th century and created a system of social hierarchy called \"sakdina\", where male commoners were conscripted as corv\u00e9e labourers for six months a year. Ayutthaya was interested in the Malay Peninsula but failed to conquer the Malacca Sultanate, which was supported by the Chinese Ming dynasty.\nEuropean contact and trade started in the early-16th century, with the envoy of Portuguese duke Afonso de Albuquerque in 1511. Portugal became an ally and ceded some soldiers to King Rama Thibodi II. The Portuguese were followed in the 17th century by the French, Dutch, and English. Rivalry for supremacy over Chiang Mai and the Mon people pitted Ayutthaya against the Burmese Kingdom. Several wars with its ruling Taungoo dynasty starting in the 1540s in the reign of Tabinshwehti and Bayinnaung were ultimately ended with the capture of the capital in 1570. Then a brief period of vassalage to Burma until Naresuan proclaimed independence in 1584 followed.\nAyutthaya sought to improve relations with European powers for many successive reigns. The kingdom especially prospered during cosmopolitan Narai's reign (1656\u20131688), when some European travellers regarded Ayutthaya as an Asian great power, alongside China and India. However, growing French influence later in his reign was met with nationalist sentiment and eventually led to the Siamese revolution of 1688. Despite the revolution, overall relations remained stable, with French missionaries still actively preaching Christianity.\nAfter a bloody period of dynastic struggle, Ayutthaya entered what has been called the Siamese \"golden age\", a relatively peaceful episode in the second quarter of the 18th century where art, literature, and learning flourished. There were seldom foreign wars, apart from conflict with the Nguy\u1ec5n lords for control of Cambodia starting around 1715. The last fifty years of the kingdom witnessed bloody succession crises, where there were purges of court officials and able generals for many consecutive reigns. In 1765, a combined 40,000-strong force of Burmese armies invaded it from the north and west. The Burmese under the new Alaungpaya dynasty quickly rose to become a new local power by 1759. After a 14-month siege, the capital city's walls fell and the city was burned in April 1767.\nThonburi Kingdom (1767\u20131782).\nThe capital and many of its territories lay in chaos after the war. The former capital was occupied by the Burmese garrison army and five local leaders declared themselves overlords, including the lords of Sakwangburi, Phitsanulok, Pimai, Chanthaburi, and Nakhon Si Thammarat. Chao Tak, a capable military leader, proceeded to make himself a lord by right of conquest, beginning with the legendary sack of Chanthaburi. Based at Chanthaburi, Chao Tak raised troops and resources, and sent a fleet up the Chao Phraya to take the fort of Thonburi. In the same year, Chao Tak was able to retake Ayutthaya from the Burmese only seven months after the fall of the city.\nChao Tak then crowned himself as Taksin and proclaimed Thonburi as temporary capital in the same year. He also quickly subdued the other warlords. His forces engaged in wars with Burma, Laos, and Cambodia, which successfully drove the Burmese out of Lan Na in 1775, captured Vientiane in 1778 and tried to install a pro-Thai king in Cambodia in the 1770s. In his final years there was a coup, supposedly caused by his \"insanity\", and eventually Taksin and his sons were executed by his longtime companion General Chao Phraya Chakri (the future Rama I). He was the first king of the ruling Chakri dynasty and founder of the Rattanakosin Kingdom on 6 April 1782.\nRattanakosin Kingdom and modernization (1782 \u20131932).\nUnder Rama I (1782\u20131809), Rattanakosin successfully defended against Burmese attacks and put an end to Burmese incursions. He also created suzerainty over large portions of Laos and Cambodia. In 1821, Briton John Crawfurd was sent to negotiate a new trade agreement with Siam \u2013 the first sign of an issue which was to dominate 19th century Siamese politics. Bangkok signed the Burney Treaty in 1826, after the British victory in the First Anglo-Burmese War.\nAnouvong of Vientiane, who mistakenly held the belief that Britain was about to launch an invasion of Bangkok, started the Lao rebellion in 1826, which was suppressed. Vientiane was destroyed and a large number of Lao people were relocated to Khorat Plateau as a result. Bangkok also waged several wars with Vietnam, where Siam successfully regained hegemony over Cambodia.\nFrom the late 19th century, Siam tried to rule the ethnic groups in the realm as colonies. In the reign of Mongkut (1851\u20131868), who recognised the potential threat Western powers posed to Siam, his court contacted the British government directly to defuse tensions. A British mission led by Sir John Bowring, Governor of Hong Kong, led to the signing of the Bowring Treaty, the first of many unequal treaties with Western countries. This, however, brought trade and economic development to Siam. The unexpected death of Mongkut from malaria led to the reign of underage King Chulalongkorn, with Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse (Chuang Bunnag) acting as regent.\nChulalongkorn (r.\u20091868\u00a0\u2013\u00a01910) initiated centralisation, set up a privy council, and abolished slavery and the corv\u00e9e system. The Front Palace crisis of 1874 stalled attempts at further reforms. In the 1870s and 1880s, he incorporated the protectorates up north into the kingdom proper, which later expanded to the protectorates in the northeast and the south. He established twelve \"krom\" in 1888, which were equivalent to present-day ministries. The crisis of 1893 erupted, caused by French demands for Laotian territory east of Mekong.\nThailand is the only Southeast Asian state never to have been colonised by a Western power, in part because Britain and France agreed in 1896 to make the Chao Phraya valley a buffer state. Not until the 20th century could Siam renegotiate every unequal treaty dating from the Bowring Treaty, including extraterritoriality. The advent of the \"monthon\" system marked the creation of the modern Thai nation-state. In 1905, there were unsuccessful rebellions in the ancient Patani area, Ubon Ratchathani, and Phrae in opposition to an attempt to blunt the power of local lords.\nThe Palace Revolt of 1912 was a failed attempt by Western-educated military officers to overthrow the Siamese monarchy. Vajiravudh (r.\u20091910\u00a0\u2013\u00a01925) responded by propaganda for the entirety of his reign, which promoted the idea of the Thai nation. In 1917, Siam joined the First World War on the side of the Allies. In the aftermath, Siam had a seat at the Paris Peace Conference and gained freedom of taxation and the revocation of extraterritoriality.\nMilitary dictatorship era (1932\u20131975).\nA period of wasteful spending by King Vajiravudh followed by the Great Depression brought economic hardships on Thailand, with sharply falling rice prices, a significant reduction in public spending, eroded confidence in the monarchy, and discontent among aristocratic supporters all contributing to the destabilization of the Chakri dynasty. These conditions spurred on the bloodless Siamese revolution of 1932, in which the Khana Ratsadon movement forced King Prajadhipok to sign the country's first constitution, thereby ending centuries of feudal and absolute monarchy. Power was partially ceded to a democratic government, but it would not last a year before the rise of significant military influence in Thai political affairs.\nIn 1933, Prime Minister Phraya Mano led a counter-revolutionary rebellion to reinstate an absolute monarchy under Prajadhipok. This was soon followed by a military coup that installed Phraya Phahon - a leader of the 1932 revolution - as Prime Minister. Prajadhipok's conflict with the government eventually led to his abdication, and the new military-led government selected Switzerland-raised Ananda Mahidol to be the new king.\nThe armed wing of Khana Ratsadon gradually came to dominate Siamese politics. Military strongman Plaek Phibunsongkhram, often known as \"Phibun\", became premier in 1938 and launched a campaign of political repression that saw the execution of both Monarchists and pro-democracy Liberals. His government adopted Thai nationalist, pro-Westernisation, anti-royalist, Irredentist, anti-Chinese and anti-French policies.\nIn 1939, Phibun changed the country's name from \"Siam\" to \"Thailand\". This coincided with the rise of fascist ideology in Thailand, with the name change reflecting policies that prioritized the needs of ethnic Thais over those of minorities like the Thai Chinese. Phibun was an admirer of Benito Mussolini, and he imposed twelve Thai cultural mandates requiring citizens to obey nationalist norms such as saluting the flag, knowing the national anthem, speaking only Thai, and wearing Western clothing.\nIn October 1940, months after fall of France to Nazi Germany, Phibun launched an opportunistic invasion of French Indochinese territories lost to the French Empire during the reign of King Chulalongkorn. The invasion was a success, with Thailand additionally gaining some Lao and Cambodian territories.Japan, which had also been invading French Indochinese territories, brokered a ceasefire that forced France to give up several territories to Thailand.\nOn 8 December 1941, the Japanese Empire launched an invasion of Thailand, and fierce fighting broke out in Southern Thailand before Phibun ordered an armistice and joined the Axis powers just five hours later. Japan was granted free passage through Thai territory, and on 21 December Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance, with a secret protocol wherein the Japanese government agreed to help Thailand gain further territories throughout southeast Asia.\nThe Thai government then declared war on the United States and the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom, whose colony Malaya was under immediate threat from Thai forces, responded in kind, but the United States refused to declare war and ignored Thailand's declaration. The Free Thai Movement was launched both in Thailand and abroad to oppose the Thai government and Japanese occupation. After the war ended in 1945, Phibun was ousted and Thailand signed formal agreements to end the state of war with the Allies. In June 1946, King Ananda was found dead under mysterious circumstances, and his younger brother Bhumibol Adulyadej ascended to the throne.\nThis period of Liberal rule was brief, with Phibun launching another military coup to take power in 1947. In his second term as Prime Minister, Phibun pursued an alliance with the United States by undertaking a campaign of domestic anti-communism, aiding the US invasion of Korea, and helping to establish the US-aligned Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) in 1954. Following a tour of Europe and the US in 1955 where he was impressed by democratic practices like freedom of speech, Phibun began to democratize Thai politics by allowing new political parties and trade unions to form, opening public forums, granting amnesty to former political opponents, and preparing Thailand for its first free elections. However, these practices likely aroused opposition to Phibun's dictatorial legacy, and the US supported his final ouster in 1957.\nField Marshal Sarit Thanarat took power by coup in 1957, and he proceeded to reverse Phibun's democratic reforms and ban the Khana Ratsadon party from politics. His rule from 1959 to 1963 was autocratic; he built his legitimacy around the god-like status of the monarch and by channelling the government and public's loyalty to the king. Though Phibun had been criticized for his close relationship to the United States, Sarit also aligned himself with them and militarily supported the United States invasion of Vietnam in 1961, leading a simultaneous campaign of anti-communist mass killings in Thailand that continued under his successor Thanom Kittikachorn.\nThe Sarit and Thanom periods coincided with significant modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society. Rapid urbanisation occurred as the rural populace sought work in growing cities like Bangkok. Economic development and public education enabled the rise of an urban middle class. The growth of this economy based on wage labour rather than subsistence agriculture resulted in increased class consciousness and sympathies to the Communist Party of Thailand, while university-educated students formed movements against the military dictatorship.\nTransition toward democracy (1973\u20132001).\nIn October 1973, a popular democratic uprising against the Thanom government began to bring about an end to Thailand's military regime. In response to mass killings of protesters, King Adulyadej installed Sanya Dharmasakti as Prime Minister, marking the first time that the king had intervened in Thai politics directly since 1932. The aftermath of the event marked a short-lived parliamentary democracy, often called the \"era when democracy blossomed\" (\u0e22\u0e38\u0e04\u0e1b\u0e23\u0e30\u0e0a\u0e32\u0e18\u0e34\u0e1b\u0e44\u0e15\u0e22\u0e40\u0e1a\u0e48\u0e07\u0e1a\u0e32\u0e19).\nWith new democratic institutions limited in their capability to solidify power and pass reforms, the three years after the uprising were marked by political and economic instability. Right-wing fears of a Communist takeover of Thailand grew following the captures of South Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos by Communist insurgents. These factors culminated in the Thammasat University massacre in October 1976, in which police and right-wing mobs massacred students protesting the return of Thanom Kittikachorn to Thai politics. A military coup d'\u00e9tat on that day brought Thailand a new ultra-right wing military government which cracked down on media outlets, government officials, and intellectuals, engendering a communist insurgency. Another military coup the following year installed a more moderate military government, which offered amnesty to some communist fighters in 1978.\nMilitary figure Prem Tinsulanonda was appointed Prime Minister from in 1980. He oversaw the beginning of a period of significant economic growth and democratization throughout the 1980s. Prem's premiership was often referred to as \"premocracy\" because it involved semi-democratic practices such as a Parliament composed of an all-elected House and an all-appointed Senate. Prem's constitutionalist political approach aided with a transition away from military rule and a negotiated end to the Communist insurgency by 1983. He maintained political stability via a close relationship with King Bhumibol, who helped to foil two military coups in attempts against Prem in 1981 and in 1985.\nIn 1988, Thailand saw its first freely-elected prime minister since the 1976 coup. Chatichai Choonhavan ruled for 3 years before being overthrown in a coup that ushered in two years of military rule under the National Peace Keeping Council. One of the coup leaders, Suchinda Kraprayoon, was nominated as prime minister for the majority coalition government after the March 1992 general election. This caused a popular demonstration in Bangkok, which ended with a bloody military crackdown known as Black May. The King intervened in the event, granting amnesty to the belligerents and forcing the resignation of Suchinda.\nFree elections were once again held in September 1992, bringing the neoliberal Democrat Party to power. Power passed between various neoliberal parties throughout the decade, who all had a hand in drafting the 1997 \"People's Constitution.\" Spurred on by the events of Black May, the constitution explicitly acknowledged several human rights and established several government and electoral accountability measures, including the creation of a fully-elected bicameral legislature.\nShinawatra Era (2001\u2013present).\nThe neoliberal government's attempt to peg the Thai baht to the United States dollar induced the 1997 Asian financial crisis, crashing regional economies and ending nearly 40 years of uninterrupted economic growth in Thailand. To cover a shortage of foreign currency and investments, which had come primarily from Japan, Chavalit Yongchaiyudh's government took out a $17 billion International Monetary Fund loan in US dollars. To satisfy the conditions of the loan, Thailand underwent a series of austerity measures until the loan was repaid in 2003.\nThe crisis brought on the ascendancy of the populist Thai Rak Thai party, whose base consisted primarily of indebted rural workers. Its prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra governed from 2001 until 2006. His policies were successful in reducing rural poverty and providing universal healthcare. However, Thaksin was viewed by opponents among the Thai upper and upper middle classes as a corrupt populist who was destroying the middle class in order to favour himself and the rural poor. Additionally, his rural poverty policies directly conflicted with King Bhumibol's recommendations, drawing the ire of royalists, a powerful faction in Thailand. Thaksin also faced crises in the form of the South Thailand insurgency, which escalated starting from 2004, and the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami which claimed around 8,000 lives in Thailand.\nMassive protests against Thaksin led by the reactionary People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD) started in his second term as prime minister, and the monarchy and the military eventually agreed to oust him. The crisis peaked in 2005 with a series of controversies surrounding Buddhist and monarchic institutions, and the army dissolved Thaksin's party with a coup d'\u00e9tat in 2006 and banned over a hundred of its executives from politics. After the coup, a military government was installed for one year.\nThe military government faced significant resistance, with protesters frequently storming government buildings and elements within the military threatening yet another coup. In 2007, a civilian government led by the Thaksin-aligned People's Power Party (PPP) was elected. Another protest led by PAD ended with the dissolution of PPP, and the Democrat Party led a coalition government in its place. The pro-Thaksin United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD) protested both in 2009 and in 2010, the latter of which ended with a violent military crackdown causing more than 70 civilian deaths.\nAfter the general election of 2011, the populist Pheu Thai Party won a majority. Yingluck Shinawatra, Thaksin's younger sister, became prime minister. The People's Democratic Reform Committee organised another anti-Shinawatra protest after the ruling party proposed an amnesty bill which would benefit Thaksin. Yingluck dissolved parliament and a general election was scheduled, but her decision was invalidated by the Constitutional Court. The crisis ended with another coup d'\u00e9tat in 2014.\nThe ensuing National Council for Peace and Order, a military junta led by General Prayut Chan-o-cha, led the country until 2019. Civil and political rights were restricted, and the country saw a surge in \"l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9\" cases. Political opponents and dissenters were sent to \"attitude adjustment\" camps; this was described by academics as indicating the return of fascism to Thailand. Bhumibol, the longest-reigning Thai king, died in 2016, and his son Vajiralongkorn ascended to the throne. The referendum and adoption of Thailand's current constitution happened under the junta's rule. The junta bound future governments to a 20-year national strategy 'road map' it laid down, effectively locking the country into military-guided democracy.\nIn 2019, the junta agreed to schedule a general election. General Prayut continued his premiership with the support of an elected Palang Pracharath Party coalition in the House and junta-appointed Senate, despite allegations of election fraud. An extended two-year period of pro-democracy protests were subsequently triggered by distrust in the election as well as increasing royal prerogative, democratic and economic regression under monarchy-supported military rule, retaliatory dissolution of the pro-democracy Future Forward Party, regressive policies on political issues like women's and labour rights, forced disappearances and deaths of political activists like Wanchalearm Satsaksit, and various political corruption scandals including 1MDB. The protests brought forward unprecedented demands to reform the monarchy and the highest sense of republicanism in the country's history.\nIn May 2023, Thailand's reformist opposition - the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and Thaksin's populist Pheu Thai Party - won the general election, ending 9 years of royalist-military rule under Prayut. On 22 August 2023, Srettha Thavisin of the Pheu Thai party became Thailand's new prime minister, while the ex-PM and party figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile from the military regime. Thavisin was later dismissed from his prime ministerial role on 14 August 2024 by the Constitutional Court for \"gross ethics violations\". He was succeeded by Thaksin's daughter Paetongtarn Shinawatra, who spent a year in office before the Constitutional Court ordered her removal over a controversial phone call with Cambodia's president. The Court then ordered the arrest of Thaksin in September 2025.\nGeography.\nTotalling , Thailand is the 50th-largest country by total area. Thailand comprises several distinct geographic regions, partly corresponding to the provincial groups. The north of the country is the mountainous area of the Thai highlands, with the highest point being Doi Inthanon in the Thanon Thong Chai Range at above sea level. The northeast, Isan, consists of the Khorat Plateau, bordered to the east by the Mekong River. The centre of the country is dominated by the predominantly flat Chao Phraya river valley, which runs into the Gulf of Thailand. Southern Thailand consists of the narrow Kra Isthmus that widens into the Malay Peninsula.\nThe Chao Phraya and the Mekong River are the indispensable water courses of rural Thailand. Industrial scale production of crops use both rivers and their tributaries. The Gulf of Thailand covers and is fed by the Chao Phraya, Mae Klong, Bang Pakong, and Tapi Rivers. It contributes to the tourism sector owing to its clear shallow waters along the coasts in the southern region and the Kra Isthmus. The eastern shore of the Gulf of Thailand has the kingdom's premier deepwater port in Sattahip and its busiest commercial port, Laem Chabang. Phuket, Krabi, Ranong, Phang Nga and Trang, and their islands, all lay along the coasts of the Andaman Sea.\nClimate.\nThailand's climate is influenced by monsoon winds that have a seasonal character (the southwest and northeast monsoon). Most of the country is classified as K\u00f6ppen's tropical savanna climate. The majority of the south, as well as the eastern tip, have a tropical monsoon climate. Parts of the south also have a tropical rainforest climate.\nA year in Thailand is divided into three seasons. The first is the rainy or southwest monsoon season (mid\u2013May to mid\u2013October), which is caused by southwestern wind from the Indian Ocean.\nRainfall is also contributed by Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and tropical cyclones, with August and September being the wettest period of the year. The country receives a mean annual rainfall of .\nWinter or the northeast monsoon occurs from mid-October until mid-February. Most of Thailand experiences dry weather with mild temperatures. Summer or the pre-monsoon season runs from mid-February until mid-May.\nDue to their inland position and latitude, the north, northeast, central and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather, where temperatures can reach up to during March to May, in contrast to close to or below in some areas in winter.\nSouthern Thailand is characterised by mild weather year-round with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures due to maritime influences. It receives abundant rainfall, particularly during October to November. Thailand is among the world's ten countries that are most exposed to climate change. In particular, it is highly vulnerable to rising sea levels and extreme weather events.\nBiodiversity and conservation.\nNational parks in Thailand are defined as \"an area that contains natural resources of ecological importance or unique beauty, or flora and fauna of special importance\". Thailand's protected areas include 156 national parks, 58 wildlife sanctuaries, 67 non-hunting areas, and 120 forest parks. They cover almost 31 per cent of the kingdom's territory. The parks are administered by the National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department (DNP) of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE). The Khao Kheow Open Zoo in Chonburi is the second largest zoo in Asia. The largest national park of Thailand is Kaeng Krachan National Park. \nThailand has a mediocre but improving performance in the global Environmental Performance Index (EPI), with an overall ranking of 91 out of 180 countries in 2016. The environmental areas where Thailand performs worst (i.e., highest-ranking) are air quality (167), environmental effects of the agricultural industry (106), and the climate and energy sector (93), the later mainly because of a high CO2 emission per kWh produced. Thailand performs best (i.e., lowest-ranking) in water resource management (66), with some major improvements expected for the future, and sanitation (68). The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.00/10, ranking it 88th globally out of 172 countries.\nThe population of elephants, the country's national symbol, has fallen from 100,000 in 1850 to an estimated 2,000. Poachers have long hunted elephants for ivory and hides, and now increasingly for meat. Young elephants are often captured for use in tourist attractions or as work animals, where there have been claims of mistreatment. In 1989, the government banned the use of elephants for logging, leading many elephant owners to move their domesticated animals to the tourism industry.\nPoaching of protected species remains a major problem. Tigers, leopards, and other large cats are hunted for their pelts. Many are farmed or hunted for their meat, which supposedly has medicinal properties. Although such trade is illegal, the well-known Bangkok market Chatuchak is still known for the sale of endangered species. The practice of keeping wild animals as pets affects species such as Asiatic black bear, Malayan sun bear, white-handed lar, pileated gibbon, and binturong.\nPolitics and government.\nPrior to 1932, Thai kings were feudal or absolute monarchs. During Sukhothai Kingdom, the king was seen as a \"Dharmaraja\" or 'king who rules in accordance with Dharma'. The system of government was a network of tributaries ruled by local lords. Modern absolute monarchy and statehood was established by Chulalongkorn when he transformed the decentralised protectorate system into a unitary state. On 24 June 1932, Khana Ratsadon (People's Party) carried out a bloodless revolution which marked the beginning of constitutional monarchy.\nThailand has had 20 constitutions and charters since 1932, including the latest and current 2017 Constitution. All constitutions state that the politics is conducted within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, but the \"de facto\" form of government has ranged from military dictatorship to electoral democracy. Thailand's current form of government is part democracy and part dictatorship; many terms are used to describe it. Thailand has had the fourth-most coups in the world. \"Uniformed or ex-military men have led Thailand for 55 of the 83 years\" between 1932 and 2009. Most recently, the military junta self-titled as the National Council for Peace and Order ruled the country between 2014 and 2019.\nGovernment is separated into three branches:\nMilitary and bureaucratic aristocrats fully controlled political parties between 1946 and the 1980s. Most parties in Thailand are short-lived. Between 1992 and 2006, Thailand had a two-party system. Later constitutions created a multi-party system where a single party cannot gain a majority in the house.\nA hereditary monarch serves as Thailand's head of state. The current King of Thailand is Vajiralongkorn (Rama X), who has reigned since October 2016. The powers of the king are limited by the constitution and he is primarily a symbolic figurehead. However, the monarch still occasionally intervenes in Thai politics, as all constitutions pave the way for customary royal rulings. Some academics outside Thailand, including Duncan McCargo and Federico Ferrara, noted extraconstitutional role of the monarch through a \"network monarchy\" behind the political scenes. The monarchy is protected by the severe \"l\u00e8se majest\u00e9\" law, even though the people's attitude towards the institution varies from one reign to another.\nThe kings are protected by \"l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9\" laws which allow critics to be jailed for three to fifteen years. After the coup d'\u00e9tat in 2014, Thailand had the highest in the nation's history. Human rights in Thailand has been rated \"not free\" on the Freedom House Index since 2014. On August 7, 2024, Thailand's Constitutional Court banned the victors of the 2023 parliamentary elections, the Move Forward Party and all of its leaders from politics for its proposal to reform the l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9 law, arguing it posed a threat to the constitutional order. \"The Economist\" criticised the move as an example of \"lawfare\" and pointed to the dissolution of its predecessor party, Future Forward in 2020, as the latest example of how an \"alliance of conservative forces in Thailand\u2014including monarchists, the army and a handful of business tycoons\u2014has sought to suppress opposition\".\nOn the Freedom in the World 2024 Report for Thailand, their status improved from \"not free\" to \"partly free\" due to competitive parliamentary elections and the formation of a new governing coalition by what had been a major opposition party, though unelected senators ensured that the party with the most votes was excluded.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThailand is a unitary state; the administrative services of the executive branch are divided into three levels by \"National Government Organisation Act, BE 2534\" (1991): central, provincial and local. Thailand is composed of 76 provinces (, \"changwat\"), which are first-level administrative divisions. There are also two specially governed districts: the capital Bangkok and Pattaya. Bangkok is at provincial level and thus often counted as a province. Each province is divided into districts (, \"amphoe\") and the districts are further divided into sub-districts (, \"tambons\"). The name of each province's capital city (, mueang) is the same as that of the province. For example, the capital of Chiang Mai Province (\"Changwat Chiang Mai\") is \"Mueang Chiang Mai\" or \"Chiang Mai\". All provincial governors and district chiefs, which are administrators of provinces and districts respectively, are appointed by the central government. Thailand's provinces are sometimes grouped into four to six regions, depending on the source.\nForeign relations.\nSiam's and Thailand's way of conducting foreign relations has long been described as \"bamboo bending with the wind\", of policies that are \"always solidly rooted, but flexible enough to bend whichever way the wind blows in order to survive\", or adaptable and pragmatic. In order to secure independence, it sought to pit one great power against the others so that it would be dominated by none.\nDuring the Cold War, Thailand sought to prevent the spread of communism so it joined the United States, including participating in SEATO alliance, sending expeditions to Korea and Vietnam, and offering the US to use its base. Thailand is one of the five founding members of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), initially to safeguard against communism. The end of Vietnam War was a turning point in Thai foreign policy and afterwards it sought to improve relations with Communist China and its now-Communist neighbours. Thailand remains an active member of ASEAN and seek to project its influence in it. Thailand has developed increasingly close ties with other members, with progressing regional co-operation in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters.\nIn the 2000s, Thailand had taken an active role on the international stage and participated fully in international and regional organisations. It is a major non-NATO ally and Priority Watch List Special 301 Report of the United States. When East Timor gained independence from Indonesia, Thailand contributed troops to the international peacekeeping effort. As part of its effort to increase international ties, Thailand had reached out to such regional organisations as the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).\nDuring Thaksin Shinawatra's premiership, negotiations for several free trade agreements with China, Australia, Bahrain, India, and the US were initiated. Thaksin sought to position Thailand as a regional leader, initiating various development projects in poorer neighbouring countries. More controversially, he established close, friendly ties with the Burmese dictatorship. Thailand joined the US-led invasion of Iraq, sending a humanitarian contingent until September 2004. Thailand also had contributed troops to reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan.\nIn April 2009, the 2008\u20132013 Cambodian\u2013Thai border crisis brought troops on territory immediately adjacent to the 900-year-old ruins of Cambodia's Preah Vihear Hindu temple near the border.\nAfter the 2014 coup, Thailand leaned more towards China. Growing Chinese influence and capital inflow caused some members of parliament to raise the concern about \"economic colony\" under China after many concessions.\nDuring the Israel-Gaza war in 2023, at first Thailand's prime minister stated that his government strongly condemns the attack against Israel and extends its deepest condolences to the government and the people of Israel but the government later changed its position and announced that Thailand adopted a neutral stance in this conflict. 28 Thai nationals were killed in this conflict.\nArmed forces.\nThe Royal Thai Armed Forces (\u0e01\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22; RTGS:\u00a0) constitute the military of the Kingdom of Thailand. It consists of the Royal Thai Army (\u0e01\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e1a\u0e01\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22), the Royal Thai Navy (\u0e01\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e40\u0e23\u0e37\u0e2d\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22), and the Royal Thai Air Force (\u0e01\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e2d\u0e32\u0e01\u0e32\u0e28\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22). It also incorporates various paramilitary forces.\nThe head of the Thai Armed Forces (\u0e08\u0e2d\u0e21\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22, \"Chom Thap Thai\") is the king, although this position is only nominal. The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence of Thailand, which is headed by the Minister of Defence (a member of the cabinet of Thailand) and commanded by the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters, which in turn is headed by the Chief of Defence Forces of Thailand. Thai annual defence budget almost tripled from US$1.98 billion in 2005 to US$5.88 billion in 2016, accounting for approximately 1.4% of GDP. Thailand ranked 16th worldwide in the Military Strength Index based on the Credit Suisse report in September 2015.\nThe military is also tasked with humanitarian missions, such as escorting Rohingya to Malaysia or Indonesia, ensuring security and welfare for refugees during Indochina refugee crisis.\nAccording to the constitution, serving in the armed forces is a duty of all Thai citizens. Thailand still use active draft system for males over the age of 21. They are subjected to varying lengths of active service depending on the duration of reserve training as Territorial Defence Student and their level of education. Those who have completed three years or more of reserve training will be exempted entirely. The practice has long been criticized, as some media question its efficacy and value. It is alleged that conscripts end up as servants to senior officers or clerks in military cooperative shops. In a report issued in March 2020, Amnesty International charged that Thai military conscripts face institutionalised abuse systematically hushed up by military authorities.\nCritics observed that Thai military's main objective is to deal with internal rather than external threats. Internal Security Operations Command is called the political arm of the Thai military, which has overlapping social and political functions with civilian bureaucracy. It also has anti-democracy mission. The military is also notorious for numerous corruption incidents, such as accusation of human trafficking, and nepotism in promotion of high-ranking officers. The military is deeply entrenched in politics. Most recently, the appointed senators include more than 100 active and retired military.\nThailand is the 75th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Thailand is heavily export-dependent, with exports accounting for more than two-thirds of gross domestic product (GDP). Thailand exports over US$105 billion worth of goods and services annually. Major exports include cars, computers, electrical appliances, rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber, and jewellery.\nThailand is an emerging economy and is considered a newly industrialised country. Thailand had a 2017 GDP of US$1.236 trillion (on a purchasing power parity basis). Thailand is the second largest economy in Southeast Asia after Indonesia. Thailand ranks midway in the wealth spread in Southeast Asia as it is the fourth richest nation according to GDP per capita, after Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia.\nThailand functions as an anchor economy for the neighbouring developing economies of Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia. In the third quarter of 2014, the unemployment rate in Thailand stood at 0.84% according to Thailand's National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB).\nIn 2017, the Thai economy grew an inflation-adjusted 3.9%, up from 3.3% in 2016, marking its fastest expansion since 2012. High public spending, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, prompted the authorities to raise Thailand's public debt ceiling from 60% to 70% of GDP.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Thailand struggles with low productivity, poor education, high household debt, low private investment and slow economic growth, with an economic research group forecasted an annual GDP growth of below 2% in the next decades without structural reforms.\nIncome and wealth disparities.\nThais have median wealth per one adult person of $1,469 in 2016, increasing from $605 in 2010. In 2016, Thailand was ranked 87th in Human Development Index, and 70th in the inequality-adjusted HDI.\nIn 2017, Thailand's median household income was \u0e3f26,946 per month. Top quintile households had a 45.0% share of all income, while bottom quintile households had 7.1%. There were 26.9 million persons who had the bottom 40% of income earning less than \u0e3f5,344 per person per month. During the 2013\u20132014 Thai political crisis, a survey found that anti-government PDRC mostly (32%) had a monthly income of more than \u0e3f50,000, while pro-government UDD mostly (27%) had between \u0e3f10,000 and \u0e3f20,000.\nIn 2014, Credit Suisse reported that Thailand was the world's third most unequal country, behind Russia and India. The top 10% richest held 79% of the country's assets. The top 1% held 58% of the assets. The 50 richest Thai families had a total net worth accounting to 30% of GDP. Bank of Thailand reported that during 2006\u201316, Thailand's top 5% largest companies had 85% of all corporate revenue in the nation, and only 6% of the country's companies were in export industries, which made up 60% of the country's GDP.\nIn 2016, 5.81 million people lived in poverty, or 11.6 million people (17.2% of population) if \"near poor\" is included. The proportion of the poor relative to total population in each region was 12.96% in the Northeast, 12.35% in the South, and 9.83% in the North. In 2017, there were 14 million people who applied for social welfare (yearly income of less than \u0e3f100,000 was required). In the first quarter of 2023, Thai household debts totaled 14.6 trillion baht or 89.2% of GDP; the average debt per household was approximately 500,000 baht. In 2016, there were estimated 30,000 homeless persons in the country.\nExports and manufacturing.\nThe economy of Thailand is heavily export-dependent, with exports accounting for more than two-thirds of gross domestic products (GDPs). Major exports include cars, computers, electrical appliances, rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber, and jewellery. In 2022, Thailand's export of goods is worth roughly while its import worth roughly .\nSubstantial industries include electric appliances, components, computer components, and vehicles. Thailand's recovery from the 1997\u20131998 Asian financial crisis depended mainly on exports, among various other factors. As of 2012[ [update]], the Thai automotive industry was the largest in Southeast Asia and the 9th largest in the world. The Thailand industry has an annual output of near 1.5 million vehicles, mostly commercial vehicles.\nMost of the vehicles built in Thailand are developed and licensed by foreign producers, mainly Japanese and American. The Thai car industry takes advantage of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) to find a market for many of its products. Eight manufacturers, five Japanese, two US, and Tata of India, produce pick-up trucks in Thailand. As of 2012, due to its favourable taxation for 2-door pick-ups at only 3\u201312% against 17\u201350% for passenger cars, Thailand was the second largest consumer of pick-up trucks in the world, after the US. In 2014, pick-ups accounted for 42% of all new vehicle sales in Thailand.\nTourism.\nTourism makes up about 6% of the country's economy. Prior to the pandemic, Thailand was the world's eighth most visited country according to the World Tourism rankings compiled by the United Nations World Tourism Organisation. In 2019, Thailand received 39.8 million international tourists, ahead of United Kingdom and Germany and was the fourth highest in international tourism earning 60.5 billion US dollars.\nThailand was the most visited country in Southeast Asia in 2013, according to the World Tourism Organisation. Estimates of tourism receipts directly contributing to the Thai GDP of 12 trillion baht range from 9 per cent (1 trillion baht) (2013) to 16 per cent. When including the indirect effects of tourism, it is said to account for 20.2 per cent (2.4 trillion baht) of Thailand's GDP.\nAsian tourists primarily visit Thailand for Bangkok and the historical, natural, and cultural sights in its vicinity. Western tourists not only visit Bangkok and surrounding areas; many travel to the southern beaches and islands. The north is the chief destination for trekking and adventure travel with its diverse ethnic minority groups and forested mountains. The region hosting the fewest tourists is Isan. To accommodate foreign visitors, a separate tourism police with offices were set up in the major tourist areas and an emergency telephone number.\nThailand ranks as the worlds fifth largest medical tourism destination in spending, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, attracting over 2.5 million visitors in 2018, and is number one in Asia. The country is popular for the growing practice of sex reassignment surgery (SRS) and cosmetic surgery. In 2010\u20132012, more than 90% of medical tourists travelled to Thailand for SRS. Prostitution in Thailand and sex tourism also form a \"de facto\" part of the economy. Campaigns promote Thailand as exotic to attract tourists. One estimate published in 2003 placed the trade at US$4.3 billion per year or about 3% of the Thai economy. It is believed that at least 10% of tourist dollars are spent on the sex trade.\nAgriculture and natural resources.\nForty-nine per cent of Thailand's labour force is employed in agriculture. This is down from 70% in 1980. Rice is the most important crop in the country and Thailand had long been the world's leading exporter of rice, until recently falling behind both India and Vietnam. Thailand has the highest percentage of arable land, 27.25%, of any state in the Greater Mekong Subregion. About 55% of the arable land area is used for rice production.\nAgriculture has been experiencing a transition from labour-intensive and transitional methods to a more industrialised and competitive sector. Between 1962 and 1983, the agricultural sector grew by 4.1% per year on average and continued to grow at 2.2% between 1983 and 2007. The relative contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined while exports of goods and services have increased.\nFurthermore, access to biocapacity in Thailand is lower than world average. In 2016, Thailand had 1.2 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, a little less than world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In contrast, in 2016, they used 2.5 global hectares of biocapacity\u2014their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use about twice as much biocapacity as Thailand contains, resulting in a deficit.\nInformal economy.\nIn 2012, it was estimated that informal workers comprised 62.6% of the Thai workforce. The Ministry of Labour defines informal workers to be individuals who work in informal economies and do not have employee status under a given country's Labour Protection Act (LPA). The informal sector in Thailand has grown significantly over the past 60 years over the course of Thailand's gradual transition from an agriculture-based economy to becoming more industrialised and service-oriented. Between 1993 and 1995, ten per cent of the Thai labour force moved from the agricultural sector to urban and industrial jobs, especially in the manufacturing sector. It is estimated that between 1988 and 1995, the number of factory workers in the country doubled from two to four million, as Thailand's GDP tripled.\nWhile the Asian financial crisis that followed in 1997 hit the Thai economy hard, the industrial sector continued to expand under widespread deregulation, as Thailand was mandated to adopt a range of structural adjustment reforms upon receiving funding from the IMF and World Bank. These reforms implemented an agenda of increased privatisation and trade liberalisation in the country, and decreased federal subsidisation of public goods and utilities, agricultural price supports, and regulations on fair wages and labour conditions. Many migrant farmers took jobs in sweatshops and factories with few labour regulations and often exploitative conditions. Those that could not find formal factory work, including illegal migrants and the families of rural Thai migrants, are under the regulation imposed by the structural adjustment programmes. Scholars argue that the economic consequences and social costs of Thailand's labour reforms in the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis fell on individuals and families rather than the state. \nInformal labour in entertainment, nightlife, and the sex industry face additional vulnerabilities, including recruitment into circles of sexual exploitation and human trafficking. A 2012 study found that 64% of informal workers had not completed education beyond primary school. Many informal workers are also migrants, only some of which have legal status in the country. The informal labour sector is also not recognised under the Labour Protection Act (LPA). Thai social security policies fail to protect against workplace accidents and unemployment and retirement insurance. Many informal workers are not legally contracted for their employment, and many do not make a living wage. Tens of thousands of migrants from neighboring countries face exploitation in a few industries, especially in fishing where slave-like conditions have been reported.\nScience and technology.\nThailand ranked 45th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. The Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation and its agencies oversees the development of science, technology, and research in Thailand. According to the National Research Council of Thailand, the country devoted 1.1% of its GDP to the research and development of science in 2019, with over 166,788 research and development personnel in full-time equivalent that year.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe State Railway of Thailand (SRT) operates all of Thailand's national rail lines. Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal and Bangkok (Hua Lamphong) are the main termini of intercity routes. Phahonyothin and ICD Lat Krabang are the main freight terminals. As of 2025[ [update]] SRT had of track, all of it meter gauge. Nearly all is single-track (2702.1\u00a0km), although some important sections around Bangkok are double () or triple-tracked (), and there are plans to extend this.\nRail transport in Bangkok includes long-distance services. There are four rapid transit rail systems in the capital: the BTS Skytrain, MRT, SRT Red Lines, and the Airport Rail Link. In Bangkok, there were two failed rapid rail projects Lavalin Skytrain and Bangkok Elevated Road and Train System, before Mass Rapid Transit Master Plan in Bangkok Metropolitan Region was endorsed by the cabinet on 27 September 1994 and implemented from 1995 to the present.\nThailand has of highways. As of 2017[ [update]], Thailand has over 462,133 roads and 37 million registered vehicles, 20 million of them motorbikes. A number of undivided two-lane highways have been converted into divided four-lane highways. Within the Bangkok Metropolitan Region, there are a number of controlled-access highways. There are 4,125 public vans operating on 114 routes from Bangkok alone. Other forms of road transport includes tuk-tuks, taxis\u2014with over 80,647 registered taxis nationwide as of 2018, vans (minibus), motorbike taxis, and songthaews.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], Thailand has 103 airports with 63 paved runways, in addition to 6 heliports. The busiest airport in the country is Bangkok's Suvarnabhumi Airport.\nEnergy.\n75% of Thailand's electrical generation is powered by natural gas in 2014. Coal-fired power plants produce an additional 20% of electricity, with the remainder coming from biomass, hydro, and biogas. Compared to other ASEAN's countries, Thailand is the largest importer of gas in weight.17 In 2022, Thailand's oil and gas production dropped by 19% and 17%, respectively.8\nThe government, in 2018, has developed an Alternative Energy Development Plan 2018\u20132037 (AEDP 2018). The plan defines goals for the increase of renewable energy to almost 30,000 MW by 2037.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThailand had a population of 65.95 million on 8 Jan 2025. There were 64,953,661 Thai nationals and 997,549 non-Thai residents. Thailand's first census in 1909 found the population to be 8.2 million. Thailand's population is largely rural, concentrated in the rice-growing areas of the central, northeastern, and northern regions. About 44.2% of Thailand's population lived in urban areas as of 2010[ [update]], slowly increasing from 29.4% in the 1990 census and 31.1% in the 2000 census.\nThailand's government-sponsored family planning programme resulted in a dramatic decline in population growth from 3.1% in 1960 to around 0.4% today. In 1970, an average of 5.7 people lived in a Thai household; in 2022, the average Thai household size was 3 people. Now, more than 20% of its population is aged over 60 and has a low birth rate, posing economic challenges. The sex ratio between male and female is 1.05, with Thailand having slightly more males. Thailand's total fertility rate declined to 1.0 in 2024. This ranks Thailand among countries with ultra-low fertility rates.\nEthnic groups.\nAs of 2010, Thai people make up the majority of Thailand's population (95.9%). The remaining 4.1% of the population are Burmese (2.0%), others (1.3%), and unspecified (0.9%).\nAccording to genetic research, the present-day Thai people were divided into three groups: the northern group (Khon Mueang) are closely related to the Tai ethnic groups in southern China, the northeastern group (Isan people) are mixed Tai and several Austroasiatic-speaking ethnic groups, while the central and southern groups (formerly called Siamese) strongly share genetic profiles with the Mon people.\nAccording to the Royal Thai Government's 2011 Country Report to the UN Committee responsible for the International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, available from the Department of Rights and Liberties Promotion of the Thai Ministry of Justice, 62 ethnic communities are officially recognised in Thailand. Twenty million Central Thai (together with approximately 650,000 Khorat Thai) made up approximately 20,650,000 (34.1 per cent) of the state's population of 60,544,937 at the time of completion of the Mahidol University \"Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand\" data (1997).\nThe 2011 Thailand Country Report provides population numbers for mountain peoples ('hill tribes') and ethnic communities in the Northeast and is explicit about its main reliance on the Mahidol University Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand data. Thus, though over 3.288 million people in the Northeast alone could not be categorised, the population and percentages of other ethnic communities c.\u20091997 are known for all of Thailand and constitute minimum populations. In descending order, the largest (equal to or greater than 400,000) are a) 15,080,000 Lao (24.9 per cent) consisting of the Thai Lao (14 million) and other smaller Lao groups, namely the Thai Loei (400\u2013500,000), Lao Lom (350,000), Lao Wiang/Klang (200,000), Lao Khrang (90,000), Lao Ngaew (30,000), and Lao Ti (10,000); b) six million Khon Muang (9.9 per cent, also called Northern Thais); c) 4.5 million Pak Tai (7.5 per cent, also called Southern Thais); d) 1.4 million Khmer Leu (2.3 per cent, also called Northern Khmer); e) 900,000 Malay (1.5%); f) 500,000 Nyaw (0.8 per cent); g) 470,000 Phu Thai (0.8 per cent); h) 400,000 Kuy/Kuay (also known as Suay) (0.7 per cent), and i) 350,000 Karen (0.6 per cent). Thai Chinese, including those of significant Chinese origins, are 14% of the population, while Thais with partial Chinese ancestry comprise up to 40% of the population. Thai Malays also represent 3% of the Thai population's heritage, with the remainder consisting of Mons, Khmers, and various \"hill tribes\".\nIncreasing numbers of migrants from neighbouring Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia, as well as from Nepal and India, have pushed the total number of non-national residents to around 3.5 million as of 2009[ [update]], up from an estimated 2 million in 2008. Some 41,000 Britons and 20,000 Australians live in Thailand.\nPopulation centres.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage.\nThai is the official language. It is a Kra\u2013Dai language closely related to Lao, Shan in Myanmar, and numerous smaller languages spoken in an arc from Hainan and Yunnan south to the Chinese border. It is the principal language of education and government and spoken throughout the country. The standard is based on the dialect of the central Thai people, and it is written in the Thai alphabet, an abugida script that evolved from the Khmer alphabet.\nSixty-two languages were recognised by the Royal Thai Government. For the purposes of the national census, four dialects of Thai exist; these partly coincide with regional designations, such as Southern Thai and Northern Thai.\nThe largest of Thailand's minority languages is the Lao dialect of Isan spoken in the northeastern provinces. In the far south, Kelantan-Pattani Malay is the primary language of Malay Muslims. Varieties of Chinese are also spoken by the large Thai Chinese population, with the Teochew dialect best-represented. Numerous tribal languages are also spoken, including many Austroasiatic languages such as Mon, Khmer, and Mlabri; Austronesian languages such as Cham, Moken and Urak Lawoi'; Sino-Tibetan languages like Lawa, Akha, and Karen; and other Tai languages such as Phu Thai, and Saek. Hmong is a member of the Hmong\u2013Mien languages, which is now regarded as a language family of its own.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe country's most prevalent religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is an integral part of Thai identity and culture. Active participation in Buddhism is among the highest in the world. Thailand has the second-largest number of Buddhists in the world after China. According to the 2018 National Statistical Office data, 93.46% of the country's population self-identified as Buddhists.\nMuslims constitute the second largest religious group in Thailand, comprising 5.37% of the population in 2018. Islam is concentrated mostly in the country's southernmost provinces: Pattani, Yala, Satun, Narathiwat, and part of Songkhla, which are predominantly Malay, most of whom are Sunni Muslims. Christians represented 1.13% of the population in 2018, with the remaining population consisting of Hindus and Sikhs, who live mostly in the country's cities. There is also a small Jewish community in Thailand dating back to the 17th century.\nThe constitution does not name an official state religion, and provides for freedom of religion. There have been no widespread reports of societal abuses or discrimination based on religious belief or practice. Thai law officially recognises five religious groups: Buddhists, Muslims, Brahmin-Hindus, Sikhs, and Christians. However, some laws are inspired from Buddhist practices, such as banning alcohol sales on religious holidays.\nEducation.\nIn 1995, as minister of education, Sukavich Rangsitpollaid let out his plans for educational reform in Thailand. The reform was considered a landmark movement after nearly 100 years of education under the previous system. Thailand's youth literacy rate was 98.1% in 2015. Education is provided by a school system of kindergartens, primary, lower secondary and upper secondary schools, numerous vocational colleges, and universities. Education is compulsory up to and including age 14, while the government is mandated to provide free education through to age 17. Issues concerning university entrance have been in constant upheaval for a number of years. The country is also one of the few that still mandates uniform up to the university years, which is still a subject of ongoing debate.\nIn 2013, the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology announced that 27,231 schools would receive classroom-level access to high-speed internet. However, the country's educational infrastructure was still underprepared for online teaching, as smaller and more remote schools were particularly hindered by COVID-19 restrictions.\nThe number of higher education institutions in Thailand has grown over the past decades to 156 officially. The two top-ranking universities in Thailand are Chulalongkorn University and Mahidol University. Thai universities' research output is still relatively low, even though the country's journal publications increased by 20% between 2011 and 2016. Thailand has the second highest number of English-medium private international schools in Southeast Asian Nations. Cram schools are especially popular for university entrance exams.\nStudents in ethnic minority areas score consistently lower in standardised national and international tests. This is likely due to unequal allocation of educational resources, weak teacher training, poverty, and low Thai language skill, the language of the tests. As of 2020[ [update]], Thailand was ranked 89th out of 100 countries globally for English proficiency. Thailand is the third most popular study destination in ASEAN. The number of international degree students in Thailand increased by 9.7 times between 1999 and 2012, from 1,882 to 20,309 students. Most of international students come from neighbor countries like China, Myanmar, Cambodia and Vietnam.\nHealth.\nThailand ranks world's sixth, and Asia's first in the 2019 Global Health Security Index of global health security capabilities in 195 countries, making it the only developing country on the world's top ten. Thailand had 62 hospitals accredited by Joint Commission International. In 2002, Bumrungrad became the first hospital in Asia to meet the standard.\nHealth and medical care is overseen by the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH), with total national expenditures on health amounting to 4.3 per cent of GDP in 2009. Non-communicable diseases form the major burden of morbidity and mortality, while infectious diseases including malaria and tuberculosis, as well as traffic accidents, are also important public health issues.\nIn December 2018, the interim parliament voted to legalise the use of cannabis for medical reasons, making Thailand the first Southeast Asian country to allow the use of medical cannabis.\nCulture.\nThai culture and traditions incorporate influences from India, China, Cambodia, and the rest of Southeast Asia. Thailand's national religion, Theravada Buddhism, is central to modern Thai identity. Thai Buddhism has evolved over millennia from the Mon kingdom of Dvaravati in Central Thailand (6th\u201311th century). Nowadays it includes many regional beliefs originating from Hinduism, animism, as well as ancestor worship. The official calendar in Thailand is based on the Eastern version of the Buddhist Era (BE). The ancient Thai identity originates from the Tai-speaking groups who migrated from southern China to Southeast Asia in 6th to 11th century. The Tai brought the Thai language and established city-states. They mixed with the existing Austro-Asiatic groups like the Mon and Khmer while absorbing their cultures and beliefs in the Chao Phraya Basin. The prevalent culture of Central Thailand formed the basis of the modern Thai identity. This was spread nationwide by the Phibun regime to assimilate the ethnic groups in the 1940s.\nSeveral ethnic groups mediated change between their traditional local culture, national Thai, and global cultural influences. Overseas Chinese also form a significant part of Thai society, particularly in and around Bangkok. Thai Chinese businesses prosper as part of the larger bamboo network.\nRespect for elderly and superiors (by age, position, monks, or certain professions) is Thai mores, reflecting in many classes of honorifics. \"Wai\" is a familiar Thai greeting, and is generally offered first by a person who is younger or lower in social status and position. Older siblings have duties to younger ones.\nTaboos in Thai culture include touching someone's head or pointing with the feet, as the head is considered the most sacred and the foot the lowest part of the body.\nArt.\nThe origins of Thai art were influenced by Buddhist art and by scenes from the Indian epics. Traditional Thai sculpture almost exclusively depicts images of the Buddha, being very similar with the other styles from Southeast Asia. Traditional Thai paintings usually consist of book illustrations, and painted ornamentation of buildings such as palaces and temples.\nThai art was influenced by indigenous civilisations of the Mon and other civilisations. By the Sukothai and Ayutthaya periods, Thai had developed into its own unique style and was later further influenced by the other Asian styles, mostly by Sri Lankan and Chinese. Thai sculpture and painting, and the royal courts provided patronage, erecting temples and other religious shrines as acts of merit or to commemorate important events.\nTraditional Thai paintings showed subjects in two dimensions without perspective. The size of each element in the picture reflected its degree of importance. The primary technique of composition is that of apportioning areas: the main elements are isolated from each other by space transformers. This eliminated the intermediate ground, which would otherwise imply perspective. Perspective was introduced only as a result of Western influence in the mid-19th century. Monk artist Khrua In Khong is well known as the first artist to introduce linear perspective to Thai traditional art.\nThe most frequent narrative subjects for paintings were or are: the Jataka stories, episodes from the life of the Buddha, the Buddhist heavens and hells, themes derived from the Thai versions of the \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\", and scenes of daily life. Some of the scenes are influenced by Thai folklore instead of following strict Buddhist iconography.\nArchitecture.\nThe Ayutthaya Kingdom movement is designed to display might and riches. The temples in Ayutthaya seldom built eaves stretching from the masterhead. Buddhist temples in Thailand are known as \"wats\", from the P\u0101\u1e37i \"v\u0101\u1e6da\", meaning an enclosure: a temple has an enclosing wall that divides it from the secular world. Wat architecture demonstrates many differences in layout and style, but they all adhere to the same principles.\nLiterature.\nThai literature has had a long history. Even before the establishment of the Sukhothai Kingdom there existed oral and written works.\nDuring the Sukhothai Kingdom, most literary works were written in simple prose with certain alliteration schemes. Major works include King Ram Khamhaeng Inscription describing life at the time, which is considered the first literary work in Thai script, but some historians questioned its authenticity. \"Trai Phum Phra Ruang\", written in 1345 by King Maha Thammaracha I, expounds Buddhist philosophy based on an extensive study with reference to over 30 sacred texts and could be considered the nation's first piece of research dissertation.\nDuring the Ayutthaya Kingdom, new poetic forms were created, with different rhyme schemes and metres. It is common to find a combination of different poetic forms in one poetic work. \"Lilit Yuan Phai\" is a narrative poem describing the war between King Borommatrailokkanat of Ayutthaya and Prince Tilokaraj of Lan Na. One literary work is \"Kap He Ruea\", composed by Prince Thammathibet in the \"nirat\" tradition. Traditionally, the verse is sung during the royal barge procession and has been the model for subsequent poets to emulate. The same prince also composed the greatly admired \"Kap Ho Khlong\" on the Visit to Than Thongdaeng and \"Kap Ho Khlong Nirat Phrabat\". The Thonburi period produced \"Ramakien\", a verse drama contributed by King Taksin the Great.\nDuring the 18th century Rattanakosin period, which still fought with the Burmese, many of the early Rattanakosin works dealt with war and military strategy. Some examples are \"Nirat Rop Phama Thi Tha Din Daeng\", \"Phleng Yao Rop Phama Thi Nakhon Si Thammarat\". There were also verse recitals with musical accompaniment, such as Mahori telling the story of \"Kaki\" and Sepha, relating the story of \"Khun Chang Khun Phaen\". Other recitals include Sri Thanonchai. The Thai poet Sunthorn Phu is known as \"the bard of Rattanakosin\" (). Sunthorn Phu is best known for his epic poem \"Phra Aphai Mani\", a versified fantasy-adventure novel, a genre of Siamese literature known as ().\nSome of the most well-known modern Thai writers include Kukrit Pramoj, Kulap Saipradit, (penname Siburapha), Suweeriya Sirisingh (penname Botan), Chart Korbjitti, Prabda Yoon, and Duanwad Pimwana.\nMusic and dance.\nAside from folk and regional dances (southern Thailand's Menora and Ramwong, for example), the two major forms of Thai classical dance drama are Khon and Lakhon nai. In the beginning, both were exclusively court entertainments, and it was not until much later that a popular style of dance theatre, likay, evolved as a diversion for common folk. Folk dance forms include dance theater forms like likay, numerous regional dances (\"ram\"), the ritual dance ram muay, and homage to the teacher, wai khru. Both ram muay and wai khru take place before all traditional muay Thai matches.\nThe three primary classical ensembles are the Piphat, Khrueang sai, and Mahori. Mahori employ small ching hand cymbals.\nMedia.\nThai films are exported and exhibited in Southeast Asia. Thai cinema has developed its own unique identity.\nThe Thai heist thriller film \"Bad Genius\" (2017) was one of the most internationally successful Thai films; it broke Thai film earning records in several Asian countries, Bad Genius won in 12 categories at the 27th Suphannahong National Film Awards, and also won the Jury Award at the 16th New York Asian Film Festival with a worldwide collection of more than $42 million.\n\"Shutter\" (2004) was one of the best-known Thai horror movies and was recognized worldwide. Films such as \"\" (2003) and \"Tom-Yum-Goong\" (2005), starring Tony Jaa, feature distinctive aspects of Thai martial arts \"Muay Thai\". Thailand television dramas, known as Lakorn, have become popular in Thailand and regionally.\nThe entertainment industries are estimated to have directly contributed $2.1 billion in GDP to the Thai economy in 2011. They also directly supported 86,600 jobs. Amongst several dance-pop artists who have made internationally successful are Lisa, Violette Wautier, Illslick, and Tata Young.\nCuisine.\nThai cuisine is one of the most popular in the world. Common ingredients include garlic, lemongrass, kaffir lime, galangal, turmeric, coriander, and coconut milk. Each region of Thailand has its specialities: \"kaeng khiao wan\" (green curry) in the central region, \"som tam\" (green papaya salad) in the northeast, \"khao soi\" in the north, and \"massaman\" curry in the south.\nIn 2017, seven Thai dishes appeared on a list of the \"World's 50 Best Foods\"\u2014an online worldwide poll by CNN Travel. Thailand had more dishes on the list than any other country. They were: \"tom yam goong\" (4th), \"pad Thai\" (5th), \"som tam\" (6th), \"massaman\" curry (10th), green curry (19th), Thai fried rice (24th) and \"nam tok mu\" (36th). Two desserts were also listed in CNN's 50 Best Desserts Around The World: mango sticky rice and tub tim krob.\nThe staple food in Thailand is rice, particularly jasmine rice, which forms part of almost every meal. Thailand is a leading exporter of rice, and Thais consume over 100\u00a0kg of milled rice per person per year. Thailand is also the world leader in edible insect industry and well known for its street food; Bangkok is sometimes called the street food capital of the world.\nUnits of measurement.\nThailand generally uses the metric system, but traditional units of measurement for land area are used, and imperial units of measurement are occasionally used for building materials. Years are numbered as B.E. (Buddhist Era) in educational settings, civil service, government, contracts, and newspaper datelines. However, in banking, and increasingly in industry and commerce, standard Western year (Christian or Common Era) counting is the standard practice.\nSports.\nMuay Thai (lit.\u2009'Thai boxing') is a combat sport that uses stand-up striking along with various clinching techniques. Muay Thai became widespread internationally in the late-20th to 21st centuries. Famous practitioners include Buakaw Banchamek, Samart Payakaroon, and Apidej Sit-Hirun. Association football has overtaken Muay Thai as the most widely followed sport in Thailand. The Thailand national football team has played the AFC Asian Cup six times and reached the semifinals in 1972. The country has hosted the Asian Cup twice, in 1972 and in 2007 (along with Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam for the 2007).\nVolleyball is rapidly growing as one of the most popular sports. The women's team has often participated in the World Championship, World Cup, and World Grand Prix Asian Championship. They have won the Asian Championship twice and the Asian Cup once. Takraw is a sport native to Thailand in which the players hit a rattan ball and are only allowed to use their feet, knees, chest, and head to touch the ball. Sepak takraw is a form of this sport which is similar to volleyball. A rather similar game but played only with the feet is buka ball.\nRugby is also a growing sport in Thailand with the Thailand national rugby union team rising to be ranked 61st in the world. Thailand became the first country in the world to host an international 80 welterweight rugby tournament in 2005. Thailand has also attracts golfers from Japan, Korea, and Western countries. There are more than 200 world-class golf courses nationwide. For basketball, the Chang Thailand Slammers won the 2011 ASEAN Basketball League Championship. The Thailand national basketball team had its most successful year at the 1966 Asian Games where it won the silver medal.\nThe Lumpinee Boxing Stadium originally sited at Rama IV Road near Lumphini Park hosted its final Muay Thai boxing matches on 8 February 2014 after the venue first opened in December 1956. On 11 February 2014, the stadium was relocated to Ram Intra Road due to the new venue's capacity. Thammasat Stadium in Bangkok was built for the 1998 Asian Games. Rajamangala National Stadium is the biggest sporting arena in Thailand, with a capacity of around 50,000.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment\nGeneral information\nTravel\nOther"}
{"id": "30129", "revid": "41995175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30129", "title": "History of Thailand", "text": "Mass migration of Tai peoples from China (Guangxi) to Mainland Southeast Asia and Northern Thailand occurred between the 8th-10th century. The Mainland region was ruled by the Khmer Empire since 800 CE. The Thai established their own kingdoms: the semi-legendary Singhanavati Kingdom (691 BCE\u2013638 CE) evolved into the Ngoenyang Kingdom (638\u20131292). In 1220, the Khmer controlled Sukhothai was conquered by the Thais and made the capital of the Sukhothai Kingdom. By 1220, the long declining Khmer Empire was mostly overrun by Thais. By the 13th century, the Sukhothai Kingdom (1238\u20131438) had replaced the Mon kingdoms in Central Thailand. During the reign of King Ramkhamhaeng the Thai script was created in 1283, the arts flourished, Thai institutions were developed, and people called themselves \"Thai\" as freed people from foreign rule.\nIn 1351, the Suphannabhum city-state (modern-day Suphan Buri), and Lavo city-state (modern-day Lop Buri) merged into the Ayutthaya Kingdom which was founded near the Chao Phraya River. Duarte Fernandes was the first European to arrive in Ayutthaya in 1511. Siam became the popular international name for Thailand.\nThere were 26 Burmese-Siamese wars from the 16th to the early 19th century. The Ayuthaya Kingdom collapsed when the capital Ayutthaya city was sacked during Burmese\u2013Siamese War (1765\u20131767). General Taksin expunged the Burmese, reunified the 5 warring regional states and established the shortlived Thonburi Kingdom in 1767. Taksin was disposed by the Thonburi military commander Chao Phraya Chakri who subsequently founded the Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782\u20131932). At its greatest extent in 1805-1812 the Rattanakosin Kingdom consisted of 25 polities including modern-day Cambodia, Laos, northern Malaysia and eastern Burma.\nKing Mongkut (Rama IV) embraced Western innovations and initiated the modernization of Thailand. During European colonization of Southeast Asia (1511-1984) only Thailand remained independent. This was due to multiple factors: the centralizing and modernization reforms enacted by King Chulalongkorn, a political policy which balanced British and French colonial interests, King Rama V made diplomatic visits to Europe in 1897 and 1907, large territorial concessions to French Indochina, and the French and British maintained Siam as a buffer state to avoid conflicts between their colonies. An 1874 edict was issued for reforms which abolished slavery in 1905.\nSiam became an ally of the United Kingdom in 1917 and joined the Allies of World War I. The Siamese revolution of 1932 ended centuries of absolute monarchy. The government changed to a constitutional monarchy with King Prajadhipok (Rama VII). The country name was formally changed to Thailand which means \u201cLand of the Free\u201d in 1939. The Franco-Thai War in 1940-1941 resulted in the Thai annexation of disputed territories in Cambodia and Laos of French Indochina. During World War II, Thailand was initially neutral, but joined the Axis after the Japanese invasion of Thailand on 8 December 1941. Thailand annexed disputed territories in Burma (Saharat Thai Doem), and Malaysia (Sirat Malai). After World War II these territories were ceded in return for admission to the United Nations, dropping all wartime claims and U.S. aid.\nDuring the 70-year reign of King Bhumibol Adulyadej, Thailand had 10 coups with military governments and 17 constitutions. During the Vietnam War in 1962, Thailand permitted the United States to use bases and Thai troops fought in South Vietnam. In 1965, the CPT began the Communist insurgency which was won by the Thai Government in 1973.\nThailand was a founding member of ASEAN in 1967. The 1970s peasant revolts in Thailand to reduce the debt of farmers and for fair rice prices lead to the enactment of the Land Rent Control Act (LRCA) in Dec 1974. Thailand had unprecedented economic growth from 1993 to 1997. The 1997 Asian financial crisis caused many bankruptcies and unemployment. However, there was a quick recovery in 1998-1999. In 2000, candidates were democratically elected for the Senate for the first time. The world's largest parliamentary building; the Sappaya-Sapasathan was completed on 1 May 2021.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Siam\" ( RTGS:\u00a0) may have originated from Pali (\"suva\u1e47\u1e47abh\u016bmi\", \"land of gold\"), Sanskrit \u0936\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092e (\"\u015by\u0101ma\", \"dark\"), or Mon \u101b\u102c\u1019\u100a (\"rhma\u00f1\u00f1a\", \"stranger\"), with likely the same root as Shan and Ahom. The Thai country name has mostly been \"Mueang Thai\". The country's designation as Siam by Westerners likely came from the Portuguese. Portuguese chronicles noted that Borommatrailokkanat, king of Ayutthaya, sent an expedition to the Malacca Sultanate, at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, in 1455. Following their conquest of Malacca in 1511, the Portuguese sent a diplomatic mission to the Ayutthaya Kingdom. The explorer Duarte Fernandes was the first European to arrive in Ayutthaya in 1511. The Mandarin name for Siam is \"Xi\u0101n lu\u00f3\" (). A century later, on 15 August 1612, \"The Globe\", an East India Company merchantman bearing a letter from King James I, arrived in \"the Road of Syam\". \"By the end of the 19th century, \"Siam\" had become so enshrined in geographical nomenclature that it was believed that by this name and no other would it continue to be known and styled.\" The country was renamed to Thailand ( RTGS:\u00a0) which means \u201cLand of the Free\u201d in 1939. Thailand has been nicknamed the \"Emerald Kingdom\", the \"Land of the White Elephant\", the \"Rice bowl of Asia\", and the \"Land of Smiles\". The elephant is a Thai national symbol and treasure. Thailand's geographic shape resembles an elephant's head with a long trunk.\nPrehistory.\nMainland Southeast Asia was home to various indigenous communities for up to 100,000 years. The discovery of Homo erectus fossils such as Lampang man is an example of archaic hominids. The remains were first discovered during excavations in Lampang Province. The finds have been dated from roughly 1,000,000\u2013500,000 years ago in the Pleistocene. Stone artefacts dating to 40,000 years ago have been recovered from, e.g., Tham Lod rockshelter in Mae Hong Son and Lang Rongrien Rockshelter in Krabi, peninsular Thailand. The archaeological data between 18,000 and 3,000 years ago primarily derive from cave and rock shelter sites, and are associated with Hoabinhian foragers.\nClassical Thailand.\nInitial states.\nThere are many sites in present-day Thailand dating to the Bronze (1500\u2013500 BCE) and Iron Ages (500 BCE\u2013500 CE). Areas comprising what is now Thailand participated in the Maritime Jade Road, as ascertained by archeological research. The trading network existed for 3,000 years, between 2000 BC and 1000 AD. The site of Ban Chiang (around Udon Thani Province) currently ranks as the earliest known center of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia and has been dated to around 2,000 years BCE.\nThe oldest known records of a political entity in Indochina are attributed to Funan\u2014centered in the Mekong Delta and comprising territories inside modern-day Thailand. Chinese annals confirm Funan's existence as early as the first century CE. Archaeological documentation implies an extensive human settlement history since the fourth century BCE.\nThe region also hosted a number of indigenous Austroasiatic-speaking and Malayo-Sumbawan-speaking civilisations. However, little is known about Thailand before the 13th century, as literary and concrete sources are scarce, and most of the knowledge about this period is gleaned from archaeological evidence. Similar to other regions in Southeast Asia, Thailand was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India, starting with the Kingdom of Funan, around the first century, until the Khmer Empire. These \"Indianised kingdoms\" are composed of Dvaravati, Srivijaya, and the Khmer Empire. E. A. Voretzsch believes that Buddhism must have been flowing into Thailand from India at the time of the Indian emperor Ashoka of the Maurya Empire and into the first millennium. Later, Thailand was influenced by the south Indian Pallava dynasty and north Indian Gupta Empire.\nCentral Thailand.\nThe Chao Phraya River in what is now central Thailand had once been the home of the Mon Dvaravati culture, which prevailed from the seventh century to the tenth century. Samuel Beal discovered the polity among the Chinese writings on Southeast Asia as \"Duoluobodi\". During the early 20th century, archaeological excavations led by George Coed\u00e8s found Nakhon Pathom Province to be a centre of Dvaravati culture. The two most important sites were Nakorn Pathom and U Thong (in modern Suphan Buri Province). The inscriptions of Dvaravati were in Sanskrit and Mon using the script derived from the Pallava alphabet of the South Indian Pallava dynasty.\nIt is believed that the Dvaravati borrowed Theravada Buddhism through its contacts with Sri Lanka, while the ruling class participated in Hindu rites. Dvaravati art, including the Buddha sculptures and stupas, showed strong similarities to those of the Gupta Empire of India. The eastern parts of the Chao Phraya valley were subjected to a more Khmer and Hindu influence as the inscriptions are found in Khmer and Sanskrit.\nDvaravati was a network of city-states paying tribute to more powerful ones according to the mandala political model. Dvaravati culture expanded into Isan as well as south as far as the Kra Isthmus. Dvaravati culture lost its influence around the tenth century when they submitted to the more unified Lavo-Khmer polity.\nAround the tenth century, the city-states of Dvaravati merged into the mandalas of: Lavo (modern Lopburi) and Suvarnabhumi (modern Suphan Buri). According to a legend in the Northern Chronicles, in 903, a king of Tambralinga invaded and took Lavo and installed a Malay prince on the Lavo throne. The Malay prince was married to a Khmer princess who had fled an Angkorian dynastic bloodbath. The son of the couple contested the Khmer throne and became Suryavarman I (1006\u20131050), thus bringing Lavo under Khmer domination through marital union. Suryavarman I also expanded into the Khorat Plateau (later styled \"Isan\"), constructing many temples.\nSuryavarman, however, had no male heirs and Lavo again became independent. After the death of King Narai of Lavo, the Lavo kingdom was plunged into a bloody civil war. The Khmer Empire under Suryavarman II took advantage by invading Lavo and installed his son as the King of Lavo. The repeated but discontinued Khmer domination eventually Khmerized Lavo. Lavo was transformed from a Theravadin Mon Dvaravati city into a Hindu Khmer one. Lavo became the entrep\u00f4t of Khmer culture and power of the Chao Phraya river basin. The bas-relief at Angkor Wat shows a Lavo army as one of the subordinates to Angkor. One interesting note is that a Tai army was shown as part of the Lavo army, a century before the establishment of the Sukhothai Kingdom.\nSouthern Thailand.\nMalay civilisations dominated the area below the Kra Isthmus. Early Malay kingdoms are described as tributaries to Funan by second-century Chinese sources, though most of them proved to be tribal organisations instead of full-fledged kingdoms. From the sixth century on, two major mandalas ruled southern Thailand, the Kanduli and Langkasuka. Kanduli centred on what is now Surat Thani Province and Langasuka in Pattani Province.\nSouthern Thailand was the centre of Hinduism and Mahayana Buddhism. The 7th century Tang monk Yijing stopped at Langkasuka to study Pali grammar and Mahayana during his journey to India. At that time, the kingdoms of Southern Thailand quickly fell under the influences of the Malay kingdom of Srivijaya from Sumatra. The Tamil King Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty invaded Tambralinga in the 11th century.\nNorthern Thailand.\nAccording to the \"C\u0101madeviva\u1e43sa\", the city of Hariphunchai (modern Lamphun) was founded by hermits. Camadevi, a princess of the Lavo Kingdom, was invited to rule the city around 700. Hariphunchai may be a later (10th century) offshoot of the Lavo Kingdom or instead related to the Thaton Kingdom.\nHariphunchai was the centre of Theravada in the north. The kingdom flourished during the reign of King Attayawong who built Wat Phra That Hariphunchai in 1108. The kingdom had strong relations with the Mon Kingdom of Thaton. During the 11th century, Hariphunchai waged lengthy wars with the Tai Ngoenyang Kingdom of Chiang Saen. Weakened by Tai invasions, Hariphunchai eventually fell in 1293 to Mangrai, king of Lan Na, the successor state of the Ngoenyang Kingdom.\nFeudal Thailand.\nThese are notable feudal Thai kingdoms and city-states.\nArrival of the Tais.\nThe most recent and accurate theory about the origin of the Tai people proposes that Guangxi in China is the ancient homeland. A large number of Tai people known as the Zhuang still live in Guangxi today. Around 700 AD, Tai people who did not come under Chinese influence settled in what is now \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 in modern Vietnam according to the Khun Borom legend. Based on layers of Chinese loanwords in proto-Southwestern Tai and other historical evidence, Pittayawat Pittayaporn (2014) proposed that this migration must have taken place sometime between the eighth\u201310th centuries. Tai speaking tribes migrated southwestward along the rivers and over the lower passes into Southeast Asia, perhaps prompted by the Chinese expansion and suppression. Chinese historical texts record that, in 722, 400,000 'Lao' rose in revolt behind a leader who declared himself the king of Nanyue in Guangdong. After the 722 revolt, some 60,000 were beheaded. In 726, after the suppression of a rebellion by a 'Lao' leader in the present-day Guangxi, over 30,000 rebels were captured and beheaded. In 756, another revolt attracted 200,000 followers and lasted four years. In the 860s, many local people in what is now North Vietnam sided with attackers from Nanchao, and in the aftermath, some 30,000 of them were beheaded. In the 1040s, a powerful matriarch-shamaness by the name of A Nong, her chiefly husband, and their son, Nong Zhigao, raised a revolt, took Nanning, besieged Guangzhou for 57 days, and slew the commanders of five Chinese armies sent against them before they were defeated, and many of their leaders were killed. As a result of these three bloody centuries, the Tai began to migrate southwestward.\nEarly kingdoms.\nThe \"Simhanavati legend\" tells us that a Tai chief named Simhanavati drove out the native Wa people and founded the city of Chiang Saen around 800 CE. For the first time, the Tai people made contact with the Theravadin Buddhist kingdoms of Southeast Asia. Through Hariphunchai, the Tais of Chiang Saen embraced Theravada Buddhism and Sanskrit royal names. Wat Phrathat Doi Tong, constructed around 850, signified the piety of Tai people on the Theravada Buddhism. Around 900, major wars were fought between Chiang Saen and Hariphunchai. Mon forces captured Chiang Saen and its king fled. In 937, Prince Prom the Great took Chiang Saen back from the Mon and inflicted severe defeats on Hariphunchai.\nAround 1000 CE, Chiang Saen was destroyed by an earthquake with many inhabitants killed. A council was established to govern the kingdom for a while, and then a local Wa man known as Lavachakkaraj was elected king of the new city of Chiang Saen or Ngoenyang. The Lavachakkaraj dynasty would rule over the region for about 500 years.\nOverpopulation might have encouraged the Tais to seek their fortune further southwards. By 1100 CE, the Tai had established themselves as \"Po Khun\"s (ruling fathers) at Nan, Phrae, Songkwae, Sawankhalok, and Chakangrao on the upper Chao Phraya River. These southern Tai princes faced Khmer influence from the Lavo Kingdom. Some of them became subordinates to it. Suphannabhum was an important Siamese city-state founded circa 1150. It was located in Central Thailand, present-day Suphan Buri. The Suphannabhum Kingdom became a tributary state of the Sukhothai Kingdom from 1283\u20131298.\nSukhothai period (1238\u20131438).\nThai city-states gradually became independent of the weakened Khmer Empire. It is said that the Sukhothai Kingdom was established as a strong sovereign kingdom by Sri Indraditya in 1238 AC. A political feature which \"classic\" Thai historians call \"father governs children\" existed at this time. Everybody could bring their problems to the king directly, as there was a bell in front of the palace for this purpose. The city briefly dominated the area under King Ram Khamhaeng, who tradition and legend states established the Thai alphabet, but after his death in 1365, Sukhothai fell into decline and became subject to another emerging Thai state, the Ayutthaya Kingdom in the lower Chao Phraya River area.\nAnother Thai state that coexisted with Sukhothai was the eastern state of Lan Na centred in Chiang Mai. King Mangrai was its founder. This city-state emerged in the same period as Sukhothai. Evidently, Lan Na became closely allied with Sukhothai. After the Ayutthaya Kingdom had emerged and expanded its influence from the Chao Phraya valley, Sukhothai was finally subdued. Fierce battles between Lan Na and Ayutthaya also constantly took place and Chiang Mai was eventually subjugated, becoming Ayutthaya's vassal.\nLan Na's independent history ended in 1558, when it finally fell to the Burmese. It was dominated by Burma until the late-18th century. Local leaders then rose up against the Burmese with the help of the rising Thai kingdom of Thonburi of King Taksin. The \"Northern City-States\" then became vassals of the lower Thai kingdoms of Thonburi and Bangkok. In the early 20th century, they were annexed and became part of modern Siam, the country that is now called \"Thailand\".\nAyutthaya period (1351\u20131767).\nThe city of Ayutthaya was on a small island, encircled by three rivers. Due to its defensible location, Ayutthaya quickly became powerful, politically, and economically. Ayutthaya's name is derived from Ayodhya, an Indian holy city.\nThe first ruler of the Kingdom of Ayutthaya, King Uthong (r. 1351\u20131369), made two important contributions to Thai history: the establishment and promotion of Theravada Buddhism as the official religion to differentiate his kingdom from the neighbouring Hindu kingdom of Angkor and the compilation of the \"Dharma\u015b\u0101stra\", a legal code based on Hindu sources and traditional Thai custom. The \"Dharma\u015b\u0101stra\" remained a tool of Thai law until late in the 19th century.\nSakdina system.\nThe Sakdina (Thai: \u0e28\u0e31\u0e01\u0e14\u0e34\u0e19\u0e32) system of social hierarchy was established at the beginning of the Ayutthaya Kingdom. It assigned a numerical rank (rai) to each person depending on their status. This determined their position in society. There were 6 classes in society: the king, royal family, nobility, monks, commoners and slaves. The king was an absolute monarch and owned all the land. The king granted control of the land to his subjects. The nobility had important leading roles. The learned Buddhist monks were above commoners. The lowest class were various slaves. The numbers represented the number of \"rai\" of land a person was entitled to own. In practice it indicated the number of people under control. The sakdina system was used for around 600 years till the early era of the Rattanakosin Kingdom.\nGolden age.\nIn 1511 Duke Afonso de Albuquerque dispatched Duarte Fernandes as an envoy to the Ayutthaya Kingdom, known then to Europeans as the \"Kingdom of Siam\". This contact with the West during the 16th century led to a period of economic growth as lucrative trade routes were established. Ayutthaya became one of the most prosperous cities in Southeast Asia. According to George Modelski, Ayutthaya is estimated to have been the largest city in the world in 1700 CE, with a population around one million. International trade flourished; the Dutch and Portuguese merchants were among the most active western foreigners in the kingdom together with the Chinese and Malayans. Luzones merchants and warriors from Luzon, the Philippines were also present. Philippines-Thailand relations already had precursors in that, Thailand often exported ceramics to several Filipino states as evidenced that when the Magellan expedition landed at the Cebu Rajahnate, they noted a Thai embassy to the king, Rajah Humabon. When the Spanish colonized the Philippines via Latin America, Spaniards and Mexicans joined the Filipinos in trading at Thailand.\nThe Ayutthaya Period is known as the golden age of Thai literature, art and trade with the eastern and western world. The Ayutthaya period was also considered as \"a golden age of medicine in Thailand\" due to major progress in the field of medicine at that time.\nBurmese wars.\nStarting in the middle of the 16th century, the kingdom came under repeated attacks by the Taungoo Dynasty of Burma. The Burmese\u2013Siamese War (1547\u201349) began with a Burmese invasion and a failed siege of Ayutthaya. A second siege (1563\u201364) led by King Bayinnaung forced King Maha Chakkraphat to surrender in 1564. The royal family was taken to Bago, Burma, with the king's second son Mahinthrathirat installed as a vassal king. In 1568, Mahinthrathirat revolted when his father managed to return from Bago as a Buddhist monk. The ensuing third siege captured Ayutthaya in 1569 and Bayinnaung made Mahathammarachathirat his vassal king.\nAfter Bayinnaung's death in 1581, Uparaja Naresuan proclaimed Ayutthaya's independence in 1584. The Thai fought off repeated Burmese invasions (1584\u20131593), capped by an elephant duel between King Naresuan and Burmese heir-apparent Mingyi Swa in 1593 during the fourth siege of Ayutthaya in which Naresuan famously slew Mingyi Swa. The Burmese\u2013Siamese War (1594\u20131605) was a Thai attack on Burma, resulting in the capture of the Tanintharyi Region as far as Mottama in 1595 and Lan Na in 1602. Naresuan even invaded mainland Burma as far as Taungoo in 1600, but was driven back.\nAyutthaya expanded its sphere of influence over a considerable area, ranging from the Islamic states on the Malay Peninsula, the Andaman seaports of present-day India, the Angkor kingdom of Cambodia, to states in northern Thailand. In the 18th century, the power of the Ayutthaya Kingdom gradually declined as fighting between princes and officials plagued its politics. Outlying principalities became more and more independent, ignoring the capital's orders and decrees.\nIn the 18th century, the last phase of the kingdom arrived. The Bamar people, who had taken control of Lan Na and had also unified their kingdom under the powerful Konbaung Dynasty, launched several blows against Ayutthaya in the 1750s and 1760s. Finally, in 1767, after several months of siege, the Burmese broke through Ayutthaya's outer and inner walls, sacked the city, and burned it down. The royal family fled the city and Ayutthaya's last king, Ekkathat, died of starvation ten days later while in hiding.\nThonburi period (1767-1782).\nReunification by Taksin.\nAfter more than 400 years of power, in 1767, the Kingdom of Ayutthaya was brought down by invading Burmese armies, its capital destroyed, and the territory split. Despite its complete defeat and occupation by Burma, Siam made a rapid recovery. The resistance to Burmese rule was led by the noble military leader Taksin. He travelled first to the town Chonburi, and then to Rayong, where he raised a small army. He made a surprise attack on Chanthaburi and captured it on 15 June 1767. Taksin's army grew rapidly. Within a year he had defeated the Burmese occupation army and re-established a Siamese state with its capital at Thonburi on the west bank of the Chao Phraya, 20 km from the Gulf of Thailand. In 1767 he was crowned as King Taksin (now officially known as \"Taksin the Great\").\nAfter the sacking of Ayutthaya, the country fell apart due to the lack of a central authority. Besides King Taksin, who had organised his force in the southeastern provinces, four other claimants and warlords had seized power and set up their own sphere of influence. Prince Thepphiphit, King Boromakot's son, who had been unsuccessful in a diversionary action against the Burmese in 1766, had set himself up as the ruler of Phimai holding sway over the eastern provinces including Nakhon Ratchasima or Khorat. The Governor of Phitsanulok, whose first name was Ruang, had proclaimed himself independent, with the territory under his control extending to the province of Nakhon Sawan. A Buddhist monk named Ruan made himself a prince, appointing fellow monks as army commanders, at the town of Sawangburi (known as Fang in Uttaradit Province). Previously, He had pursued Buddhist studies at Ayutthaya with such excellent results that he had been appointed the chief monk of Sawangburi by King Boromakot. In the southern provinces as far north as Chumphon, a Pra Palad who was the acting Governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat declared his independence and raised himself to a princely rank.\nHaving firmly established his power at Thonburi, King Taksin set out to reunify the old kingdom, crushing regional rivals. After a temporary repulse by the Governor of Phitsanulok, he concentrated on the defeat of the weakest warlord first: Prince Thepphiphit of Phimai was subjugated and executed in 1768. Chao Narasuriyawongse, one of Taksin's nephews, replaced Thepphiphit as governor. The last so-called ruler who still challenged the King was the Prince of Sawangburi (Ruan) or Chao Pra Fang, as he had just annexed Phitsanulok on the death of its Governor. King Taksin himself led an expedition against him and took it, but the prince disappeared. In dealing with the Prince of Nakhon Si Thammarat, who was taken prisoner by the loyal Governor of Pattani, the king not only pardoned him but also favoured him with a residence at Thonburi.\nIn the Thonburi period, the beginning of the Chinese mass immigration fell to Siam. Through the availability of Chinese workers, trade, agriculture and craftsmen flourished. However, the first Chinese rebellions had to be suppressed. However, later due to stress and many factors, King Taksin supposedly suffered mental breakdowns. After a coup d'\u00e9tat removing Taksin from power, stability was restored by Chaophraya Chakri (later King Rama I). Taksin was sentenced to death on Wednesday, 10 April 1782.\nRattanakosin period (1782 \u20131932).\nRestoration under Rama 1st.\nA noble of Mon descent, General Chakri succeeded Taksin in 1782 as Rama I (Phra Phutthayotfa), the first king of the Chakri dynasty. In the same year he founded a new capital city across the Chao Phraya River in an area known as Rattanakosin Island. (While settlements on both banks were commonly called Bangkok, both the and the refer to the capital as the City of Sia-Yut'hia.) In the 1790s, Burma was defeated and driven out of Siam, as it was then called. Lan Na also became free of Burmese occupation, but was reduced to the Kingdom of Chiang Mai. The king of the new dynasty was installed as a tributary ruler of the Chakri monarch.\nIt is probable that Chakri and his family had planned his ascent to the throne during his predecessor Taksin's reign. After his coronation, he operated a systematic bloody extermination of the followers of Taksin, which corresponds to the typical approach of the usurpers in Thai history.\nThe new dynasty moved the capital of Thonburi to Rattanakosin Island, in today's Bangkok. Bangkok had previously been a small settlement with a fort, but it was strategically located on the eastern shores of the Chao Phraya river and was known among the foreign traders as the 'key to Siam'. New palaces and temples were built: construction of the Grand Palace and Wat Phra Kaew, where the Emerald Buddha is held, began. The king's goal was to transfer the old splendor of Ayutthaya to the new capital. In his new capital, Rama I crowned himself in 1785 in a splendid ceremony.\nDuring the reign of Rama I, the foreign policy was still focused on the threat of Burma. In 1786, Burma's new king Bodawpaya ordered the nine Burmese armies in a surprise attack against Siam. The Burmese army invaded through the Three Pagoda Pass. The war came to be known as the \"Nine Armies' Wars\". However, the Siamese were victorious. In 1805 Lanna (North Thailand) was largely brought under control of Bangkok. Rama I also attempted unsuccessfully to conquer the important trading ports of Tenasserim.\nAt the time of Rama I, Cambodia was practically administered as a province of Siam, as rival Vietnam had to deal with internal problems. Only when the new Vietnamese emperor Gia Long had ascended to the throne was the influence of Siam in Cambodia again contested. Relations with Vietnam took on a prominent place in this epoch, as there was yet to be significant relations with the European colonial powers during the reign of Rama I.\nOne of the most important achievements of Rama I was the codification of all the country's laws into a work of 1,700 pages called the Three Seals Law. This law remained valid in its basic traits until the beginning of the twentieth century.\nSiam also had a high level of cultural achievement. The Buddhist canon (P\u0101li Canon) was collected and reformulated within the framework of a Grand Council. The arts were promoted, as well as the construction of new palaces and temples in the capital. Literature and theatre also thrived: important works such as the 3,000-page Ramakian epic were produced. Additionally, works from Chinese, Mon, Javanese, Persian, and Indian languages were translated into Thai.\nAlthough Rama I continued the traditions of Ayutthaya in many respects, the new empire was more centralized than its predecessors. A particularly important innovation was the stronger emphasis on rationality in the relationship between the monarch and his subjects. Rama I was the first king in the history of the country who justified his decisions before the highest officials.\nMaintaining the status quo under Rama II and Rama III.\nKing Rama II (Phra Phutthaloetla) was the son of Rama I. His accession to the throne was accompanied by a plot, during which 40 people were killed. The calmness of the interior and the exterior, which during the reign of Rama II and his successor Rama III (Phra Nangklao), prevailed mainly through giving in to conflicts and building good relations with influential clans in the country.\nDuring Rama II's reign, the kingdom saw a cultural renaissance after the massive wars that plagued his predecessor's reign; particularly in the fields of arts and literature. Poets employed by Rama II included Sunthorn Phu the drunken writer (\"Phra Aphai Mani\") and Narin Dhibet (\"Nirat Narin\").\nForeign relations were initially dominated by relations with the neighbouring states, while those with European colonial powers started to enter in the background. In Cambodia and Laos, Vietnam gained the supremacy, a fact which Rama II initially accepted. When a rebellion broke out in Vietnam under Rama III in 1833\u201334, he tried to subdue the Vietnamese militarily, but this led to a costly defeat for the Siamese troops. In the 1840s, however, the Khmer themselves succeeded in expelling the Vietnamese, which subsequently led to the greater influence of Siam in Cambodia. At the same time, Siam kept sending tribute to China.\nThere was a serious touch with British colonial interests when Siam conquered the Sultanate Kedah on the Malay Peninsula in 1821. Kedah belonged to the sphere of interest of Great Britain. In the following year, Siam had to recognise the pre-conquest status after tough negotiations with the British envoy John Crawfurd. There was also the cautious resumption of trade and missionary activity in this epoch. In particular, British traders such as Robert Hunter (\"discoverer\" of the conjoined brothers Chang and Eng, the original \"Siamese twins\") or James Hayes, but also missionaries from Europe and the United States like Jacob Tomlin, Karl G\u00fctzlaff, Dan Beach Bradley and Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix became active in Siam. In 1825 an agreement was signed with British emissary Henry Burney; Siam recognised British colonial possessions on the Malay Peninsula and made commercial concessions. This agreement was due not least to the rapid British success in the First Anglo-Burmese War.\nA potentially dangerous event occurred with the Anouvong's Rebellion in 1827, when the troops of the tributary King Anouvong of the Kingdom of Vientiane advanced towards Bangkok. They were, however, destroyed, which strengthened the position of Siam in Laos. The Lao-population of the areas west of the Mekong were relocated to Thai provinces in Isan.\nUnder Rama II and Rama III, culture, dance, poetry and above all the theatre reached a climax. The temple Wat Pho was built by Rama III, known as the first university of the country.\nThe reign of Rama III was finally marked by a division of the aristocracy with regard to foreign policy. A small group of advocates of the takeover of Western technologies and other achievements were opposed by conservative circles, which proposed a stronger isolation instead. Since the kings Rama II and Rama III, the conservative-religious circles largely stuck with their isolationist tendency.\nThe death of Rama III in 1851 also signified the end of the old traditional Siamese monarchy: there were already clear signs of profound changes, which were implemented by the two successors of the king.\nModernization under Rama IV and Rama V (1851\u20131910).\nWhen King Mongkut (Rama IV) ascended the Siamese throne, he was severely threatened by the neighbouring states. The colonial powers of Britain and France had already advanced into territories which originally belonged to the Siamese sphere of influence. Mongkut and his successor Chulalongkorn (Rama V) recognised this situation and tried to strengthen the defence forces of Siam by modernisation, to absorb Western scientific and technical achievements, thus avoiding colonisation.\nThe two monarchs, who ruled in this epoch, were the first with Western formation. King Mongkut had lived 26 years as a wandering monk and later as an abbot of Wat Bowonniwet Vihara. He was not only skilled in the traditional culture and Buddhist sciences of Siam, but he had also dealt extensively with modern western science, drawing on the knowledge of European missionaries and his correspondence with Western leaders and the Pope. He was the first Siamese monarch to speak English.\nThe colonial encroachment in the 1880s in Burma to the West by the British Empire and Indochina to the East by the French caused anxiety amongst the Siamese elites including the British-educated Prince Prisdang who put forward a proposal alongside eleven other senior dignitaries to King Chulalongkorn to strengthen Siamese institutions following the European model. Some of these reforms reflect need to keep up with European convention of liberal statecraft and justice to maintain legitimacy. Prisdang suggested that the following reforms should be carried out:\nThe majority of these reforms were implemented decades after Chulalongkorn's death.\nAs early as 1855, John Bowring, the British governor in Hong Kong, appeared on a warship at the mouth of the Chao Phraya River. Under the influence of Britain's achievements in neighbouring Burma, King Mongkut signed the so-called \"Bowring Treaty\", which abolished the royal foreign trade monopoly, abolished import duties, and granted Britain a most favourable clause. The Bowring Treaty meant the integration of Siam into the world economy, but at the same time, the royal house lost its most important sources of income. Similar treaties were concluded with all Western powers in the following years, such as in 1862 with Prussia and 1869 with Austria-Hungary. From the Prussian emissary Count Friedrich Albrecht zu Eulenburg comes a much-respected travel report about Siam. The survival diplomacy, which Siam had cultivated abroad for a long time, reached its climax in this epoch.\nThe integration into the global economy meant to Siam that it became a sales market for Western industrial goods and an investment for Western capital. The export of agricultural and mineral raw materials began, including the three products rice, pewter and teakwood, which were used to produce 90% of the export turnover. King Mongkut actively promoted the expansion of agricultural land by tax incentives, while the construction of traffic routes (canals, roads and later also railways) and the influx of Chinese immigrants allowed the agricultural development of new regions. Subsistence farming in the Lower Menam Valley developed into farmers actually earning money with their produce.\nMongkut's son, King Chulalongkorn (Rama V), ascended to the throne in 1868. He was the first Siamese king to have a full Western education, having been taught by a British governess, Anna Leonowens, whose place in Siamese history has been fictionalised as \"The King and I\". At first Rama V's reign was dominated by the conservative regent, Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse, but when the king came of age in 1873 he soon took control. He created a Privy Council and a Council of State, a formal court system and budget office. He announced that slavery would be gradually abolished and debt-bondage restricted.\nWestern colonialism and cession of protectorates.\nTwo kings, Mongkut and Chulalongkorn, witnessed the expansion of both France and Great Britain to increase their colonial territories in Southeast Asia and encircle Siam. From the west, the British conquered India, Burma and Malaya, and from the east, the French conquered South Vietnam, Vietnam and claimed to be \"protecting\" Cambodia, while Siam lost its extraterritorial rights in these areas to the new conquerors.\nThe construction of Kra Isthmus Canal, planned by a group of entrepreneurs led by the engineer Ferdinand de Lesseps, was not constructed after the British conquered Kongbaung-ruled Burma in the Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1885. A major event was the Paknam incident, when, on 13 July 1893, French cannon boats entered the Chao Phraya River toward Bangkok and were fired upon from a Siamese coastal fort, leading to the Franco-Siamese crisis. In the same year, Siam was compelled to conclude a treaty with France, in which the territory of Laos, located east of the Mekong, was annexed to French Indochina. The French forced Siam to refrain from any influence on its former vassal state. In 1887, the Indo-Chinese Union was founded. In 1896, British and French concluded a treaty which made a border between their colonies, with Siam defined as a buffer state.\nAfter the French crisis of 1893, King Chulalongkorn realised the threat of the western colonial powers, and accelerated extensive reforms in the administration, military, economy and society of Siam, completing the development of the nation from a traditional feudalist structure based on personal domination and dependencies, whose peripheral areas were only indirectly bound to the central power (the King), to a centrally-governed national state with established borders and modern political institutions.\nBy 1892, The Kingdom of Siam controlled the Siamese Shan States, Laos, western Cambodia and Southern Thailand. Siam was bordered to the north by the Northern Shan States which included Kachin. On the western border was Burma. On the eastern border was Cambodia, French Cochinchina and Tonkin.\nThe Entente Cordiale of 8 April 1904 ended the rivalry between Great Britain and France over Siam. French and British zones of influence in Siam were outlined, with the eastern territories, adjacent to French Indochina, becoming a French zone, and the western, adjacent to Burmese Tenasserim, a British zone. The British recognised a French sphere of influence to the east of the River Menam's basin; in turn, the French recognised British influence over the territory to the west of the Menam basin. Both parties disclaimed any idea of annexing Siamese territory.\nThe Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 defined the modern border between Siam and British Malaya. The treaty stated that Siam relinquished their claims over Kelantan, Terengganu, Kedah and Perlis to Great Britain, which were previously part of the semi-independent Malay sultanates of Pattani and Kedah. A series of treaties with France fixed the country's current eastern border with Laos and Cambodia.\nIn 1904, 1907 and 1909, there were new border corrections in favour of France and Great Britain. When King Chulalongkorn died in 1910, Siam had achieved the borders of today's Thailand. In 1910 he was peacefully succeeded by his son Vajiravudh, who reigned as Rama VI. He had been educated at Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and University of Oxford and was an anglicised Edwardian gentleman. Indeed, one of Siam's problems was the widening gap between the Westernised royal family and upper aristocracy and the rest of the country. It took another 20 years for Western education to extend to the rest of the bureaucracy and the army.\nNation formation under Vajiravudh and Prajadhipok (1910\u20131932).\nThe successor of King Chulalongkorn was King Rama VI in October 1910, better known as Vajiravudh. He had studied law and history at the University of Oxford as the Siamese crown prince in Great Britain. After his ascension to the throne, he forgave important officials for his devoted friends, who were not part of the nobility, and even less qualified than their predecessors, an action which had hitherto been unprecedented in Siam. In his reign (1910\u20131925) many changes were made, which brought Siam closer to modern countries. For example, the Gregorian Calendar was introduced, all the citizens of his country had to accept Family names, women were encouraged to wear skirts and long hair fringements and a citizenship law, Principle of the \"Ius sanguinis\" was adopted. In 1917 the Chulalongkorn University was founded and school education was introduced for all 7 to 14-year-olds.\nKing Vajiravudh was a favour of literature, theatre, he translated many foreign literatures into Thai. He created the spiritual foundation for a kind of Thai nationalism, a phenomenon unknown in Siam. He was based on the unity of nation, Buddhism, and kingship, and demanded loyalty from his subjects to all these three institutions. King Vajiravudh also took refuge in an irrational and contradictory anti-Sinicism. As a result of the mass immigration, in contrast to previous immigration waves from China, women and entire families had also come into the country, which meant that the Chinese were less assimilated and retained their cultural independence. In an article published by King Vajiravudh under a pseudonym, he described the Chinese minority as \"Jews of the East\".\nKing Vajiravudh also created some new social associations, for example, the Wild Tiger Corps (1911), a kind of Scout movement.\nIn 1912, a Palace revolt, plotted by young military officers, tried unsuccessfully to overthrow and replace the king. Their goals were to change the system of government, overthrowing the ancien r\u00e9gime and replacing it with a modern, Westernised constitutional system, and perhaps to replace Rama VI with a prince more sympathetic to their beliefs., but the king went against the conspirators, and sentenced many of them to long prison sentences. The members of the conspiracy consisted of military and the navy, the status of the monarchy, had become challenged.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1917 Siam declared war on Germany and Austria-Hungary, mainly to gain favour with the British and the French. Siam's token participation in World War I secured it a seat at the Versailles Peace Conference, and Foreign Minister Devawongse used this opportunity to argue for the repeal of the 19th-century unequal treaties and the restoration of full Siamese sovereignty. The United States obliged in 1920, while France and Britain followed in 1925. This victory gained the king some popularity, but it was soon undercut by discontent over other issues, such as his extravagance, which became more noticeable when a sharp postwar recession hit Siam in 1919. There was also the fact that the king had no son. He obviously preferred the company of men to women (a matter which of itself did not much concern Siamese opinion, but which did undermine the stability of the monarchy due to the absence of heirs).\nThus when Rama VI died suddenly in 1925, aged only 44, the monarchy was already in a weakened state. He was succeeded by his younger brother Prajadhipok.\nBy 1925\u20131926, Siamese extraterritorial rights were restored a period of five years thereafter.\nEarly years of constitutional monarchy (1932\u20131945).\nRevolution and difficult compromise.\nA small circle from the rising bourgeoisie of former students (all of whom had completed their studies in Europe \u2013 mostly Paris), supported by some military men, seized power from the absolute monarchy on 24 June 1932 in an almost nonviolent revolution. This was also called the \"Siamese Revolution\". The group, which called themselves \"Khana Ratsadon\" or \"sponsors\", gathered officers, intellectuals and bureaucrats, who represented the idea of the refusal of the absolute monarchy.\nThe Khana Ratsadon installed a constitutional monarchy with Prajadhipok as king at the top \u2013 a corresponding constitution was proclaimed on 10 December of the year. On the same day, the experienced and rather conservative lawyer Phraya Manopakorn Nititada, was appointed as first Siamese Prime Minister. By selecting a non-party head of government, the Khana Ratsadon wanted to avoid the suspicion that the coup had only been carried out in order to come to power itself. However, the overthrow of the monarchy did not lead to free elections, and political unions were forbidden. Bureaucracy and the military shared the power in the National Assembly. The constitution was annexed to the monarchist ideology (\"nation, religion, king\") as a fourth pillar.\nIn the following period it became clear how heterogeneous the group of Khana Ratsadon was, and it fell into several rival wings, especially those of the high officers, the younger officers and the civilians. From the liberal and civilian wing, Pridi Phanomyong sought a profound transformation of the country's social and economic system. To this end, he presented an economic plan in January 1933, which became known as a \"Yellow Cover Dossier\" (). Among other things, he proposed the nationalisation of farmland, industrialization through public companies, universal healthcare and pension insurance. The King, the rather conservative Prime Minister Phraya Manopakorn, and the high-ranking officers in the Khana Ratsadon around Phraya Songsuradet and even Pridi's friend and co-worker Prayun Phamonmontri, opposed the plan.\nFearing that Pridi's liberal wing, who had the majority in the National Assembly, would decide to take action, Phraya Manopakorn dissolved the parliament in April, imposed an emergency, and rescinded the constitution, which had not yet been a year old. He imposed a law against Communist activities, which was directed not so much against the almost insignificant Communist Party of Thailand, but rather against the alleged Communist projects of Pridi. However, the younger officers of the Khana Ratsadon resisted and countered the actions of Phraya Manopakorn in another coup d'\u00e9tat only one year later, in June 1933, resulting in the appointment of Phraya Phahon as Siam's second prime minister.\nKhana Ratsadon's rise.\nAfter the fall of Phraya Manopakorn, Phraya Phahon became the new Prime Minister. Pridi Phanomyong was expelled from the charge of communism, but his economic plan was largely ignored. Only a few of his ideas, such as the expansion of primary schools and industrialisation with state enterprises, were gradually implemented. In 1933, Pridis founded the Thammasat University in Bangkok, which with its liberal self-image has remained a symbol of freedom and democracy. At the same time, the nationalist group led by Phibunsongkhram strengthened in the People's Party, oriented to the totalitarian ideas of Italy, Germany, Japan, but also the \"young Turks\" (Kemal Atat\u00fcrk).\nThe many unsettled constitutional roles of the crown and the dissatisfaction with Khana Ratsadon, especially Pridi's post in the new government, culminated in October 1933 in a reactionary Boworadet Rebellion staged by royalist factions. The royalists were led by Prince Boworadet, Prajadhipok's minister of defence. His forces who mobilised from provincial garrisons captured the Don Muang Aerodrome and led Siam into small-scale civil War. After heavy fighting in the outskirts of Bangkok, the royalists were finally defeated and Prince Boworadet left for exile in French Indochina.\nAfter the Boworadet rebellion and some other disagreements with Khana Khana Ratsadon thereafter, King Prajadhipok abdicated the throne and exiled himself. He was replaced as king by his nine-year-old nephew Prince Ananda Mahidol (King Rama VIII), who at that time was attending school in Lausanne, Switzerland. Plaek Phibunsongkhram's popularity increased from his role in leading anti-rebellion forces.\nDuring this time, Pridi played an important role in modernising Thai public administration: completed Thai legal codes, created the local government system.\nDictatorship of Phibunsongkhram.\nWhen Phibulsonggram succeeded Phraya Phahon as Prime Minister in September 1938, the military and civilian wings of Khana Ratsadon diverged even further, and military domination became more overt. Phibunsongkhram began moving the government towards militarism, and totalitarianism, as well as building a personality cult around himself.\nThe defeat of France in the Battle of France was the catalyst for the Thai leadership to begin an attack on French Indochina. This began with smaller conflicts in 1940 and resulted in the Franco-Thai War in 1941. It suffered a heavy defeat in the sea battle of Ko Chang, but it dominated on land and in the air. The Empire of Japan, already the dominant power in the Southeast Asian region, took over the role of mediator. The negotiations ended the conflict with Thai territorial gains in the French colonies of Laos and Cambodia.\nBy 1942, he had issued a series of cultural decrees (\"ratthaniyom\") or Thai cultural mandates, which reflected the desire for social modernisation, but also an authoritarian and exaggerated nationalist spirit. First, in 1939, he changed the country's name of Siam to Thailand \"(Prathet Thai)\" (). This is based on the idea of a \"Thai race\", a Pan-Thai nationalism whose program is the integration of the Shan, the Lao and other Tai peoples, such as those in Vietnam, Burma and South China, into a \"Great Kingdom of Thailand\" (). Other decrees urged the citizens to embrace Western-style modernisation.\nWorld War II.\nAfter the Franco-Thai war ended, the Thai government declared neutrality. When the Japanese invaded Thailand on 8 December 1941, a few hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan demanded the right to move troops across Thailand to the Malayan frontier. Phibun accepted Japanese demands after a brief resistance. The government improved relations with Japan by signing a military alliance in December 1941. Japanese armies used the country as a base for their invasions of Burma and Malaya. Hesitancy, however, gave way to enthusiasm after the Japanese rolled their way through Malaya in a \"Bicycle Blitzkrieg\" with surprisingly little resistance. The following month, Phibun declared war on Britain and the United States. South Africa and New Zealand declared war on Thailand on the same day. Australia followed soon after. All who opposed the Japanese alliance were sacked from his government. Pridi Phanomyong was appointed acting regent for the absent King Ananda Mahidol, while Direk Jayanama, the prominent foreign minister who had advocated continued resistance against the Japanese, was later sent to Tokyo as an ambassador. The United States considered Thailand to be a puppet of Japan and refused to declare war. When the allies were victorious, the United States blocked British efforts to impose a punitive peace.\nThe Thais and Japanese agreed that Shan State and Kayah State were to be under Thai control. On 10 May 1942, the Thai Phayap Army entered Burma's eastern Shan State, the Thai Burma Area Army entered Kayah State and some parts of central Burma. Three Thai infantry and one cavalry division, spearheaded by armoured reconnaissance groups and supported by the air force, engaged the retreating Chinese 93rd Division. Kengtung, the main objective, was captured on 27 May. Renewed offensives in June and November saw the Chinese retreat into Yunnan. The area containing the Shan States and Kayah State was annexed by Thailand in 1942. They would be ceded back to Burma in 1945.\nThe Seri Thai (Free Thai Movement) was an underground resistance movement against Japan founded by Seni Pramoj, the Thai ambassador in Washington. Led from within Thailand from the office of the regent Pridi, it operated freely, often with support from members of the royal family such as Prince Chula Chakrabongse, and members of the government. As Japan neared defeat and the underground anti-Japanese resistance Seri Thai steadily grew in strength, the National Assembly forced out Phibun. His six-year reign as the military commander-in-chief was at an end. His resignation was partly forced by his two grandiose plans gone awry. One was to relocate the capital from Bangkok to a remote site in the jungle near Phetchabun in north-central Thailand. The other was to build a \"Buddhist city\" near Saraburi. Announced at a time of severe economic difficulty, these ideas turned many government officers against him.\nAt war's end, Phibun was put on trial at Allied insistence on charges of having committed war crimes, mainly that of collaborating with the Axis powers. However, he was acquitted amid intense public pressure. Public opinion was still favourable to Phibun, as he was thought to have done his best to protect Thai interests, specifically using the alliance with Japan to support the expansion of Thai territory in Malaya and Burma.\nAllied occupation of Thailand.\nAfter Japan's defeat in 1945, British, Indian troops, and US observers landed in September, and during their brief occupation of parts of the country disarmed the Japanese troops. After repatriating them, the British left in March 1946.\nIn early September the leading elements of Major General Geoffrey Charles Evans's 7th Indian Infantry Division landed, accompanied by Edwina Mountbatten. Later that month Seni Pramoj returned from Washington to succeed Tawee as prime minister. It was the first time in over a decade that the government had been controlled by civilians. But the ensuing factional scramble for power in late 1945 created political divisions in the ranks of the civilian leaders that destroyed their potential for making a common stand against the resurgent political force of the military in the post-war years.\nFollowing the signature by Thailand of the Washington Accord of 1946, the territories that had been annexed after the Franco-Thai War, which included Phibunsongkhram Province, Nakhon Champassak Province, Phra Tabong Province, Koh Kong Province and Lan Chang Province, were returned to Cambodia and Laos.\nMoreover, the post-war accommodations with the Allies weakened the civilian government. As a result of the contributions made to the Allied war effort by the Free Thai Movement, the United States, which unlike the other Allies had never officially been at war with Thailand, refrained from dealing with Thailand as an enemy country in post-war peace negotiations. Before signing a peace treaty, however, Britain demanded war reparations in the form of rice shipments to Malaya. An Anglo-Thai Peace Treaty was signed on 1 January 1946, and an Australian\u2013Thai Peace Treaty on 3 April. France refused to permit admission of Thailand to the United Nations until Indochinese territories annexed during the war were returned. The Soviet Union insisted on the repeal of anti-communist legislation.\nBhumibol period (1946\u20132016).\nDemocratic elections and the military returns.\nElections were held in January 1946. These were the first elections in which political parties were legal, and Pridi's People's Party and its allies won a majority. In March 1946 Pridi became Siam's first democratically elected prime minister. In 1946, after he agreed to hand back the Indochinese territories occupied in 1941 as the price for admission to the United Nations, all wartime claims against Siam were dropped and substantial US aid was received.\nIn December 1945, the young king Ananda Mahidol had returned to Siam from Europe, but in June 1946 he was found shot dead in his bed, under mysterious circumstances. Three palace servants were tried and executed for his murder, although there are significant doubts as to their guilt and the case remains both murky and a highly sensitive topic in Thailand today. The king was succeeded by his younger brother, Bhumibol Adulyadej. In August Pridi was forced to resign amid suspicion that he had been involved in the regicide. Without his leadership, the civilian government foundered, and in November 1947 the army, its confidence restored after the debacle of 1945, seized power. After an interim Khuang-headed government, in April 1948 the army brought Phibun back from exile and made him prime minister. Pridi, in turn, was driven into exile, eventually settling in Beijing as a guest of the PRC.\nCold War (1947-1989).\nPhibun's return to power coincided with the onset of the Cold War and the establishment of a communist regime in North Vietnam. He soon won the support of the United Nations. Once again political opponents were arrested and tried, and some were executed. During this time, several of the key figures in the wartime Free Thai underground, including Thawin Udom, Thawi Thawethikul, Chan Bunnak, and Tiang Sirikhanth, were eliminated in extra-legal fashion by the Thai police, run by Phibun's ruthless associate Phao Sriyanond. There were attempted counter-coups by Pridi supporters in 1948, 1949, and 1951, the second leading to heavy fighting between the army and navy before Phibun emerged victorious. In the navy's 1951 attempt, popularly known as the Manhattan Coup, Phibun was nearly killed when the ship where he was held hostage was bombed by the pro-government air force.\nAlthough nominally a constitutional monarchy, Thailand was ruled by a series of military governments, most prominently led by Phibun, interspersed with brief periods of democracy. Thailand took part in the Korean War. Communist Party of Thailand guerrilla forces operated inside the country from the early-1960s to 1987. They included 12,000 full-time fighters at the peak of movement, but never posed a serious threat to the state.\nBy 1955 Phibun was losing his leading position in the army to younger rivals led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat and General Thanom Kittikachorn, the Sarit's army staged a bloodless coup on 17 September 1957, ending Phibun's career for good. The coup beginning a long tradition of US-backed military regimes in Thailand. Thanom became prime minister until 1958, then yielded his place to Sarit, the real head of the regime. Sarit held power until his death in 1963, when Thanom again took the lead.\nThe rise of American influence.\nIn 1948 the government of Phibun Songkhram declared that Thailand would adopt an anti-communist stance in the emerging Cold War. Around the same time the United States began to see Thailand as an important bastion against communism in Asia and sought ways to support the government. A State Department policy statement in 1950 noted that 'effective resistance to Communism must be based on widespread public support within the country' and set out that Thailand would receive a payment of $10,000,000 in aid. In 1950 Thailand sent troops to the Korean War and in 1954 Thailand joined the South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). US financial and technical support greatly benefited the armed forces. \nDuring the First Indochina War, the United States increasingly focused on securing Thailand's long term status as an anti-communist state through psychological programs. In September 1953, a key architect of the CIA, William Donovan was sent to Thailand to win the support of Thailand's nationalist elite. This involved a large indoctrination campaign aimed at convincing Thailand's bureaucracy that their country's interests aligned with those of the US. Through the 1950s American influence in Thailand through the decade as its status as a bastion against Communism was entrenched. Some of the most prominent early visitors were academics from the expanding area studies campuses in the United States. Most notable was Cornell University which established the Bang Chan project in a rural area north of Bangkok. For decades, the site was a key site for visiting American scholars who came to conduct ethnographic studies of the Thai people.\nIndochina wars and communist insurgency.\nThe regimes of Sarit and Thanom were strongly supported by the US. Thailand had formally become a US ally in 1954 with the formation of the SEATO. While the war in Indochina was being fought between the Vietnamese and the French, Thailand (disliking both equally) stayed aloof, but once it became a war between the US and the Vietnamese communists, Thailand committed itself strongly to the US side, concluding a secret agreement with the US in 1961, sending troops to Vietnam and Laos, and allowing the US to use airbases in the east of the country to conduct its bombing war against North Vietnam. The Vietnamese retaliated by supporting the Communist Party of Thailand's insurgency in the north, northeast, and sometimes in the south, where guerrillas co-operated with local discontented Muslims. In the postwar period, Thailand had close relations with the US, which it saw as a protector from communist revolutions in neighbouring countries. The Seventh and Thirteenth US Air Forces were headquartered at Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base.\nAgent Orange, a herbicide and defoliant chemical used by the U.S. military as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand, was tested by the United States in Thailand during the war in Southeast Asia. Buried drums were uncovered and confirmed to be Agent Orange in 1999. Workers who uncovered the drums fell ill while upgrading the airport near Hua Hin District, 100\u00a0km south of Bangkok.\nUS Vietnam-era veterans whose service involved duty on or near the perimeters of military bases in Thailand anytime between 28 February 1961, and 7 May 1975, may have been exposed to herbicides and may qualify for VA benefits.\nA declassified US Department of Defense report written in 1973 suggests that there was a significant use of herbicides on the fenced-in perimeters of military bases in Thailand to remove foliage that provided cover for enemy forces.\nBetween 1962 and 1965, 350 Thai nationals underwent an eight-month training course in North Vietnam. In the first half of 1965, the rebels smuggled approximately 3,000 US-made weapons and 90,000 rounds of ammunition from Laos.\nBetween 1961 and 1965, insurgents carried out 17 political assassinations. They avoided full scale guerrilla warfare until the summer of 1965, when militants began engaging Thai security forces. A total of 13 clashes were recorded during that period. The second half of 1965 was marked by a further 25 violent incidents, and starting in November 1965, Communist Party of Thailand (CPT) insurgents began undertaking more elaborate operations. Often the source of border problems was ordinary criminals or local merchants involved in illegal mining, logging, smuggling, and narcotics production and trade.\nThe insurgency spread to other parts of Thailand in 1966, although 90 percent of insurgency-related incidents occurred in the northeast of the country. On 14 January 1966, a spokesman representing the Thai Patriotic Front called for the start of a \"people's war\" in Thailand. The statement marked an escalation of violence in the conflict. The communist-led insurgents were of paramount concern to the Thai security forces for several decades. The Thai government declared amnesty on 23 April 1980. By 1983 the CPT entirely abandoned the insurgency.\nThe Vietnam War hastened the modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society. The American presence and the exposure to Western culture that came with it had an effect on almost every aspect of Thai life. Before the late 1960s, full access to Western culture was limited to a highly educated elite in society, but the Vietnam War brought the outside world face to face with large segments of the Thai society as never before. With US dollars pumping up the economy, the service, transportation, and construction industries grew phenomenally as did drug abuse and prostitution, which using Thailand as a \"Rest and Recreation\" facility by US forces. The traditional rural family unit was broken down as more and more rural Thais moved to the city to find new jobs. This led to a clash of cultures as Thais were exposed to Western ideas about fashion, music, values, and moral standards.\nThe population began to grow explosively as the standard of living rose, and a flood of people began to move from the villages to the cities, and above all to Bangkok. Thailand had 30 million people in 1965, while by the end of the 20th century the population had doubled. Bangkok's population had grown tenfold since 1945 and had tripled since 1970.\nEducational opportunities and exposure to mass media increased during the Vietnam War years. Bright university students learned more about ideas related to Thailand's economic and political systems, resulting in a revival of student activism. The Vietnam War period also saw the growth of the Thai middle class which gradually developed its own identity and consciousness.\nEconomic development did not bring prosperity to all. During the 1960s many of the rural poor felt increasingly dissatisfied with their condition in society and disillusioned by their treatment by the central government in Bangkok. Efforts by the Thai government to develop poor rural regions often did not have the desired effect in that they contributed to the farmers' awareness of how bad off they really were. It was not always the poorest of the poor who joined the anti-government insurgency. Increased government presence in the rural villages did little to improve the situation. Villagers became subject to increased military and police harassment and bureaucratic corruption. Villagers often felt betrayed when government promises of development were frequently not fulfilled. By the early 1970s rural discontent had manifested itself into a peasant's activist movement.\nIn 1972, hundreds of peasants, perhaps more than 3,000, suspected of supporting the communist rebellion, were massacred by the armed forces in Phattalung province in southern Thailand. Until then, communist suspects arrested by the army were usually shot and their bodies left behind. This time, the \"red barrel\" method was introduced to eliminate any possible evidence. Suspects were beaten into semi-consciousness before being thrown into barrels containing gasoline and burned alive.\nThe 1973 democracy movement.\nWith the dissatisfaction of pro-US policies of Military administration that allowed the US forces for using the country as a military base, the high rate of prostitution problems, the freedom of press and speech were limited and influx of the corruption that lead to inequality of social classes. Student demonstrations had started in 1968 and grew in size and numbers in the early 1970s despite the continued ban on political meetings. In June 1973, nine Ramkhamhaeng University students were expelled for publishing an article in a student newspaper that was critical of the government. Shortly after, thousands of students held a protest at the Democracy Monument demanding the re-enrolment of the nine students. The government ordered the universities to shut, but shortly afterwards allowed the students to be re-enrolled.\nIn October another 13 students were arrested on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government. This time the student protesters were joined by workers, businessmen, and other ordinary citizens. The demonstrations swelled to several hundred thousand and the issue broadened from the release of the arrested students to demands for a new constitution and the replacement of the current government.\nOn 13 October, the government released the detainees. Leaders of the demonstrations, among them Seksan Prasertkul, called off the march in accordance with the wishes of the king who was publicly against the democracy movement. In a speech to graduating students, he criticised the pro-democracy movement by telling students to concentrate on their studies and leave politics to their elders [military government].\nAs the crowds were breaking up the next day (14 October), many students found themselves unable to leave because the police blocked the southern route to Rajavithi Road. Cornered and overwhelmed by the hostile crowd, the police responded with teargas and gunfire.\nThe military was called in, and tanks rolled down Ratchadamnoen Avenue and helicopters fired down at Thammasat University. A number of students commandeered buses and fire engines in an attempt to halt the progress of the tanks by ramming into them. With chaos on the streets, King Bhumibol opened the gates of Chitralada Palace to the students who were being gunned down by the army. Despite orders from Thanom that the military action be intensified, army commander Kris Sivara had the army withdrawn from the streets.\nThe king condemned the government's inability to handle the demonstrations and ordered Thanom, Praphas, and Narong to leave the country, and notably condemned the students' supposed role as well. At 18:10 Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn resigned from his post as prime minister. An hour later, the king appeared on national television, asking for calm, and announcing that Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn had been replaced with Dr. Sanya Dharmasakti, a respected law professor, as prime minister.\nThe 1973 Uprising brought about the most free era in Thai recent history, called an \"age when democracy blossomed\" and a \"democratic experiment,\" which ended in the Thammasat University massacre and a coup on 6 October 1976.\nDemocratisation and setbacks.\nPost-1973 has been marked by a struggle to define the political contours of the state. It was won by the king and General Prem Tinsulanonda, who favoured a monarchial constitutional order.\nThe post-1973 years have seen a difficult and sometimes bloody transition from military to civilian rule, with several reversals along the way. The revolution of 1973 inaugurated a brief, unstable period of democracy, with military rule being reimposed after the 6 October 1976 Massacre. For most of the 1980s, Thailand was ruled by Prem Tinsulanonda, a democratically inclined strongman who restored parliamentary politics. Thereafter the country remained a democracy apart from a brief period of military rule from the 1991 Thai coup d'\u00e9tat for two years.\nShinawatra administration.\nThe populist Thai Rak Thai party, led by billionaire businessman Thaksin Shinawatra, was elected after a landslide electoral victory in 2001. Shinawatra was popular with the urban, suburban, and rural poor for his populist social programs. His rule came under attack from elites who saw danger in his \"parliamentary dictatorship\". In mid-2005, Sondhi Limthongkul, a well-known media tycoon, became the foremost Thaksin critic. Eventually, Sondhi and his allies developed the movement into a mass protest and later unified under the name of People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD).\nOn 19 September 2006, after the dissolution of parliament, Thaksin became head of a provisional government. While he was in New York for a meeting of the UN, Army Commander-in-Chief Lieutenant General Sonthi Boonyaratglin launched the bloodless September 2006 Thailand military coup d'\u00e9tat supported by anti-Thaksin elements in civil society and the Democrat Party. A general election on 23 December 2007 restored a civilian government, led by Samak Sundaravej of the People's Power Party, as a successor to Thai Rak Thai.\n2006 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nWithout meeting much resistance, a military junta overthrew the interim government of Thaksin Shinawatra on 19 September 2006. The junta abrogated the constitution, dissolved Parliament and the Constitutional Court, detained and later removed several members of the government, declared martial law, and appointed one of the king's Privy Counselors, General Surayud Chulanont, as the Prime Minister. On 1 October 2006, Surayud Chulanont, the former head of Thailand's army, was sworn in as interim prime minister. The junta later wrote a highly abbreviated interim constitution and appointed a panel to draft a new permanent constitution. The junta also appointed a 250-member legislature, called by some critics a \"chamber of generals\" while others claimed that it lacks representatives from the poor majority.\nIn this interim constitution draft, the head of the junta was allowed to remove the prime minister at any time. The legislature was not allowed to hold a vote of confidence against the cabinet and the public was not allowed to file comments on bills. This interim constitution was later surpassed by the permanent constitution on 24 August 2007. Martial law was partially revoked in January 2007. The ban on political activities was lifted in July 2007, following the 30 May dissolution of the Thai Rak Thai party. The new constitution was approved by referendum on 19 August, which led to a return to a democratic general election on 23 December 2007.\n2008\u20132010 political crisis.\nThe People's Power Party (Thailand) (PPP), led by Samak Sundaravej formed a government with five smaller parties. Following several court rulings against him in a variety of scandals, and surviving a vote of no confidence, and protesters blockading government buildings and airports, in September 2008, Sundaravej was found guilty of conflict of interest by the Constitutional Court of Thailand (due to being host of a TV cooking program), and thus, ended his term in office.\nHe was replaced by PPP member Somchai Wongsawat. As of October 2008, Wongsawat was unable to gain access to his offices, which were occupied by protesters from the People's Alliance for Democracy. On 2 December 2008, Thailand's Constitutional Court in a highly controversial ruling found the Peoples Power Party (PPP) guilty of electoral fraud, which led to the dissolution of the party according to the law. It was later alleged in media reports that at least one member of the judiciary had a telephone conversation with officials working for the Office of the Privy Council and one other person. The phone call was taped and has since circulated on the Internet. In it, the callers discuss finding a way to ensure the ruling PPP party would be disbanded. Accusations of judicial interference were levelled in the media but the recorded call was dismissed as a hoax. However, in June 2010, supporters of the eventually disbanded PPP were charged with tapping a judge's phone.\nImmediately following what many media described as a \"judicial coup\", a senior member of the armed forces met with factions of the governing coalition to get their members to join the opposition and the Democrat Party was able to form a government, a first for the party since 2001. The leader of the Democrat Party, and former leader of the opposition, Abhisit Vejjajiva was appointed and sworn in as the 27th Prime Minister, together with a new cabinet, on 17 December 2008.\nIn April 2009, protests by the National United Front of Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD, or \"Red Shirts\") forced the cancellation of the Fourth East Asia Summit after protesters stormed the Royal Cliff Hotel venue in Pattaya, smashing the glass doors of the venue to gain entry, and a blockade prevented the Chinese premier at the time, Wen Jiabao, from attending.\nAbout a year later, a set of new Red Shirts protests resulted in 87 deaths (mostly civilian and some military) and 1,378 injured. When the army tried to disperse protesters on 10 April 2010, the army was met with automatic gunfire, grenades, and fire bombs from an opposition faction in the army. This resulted in the army returning fire with rubber bullets and some live ammunition. During the time of the Red Shirt protests against the government, there were numerous grenade and bomb attacks against government offices and the homes of government officials. Gas grenades were fired at Yellow Shirt protesters who were protesting against the Red Shirts and in favour of the government, by unknown gunmen killing one pro-government protester, the government stated that the Red Shirts were firing the weapons at civilians. Red Shirts continued to hold a position in the business district of Bangkok and it was shut down for several weeks.\nOn 3 July 2011, the opposition Pheu Thai Party, led by Yingluck Shinawatra (the youngest sister of Thaksin Shinawatra), won the general election by a landslide (265 seats in the House of Representatives, out of 500). She had never previously been involved in politics, Pheu Thai campaigning for her with the slogan \"Thaksin thinks, Pheu Thai acts\". Yingluck was the nation's first female prime minister and her role was officially endorsed in a ceremony presided over by King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The Pheu Thai Party is a continuation of Thaksin's Thai Rak Thai party.\n2013\u20132014 political crisis.\nProtests recommenced in late 2013, as a broad alliance of protesters, led by former opposition deputy leader Suthep Thaugsuban, demanded an end to the Thaksin regime. A blanket amnesty for people involved in the 2010 protests, altered at the last minute to include all political crimes, including all convictions against Thaksin, triggered a mass show of discontent, with numbers variously estimated between 98,500 (the police) and 400,000 (an aerial photo survey done by the \"Bangkok Post\"), taking to the streets. The Senate was urged to reject the bill to quell the reaction, but the measure failed. A newly named group, the People's Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC) along with allied groups, escalated the pressure, with the opposition Democrat party resigning en masse to create a parliamentary vacuum. Protesters demand variously evolved as the movement's numbers grew, extending a number of deadlines and demands that became increasingly unreasonable or unrealistic, yet attracting a groundswell of support. They called for the establishment of an indirectly elected \"people's council\", in place of Yingluck's government, that would cleanse Thai politics and eradicate the Thaksin regime.\nIn response to the protests, Yingluck dissolved parliament on 9 December 2013 and proposed a new election for 2 February 2014, a date that was later approved by the election commission. The PDRC insisted that the prime minister stand down within 24 hours, regardless of her actions, with 160,000 protesters in attendance at Government House on 9 December. Yingluck insisted that she would continue her duties until the scheduled election in February 2014, urging the protesters to accept her proposal: \"Now that the government has dissolved parliament, I ask that you stop protesting and that all sides work towards elections. I have backed down to the point where I don't know how to back down any further.\"\nIn response to the Electoral Commission (EC)'s registration process for party-list candidates\u2014for the scheduled election in February 2014\u2014anti-government protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013. Suthep and the PDRC led the protest, which security forces claimed that approximately 270,000 protesters joined. Yingluck and the Pheu Thai Party reiterated their election plan and anticipated presenting a list of 125 party-list candidates to the EC.\nOn 7 May 2014, the Constitutional Court ruled that Yingluck would have to step down as the prime minister as she was deemed to have abused her power in transferring a high-level government official. On 21 August 2014 she was replaced by army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha.\n2014 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nOn 20 May 2014 the Thai army declared martial law and began to deploy troops in the capital, denying that it was a coup attempt. On 22 May, the army admitted that it was a coup and that it was taking control of the country and suspending the country's constitution. On the same day, the military imposed a curfew between the hours of 22:00\u201305:00, ordering citizens and visitors to remain indoors during this period. On 21 August 2014 the National Assembly of Thailand elected the army chief, General Prayut Chan-o-cha, as prime minister. Martial law was declared formally ended on 1 April 2015. \"Uniformed or ex-military men have led Thailand for 55 of the 83 years since absolute monarchy was overthrown in 1932...\" observed one journalist in 2015.\nThe rise of fascism in Thailand began around the coup, first coined by James Taylor of University of Adelaide in 2011, after the junta took control, academics and political commentators started to identify a political system by fascism. Pithaya Pookaman and James Taylor called it 'New Right' consisting of ultraconservatives, reactionaries, semi-fascists, pseudo-intellectuals and former leftists. John Draper, an academic and political commentator, noted that the rise of fascism in Thailand began in 2014. The King's sufficient economy was mentioned that it serves as one of the ideological foundations of the military regime, and reminiscent of fascist regimes in Europe in the 1930s.\nMilitary Junta (2014\u20132019).\nThe ruling junta led by Prayuth Chan-o-cha promised to hold new elections, but wanted to enact a new constitution before the elections were held. An initial draft constitution was rejected by government officials in 2015. A national referendum, the first since the 2014 coup, on a newly drafted constitution was held on 7 August 2016. There was a 55% turnout of which around 61% voted in favour of the constitution. Under the new constitution an unelected person other than a member of parliament can be appointed as Prime Minister, which would open the post to a military official. The new constitution also gives the National Council for Peace and Order the authority to make all the appointments to the 250-member Senate in the next government.\nVajiralongkorn period (2016\u2013present).\nOn 13 October 2016, King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand died at the age of 89, in Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok. On the night of 1 December 2016, the fiftieth day after the death of Bhumibol, Regent Prem Tinsulanonda led the heads of the country's three branches of government to an audience with Vajiralongkorn to invite him to ascend to the throne as the tenth king of the Chakri dynasty. In April 2017, King Vajiralongkorn signs the new constitution which will aid in the return to democracy.\nIn May 2017, Bangkok hospital was bombed, wounding 24 people on the third anniversary of the military coup of 2014.\nIn June 2019, both houses of Thailand's parliament elected Prayuth Chan-ocha, retired general and former military junta leader, as the country's next prime minister. The vote officially restored civilian rule in Thailand. The opposition complained of voting irregularities in the 24 March elections.\nIn February 2020, pro-democracy party Future Forward, the third largest party in the parliament with 80 seats, was disbanded. The ruling was made by the Constitutional Court, because of a donation the party's founder, Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit, made for the party.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic affected Thailand as the first country outside China, on 13 January 2020. By 2023, the pandemic declined but caused a total of 34,715 casualties.\nIn September 2022, Thailand's Constitutional Court ruled that Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha can stay in office. The opposition had challenged him, because the new constitution limits the term for prime minister as a total period of eight years in office. The Constitutional Court's ruling was that his term in office began in April 2017, simultaneously with the new constitution, although General Prayuth had ruled as the leader of the government since the 2014 military coup.\nIn May 2023, Thailand's reformist opposition, the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and the populist Pheu Thai Party, won the general election, meaning the royalist-military parties that supported Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha lost power. Initially, the opposition parties attempted to form a government together with MFP's Pita Limjaroenrat as prime ministerial candidate. This failed despite a majority in the lower house, as under the 2017 constitution the junta-appointed Senate also voted for the prime minister along with the elected lower house. Pheu Thai then dissolved its coalition with MFP and allied instead with the royalist-military parties, which allowed the new coalition to garner votes in the military-dominated Senate. On 22 August 2023, its candidate Srettha Thavisin became Thailand's new prime minister, while the Pheu Thai party's billionaire figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile.\nfor 2024 / 2025 informations see 2025 Thai political crisis\nHistorical maps.\nThese maps show the territorial evolution of Thailand through the ages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30130", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30130", "title": "Geography of Thailand", "text": "Thailand is a sovereign state located in the center of Mainland Southeast Asia. The country extends from the southeastern foothills of the Himalayas to the Mekong river, further south to the Gulf of Thailand, and roughly to the middle of the Malay Peninsula and the Andaman Sea of \u200b\u200bthe Indian Ocean. It has a total size of which is the 50th largest in the world. The land area lies between latitudes 5\u00b0 37' South and 20\u00b0 27' North, and between the longitude 97\u00b0 22' West and 105\u00b0 37' East.\nThailand shares a long international land boundary with Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia and Malaysia. The nation's axial position influenced many aspects of Thailand's society and culture. Southern Thailand is the only land route from mainland Asia to Malaysia and Singapore. It has an exclusive economic zone of .\nComposition and geography.\nLocation.\nA fertile floodplain and tropical monsoon climate, ideally suited to wet-rice (\"tham na\") cultivation, attracted settlers to this central area in preference to the marginal uplands and the highlands of the northern region or the Khorat Plateau to the northeast.\nBy the 11th century AD, a number of loosely connected rice-growing and trading states flourished in the upper Chao Phraya Valley. They broke free from domination of the Khmer Empire, but from the middle of the 14th century gradually came under the control of the Ayutthaya Kingdom at the southern extremity of the floodplain.\nSuccessive capitals, built at various points along the river, became centers of great Thai kingdoms based on rice cultivation and international commerce. Unlike the neighboring Khmer and Burmese, the Thai continued to look outward across the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea toward foreign ports of trade.\nEuropean colonisation of Southeast Asia brought a new phase of Southeast Asian commerce in the late-1800s. Thailand (then called Siam) was able to maintain its independence as a buffer zone between British-controlled Burma to the west, British Malaya to the south, and French Indochina to the east. However, Thailand lost over 50% of its former territory to the expanding claims of French Indochina until 1907. Its central location made the Kingdom of Thailand's position a regional hub that has greatly influenced its society, culture and history. Southern Thailand has a long, narrow shape. It is the only land connection to Malaysia and Singapore.\nMountains.\nThe mountain ranges that run parallel from north to south across Mainland Southeast Asia are one of Thailand's most distinctive geographical features. The country's highest peak is Doi Inthanon, with an elevation of 2,565 meters. Major mountain ranges include the Thanon Thong Chai Range, the Daen Lao Range on Thailand's northern edge, and the Tenasserim Hills on the border with Myanmar. The average elevation decreases southward. There are no volcanoes. There are 10 mountains over . 148 mountains exceed .\nNorthern Thailand's mountainous regions like Chiang Mai and Doi Inthanon have chilly air and misty mornings. However, at high altitudes it does not get colder than 5\u00a0\u00b0C to 10\u00a0\u00b0C due to the tropical climate. There is no snow and frost is rare in the coldest months. In 1955, snow-like frost was reported in Doi Inthanon.\nThe 10 tallest mountains in Thailand are all located in Northern Thailand. The highest peaks are:\nShape.\nThe geographic shape of Thailand resembles an elephant's head with a long trunk. There are 2 big ears, the Bay of Bangkok is a mouth and Southern Thailand is a long trunk that reaches down the Malay Peninsula. The westside is the front of the head. The elephant holds deep cultural significance and it's a national symbol of Thailand. The elephant also symbolizes Thailand\u2019s natural heritage and fills a vital role in the ecosystems of the region. It's also considered a \"golden axe\". The broad northern regions are the double-bitted part of the axe like a labrys. The narrow southern \u201ctail\u201d is the handle. The shape changed during the various kingdoms such as Sukhothai, Ayutthaya, and Rattanakosin.\nPlains.\nThailand has large plains, valleys and basins.\nForests.\nThe forest cover rate was 63% in the 1940s, but declined to 53.3% in the 1960s and 26.6% in 1991. It had been declining due to timber exports, urbanization, and development. Since the late 1980s, the decline has been halted since protective measures such as banning logging of natural forests were implemented. As of 2020, the Royal Forest Department has classified the country's forests as 31.6% and 38.9% according to the FAO, remaining stable.\nThe Royal Forest Department classifies the country's forests into six categories: mangrove/coastal forest, evergreen forest, evergreen forest, mixed deciduous forest, deciduous dipterocarp forest, and savanna. Exotic plantations such as eucalyptus and rubber are classified as agricultural land. Of these, mangrove forests and coastal forests are more prevalent in the south and east, mixed deciduous forests in the north, and deciduous dipterocarp forests and savannas in the northeast.\nRivers.\nThe main rivers are the Chao Phraya River and the Mekong, as well as the Salween River, Mae Klong, Mun River, Chi River, Tha Chin River, and Bang Pakong River. Southern Thailand has short and steep rivers due to the narrow peninsula. The Mekong is partially a natural border between Thailand and Laos for 920\u00a0km. It flows from the Golden Triangle in Northern Thailand to Khong Chiam district in Northeastern Thailand.\nThese are the 10 longest rivers of Thailand:\nLakes.\nThere are around 8000 natural lakes and swamps. This includes a few large lakes and thousands of small lakes. Songkhla lake is the largest natural lake at .\nThese are the 9 largest lakes of Thailand: \nWaterfalls.\nThere are over 50 waterfalls in Thailand. These are the top 10 tallest.\nIslands.\nThere are approximately 1,430 islands. They are relatively small-sized islands and uninhabited islets. Many islands are protected areas in national parks or wildlife sanctuaries. Most islands are near the coasts of Southern Thailand and Eastern Thailand. The largest island is Phuket in the Andaman Sea.\nThese are the 10 largest islands of Thailand: \nGeology.\nPresent-day Thailand is theorized to have formed during the Triassic period when two continental fragments: Shan-Thai and Cimmeria formed during the breakup of Gondwana. Shan-Thai and Cimmeria collided and merged, eventually moving northward and connecting with Laurasia. Geologically, Thailand is divided into the Western Zone, which belongs to the Shan-Thai terrane; the Northeastern Zone, which belongs to the Indochina Block; and the Central Zone, which is located between the Western and Northeastern Zones.\nThe northeastern part of Thailand is a relatively stable plateau, with only the Mesozoic, Jurassic and Cretaceous sandstone and shale being uplifted by Tertiary tectonic activity.[30] Most of the rest of the country exhibits a complex geological structure, consisting primarily of Paleozoic limestone and other sedimentary rocks, and Precambrian metamorphic rocks. Late Mesozoic granite is found in the Western Zone, while Paleozoic and Mesozoic neutral or acidic volcanic rocks are abundant in the Central Zone.\nAlthough seismic activity is not particularly high, there are 13 known active faults, mainly in the northwest and central-southwest, and in 2014 the northern part of the country experienced one of the largest earthquakes ever recorded (the 2014 Mae Lao earthquake), measuring 6.3 on the Richter scale.\nGulf of Thailand.\nThe Gulf of Thailand was historically called the Gulf of Siam until the country was renamed to Thailand in 1939. It is geographically defined by Thailand which encloses the body of water for circa 3/4th of the coastline.\nTopography and drainage.\nThe most conspicuous features of Thailand's terrain are high mountains, a central plain, and an upland plateau. Mountains cover much of northern Thailand and extend along the Myanmar border down through the Kra Isthmus and the Malay Peninsula. The central plain is a lowland area drained by the Chao Phraya River and its tributaries, the country's principal river system, which feeds into the delta at the head of the Bay of Bangkok. The Chao Phraya system drains about one-third of the nation's territory. In the northeastern part of the country the Khorat Plateau, a region of gently rolling low hills and shallow lakes, drains into the Mekong River via the Mun River. The Mekong system empties into the South China Sea and includes a series of canals and dams.\nTogether, the Chao Phraya and Mekong systems sustain Thailand's agricultural economy by supporting wet-rice cultivation and providing waterways for the transport of goods and people. In contrast, the distinguishing natural features of peninsular Thailand are long coastlines, offshore islands, and mangrove swamps. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Thailand, making it the 45th ranked country in terms of tidal flat extent.\nArea.\nThailand is the 50th largest country in the world and the 3rd largest country in Southeast Asia after Indonesia and Myanmar.\nRegions &amp; provinces.\nThailand is a unitary state; the administrative services of the executive branch are divided into three levels by the \"Law on the Organization of National Government, BE 2534\" (1991): central, provincial and local. Thailand's regions are divided into a total of 76 provinces (\u0e08\u0e31\u0e07\u0e2b\u0e27\u0e31\u0e14 , changwat) plus Bangkok, which is a special administrative area. These are first-level administrative divisions.\nThe National Research Council divides Thailand into six geographical regions, based on natural features including landforms and drainage, as well as human cultural patterns. They are:\nAlthough Bangkok geographically is part of the central plain, as the capital and largest city this metropolitan area may be considered in other respects a separate region.\nEach of the six geographical regions differs from the others in population, basic resources, natural features, and level of social and economic development. The diversity of the regions is in fact the most pronounced attribute of Thailand's physical setting.\nClimate.\nThailand's climate is influenced by seasonal monsoon winds (the southwest and northeast monsoons).\nMost of Thailand has a \"tropical wet and dry or savanna climate\" type (K\u00f6ppen's Tropical savanna climate). The majority of the south as well as the extreme east have a tropical monsoon climate. Parts of the south also have a tropical rainforest climate.\nSeasons.\nThailand has three seasons: summer, rainy, and winter.\nDue to their inland location and latitude, the north, northeast, central, and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather. During the hottest time of the year (March to May), temperatures usually reach up to or more, with the exception of coastal areas where sea breezes moderate afternoon temperatures. In contrast, outbreaks of cold air from China can bring colder temperatures; in some areas (particularly the north and northeast) close to or below . Southern Thailand has mild weather year-round, with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures, due to maritime influences.\nMost of the country receives a mean annual rainfall of . However, certain areas on the windward sides of mountains such as Ranong Province on the west coast of southern Thailand and eastern parts of Trat Province receive more than of rainfall per year. The driest areas are the leeward sides of the central valleys and the northernmost portion of south Thailand, where mean annual rainfall is less than .\nMost of Thailand (north, northeast, central, and east) has dry weather during the northeast monsoon and abundant rainfall during the southwest monsoon. In the southern parts of Thailand, abundant rainfall occurs in both the northeast and southwest monsoon seasons, with a peak in September for the western coast and a peak in November\u2013January on the eastern coast.\nNorthern vs southern climate.\nThe tropical savanna climate in Northern Thailand vs the tropical monsoon climate in Southern Thailand has notable differences. The average temperature in Phuket (Southern Thailand) is warmer than Chiang Mai (Northern Thailand) year-round. However, Phuket has more rainy days and rainfall per month than Chiang Mai.\nBangkok.\nThe capital Bangkok has a tropical savanna climate (Aw) as per the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The Asian monsoon system influences the city's three seasons: summer (hot), rainy, and winter (cool). The winter is rarely below : circa in December to in April. The annual average temperature is .\nThe summer begins in mid-February and it's usually dry with occasional storms. The rainy season is caused by the southwest monsoon around mid-May. September is the wettest month with around rainfall. The cool northeast monsoon causes the winter season from mid-October till mid-February.\nBangkok's urban heat island causes a temperature increase of during daytime and at night. Bangkok metropolis' highest temperature was on 7 May 2023. and the lowest in January 1955.\nNatural resources.\nLand resources.\nLand use.\nIn 2022, circa 46% is agricultural land. 38.8% is forest. The remaining 15.2% is divided by residential, water (surface, rivers, waterways), roads and wilderness. The exact stats are unavailable.\nLand ownership.\nPattamawadee Pochanukul, a lecturer from the Faculty of Economics at Thammasat University, estimates that about 59% of all arable land in Thailand belongs to the state. As of 2015[ [update]] the Treasury Department owned 176,467 plots of land, consisting of about 9.9 million rai (15,769.6\u00a0km2). The Ministry of Defence owns about 2.6 million rai (4,230\u00a0km2) or about 21.2% of total public land. Information from the Office of the National Anti-Corruption Commission (NACC) shows that members of the house of representatives in 2013 owned a total of 35,786 rai of land (about 57.3\u00a0km2).\nMarine resources.\nThailand has the world's 64th largest exclusive economic zone (EEZ), with an area of . It claims an EEZ of from its shores, which has long coastlines with the Andaman Sea and Strait of Malacca to the west and the Gulf of Thailand to the east, although all of its EEZ is limited by maritime boundaries with neighboring countries. Circa 3/4th of the coastline around the Gulf of Thailand is part of Thailand.\nInland fishery.\nOver 150 fish species have been identified in catches from inland waters. 20 of these are economically important. The most common fish is the carp (represented by \"Puntius gonionotus\", \"Puntioplites proctosyzron\", \"Cirrhinus jullieni\", \"Osteocheilus hasselti\", \"Labiobarbus lineatus\", \"Morulius chrysophekadion\" etc). The favorite fish of Thai people are 2 species of Snakehead (fish) called \"Channa striata\" and \"Channa micropeltes\". The main catfish species are \"Clarias batrachus\", \"C. microcephalus\", \"Pangasius sutchi\", \"P. larnooudii\", \"P. siamensis\", \"Kryptopterus pogon\" and \"Ompok bimaculatus.\" \"Corcia siamensis\" is the only representative of the clupeidae family.\nEnergy.\nIn 2014, 75% of Thailand's electricity production was fueled by natural gas. Coal-fired power plants produced an additional 20% of the electricity, with the remainder coming from biomass, hydropower, and biogas.\nThailand produces about a third of the oil it consumes. It is the second-largest oil importer in Southeast Asia. Thailand is a major producer of natural gas, with reserves of at least 3 trillion cubic meters. After Indonesia, it is the largest coal producer in Southeast Asia, but it needs to import more coal to meet domestic demand.\nBiota.\nFauna.\nThe biogeographic realm is part of the Indomalayan realm, spanning the Indochina and Sunda subrealms.[70] According to ONEP (2007), there are 302 recorded mammal species, 982 bird species, 350 reptile species, 137 amphibian species, and 2,820 fish species (720 freshwater fish species). The conservation status of 1,196 of these species was assessed in 2005, and 116 mammal species, 180 bird species, 32 reptile species, 5 amphibian species, and 215 fish species were listed as threatened. Circa 264 mammal species in Thailand are on the IUCN Red List.\nThe elephant is a representative animal, and white elephants are considered symbols of kingship, have been featured on the national flag, and are considered to be the incarnation of Buddha in Buddhism, which is practiced by the majority of the population. At the beginning of the 20th century, there were approximately 100,000 elephants in captivity, but as of 2023, the wild population had declined to approximately 2,250 and the captive population to approximately 2,400. The central government has taken measures to protect elephants, such as opening conservation facilities and dedicated hospitals. See also elephants in Thailand. Water buffalo and bulls were also used as working animals, but by the 1980s, due to the diversification of transportation methods, they were rarely used as working animals.\nFlora.\nThe phytochorion belongs to the Paleotropical kingdom. It is estimated that approximately 1,900 genus and 10,000 species of vascular plants inhabit the region, of which about 10% are considered endemic. Santisuk et al. (2006) lists a total of 1,407 species distributed in Thailand, including 921 species of dicotyledonous plants, 417 species of monocotyledonous plants, 42 species of ferns, and 27 species of gymnosperms.\nMajor tree species include those of the Dipterocarpaceae family and teak, as well as species from the Diospyros genus, Artocarpus genus, Lagerstroemia genus, and in mangrove forests, species from the Rhizophoraceae and Meliaceae families.\nNotable species native to Thailand.\nThese are notable flora and fauna that live in their natural habitats of Thailand.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnvironmental issues.\nAgriculture impact.\nThe unpredictability of precipitation, temperature changes and many other harmful events will intensify in the future. This means that Thailand will have to face droughts in the middle of the rainy season, which will result in damage to young plants and flooding of rice fields. It is therefore imperative for Thailand to adapt as quickly as possible to these changes to protect its population on the one hand and, if it wishes, to maintain a monopoly on the export of rice and not suffer significant losses. Which would ultimately have a huge impact on the country's economy. Particularly with the fluctuation in the price of rice, due to uncertainties, which prevents farmers from increasing their income.\nTerritorial disputes.\nHistory.\nThailand shares boundaries with Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, and Myanmar. The territories of China and Vietnam do not border Thailand, but they are within around 100\u00a0km distance.\nMany parts of Thailand's boundaries follow natural features, such as the Mekong river. Most borders were stabilized and demarcated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in accordance with treaties forced on Thailand and its neighbors by the British Empire and French Indochina. In some areas, however, exact boundaries, especially along Thailand's eastern borders with Laos and Cambodia, are still disputed.\nCambodia.\nCambodia's disputes with Thailand after 1951 arose in part from ill-defined boundaries and changes in France's colonial fortunes. Recently, the most notable case has been a dispute over Preah Vihear submitted to the International Court of Justice, which ruled in favor of Cambodia in 1962. During the years that the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, was controlled by the Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot (1975 to 1979), the border disputes continued.\nLaos.\nDemarcation is complete except for certain Mekong islets. The border is marked by the Mekong: at high water during the rainy season, the centre line of the current is the border, while during low water periods, all islands, mudbanks, sandbanks, and rocks that are revealed belong to Laos.\nMalaysia.\nIn contrast to dealings with Cambodia, which attracted international attention, boundary disputes with Malaysia are usually handled more cooperatively. Continuing mineral exploration and fishing, however, are sources of potential conflict. One segment at the mouth of the Golok River remained in dispute with Malaysia as of 2023, along with a section of the continental shelf in the Gulf of Thailand.\nMyanmar.\nSovereignty over three Andaman Sea islands remains disputed. The standing agreement, negotiated in February 1982, left undetermined the status of Ginga Island (Ko Lam), Ko Kham, and Ko Ki Nok at the mouth of the Kraburi River (Pakchan River). Subsequent negotiations in 1985, 1989, and 1990 made no progress. The two parties have designated the islands as \"no man's land\". Ongoing tensions in the area resulted in minor clashes in 1998, 2003, and 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30131", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30131", "title": "Demographics of Thailand", "text": "The demographics of Thailand paint a statistical portrait of the national population. Demography includes such measures as population density and distribution, ethnicity, educational levels, public health metrics, fertility, economic status, religious affiliation, and other characteristics of the populace.\nPopulation size and structure.\nPopulation.\nThe population of Thailand was 65.95 million on 8 Jan 2025 as per the Department of Provincial Administration. There were 64,953,661 Thai nationals and 997,549 non-Thai residents. Thailand's population is mainly rural: concentrated in the rice growing areas of the central, Isan, and northern regions. In 2010, the urban population\u2014principally in the Bangkok Metropolitan Region \u2014was 45.7 percent of the total population according to the National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB). Accurate statistics are difficult to arrive at, as millions of Thai migrate from rural areas to cities, then return to their place of origin to help with seasonal field work. Officially they have rural residency, but spend most of the year in urban areas.\nThailand's successful government-sponsored family planning program has resulted in a decline in population growth from 3.1 percent in 1960 to around 0.4 percent in 2015. The World Bank forecasts a contraction of the working-age population of about 10 percent between 2010 and 2040. In 1970, an average of 5.7 people lived in a Thai household. At the time of the 2010 census, the figure was down to 3.2. Even though Thailand has one of the better social security systems in Asia, the increasing population of elderly people is a challenge for the country.\nLife expectancy has risen, a reflection of Thailand's efforts to implement effective public health policies. The Thai AIDS epidemic had a major impact on the Thai population. In 2022, over 500,000 Thai were HIV or AIDS positive, approximately 1.1% of adult men and 0.9% of adult women. Every year, 30,000\u201350,000 Thai die from HIV or AIDS-related illnesses. Ninety percent of them are ages 20\u201324, the youngest range of the workforce. An aggressive public education campaign begun in the early-1990s reduced the number of new HIV infections from 150,000 to under 10,000 annually.\nThe leading cause of death among the age cohort under 15 years of age: drowning. A study by the Child Safety Promotion and Injury Prevention Centre of Ramathibodi Hospital revealed that more than 1,400 youths under 15 years old died from drowning each year, or an average four deaths a day, becoming the top cause of deaths of children, even exceeding that of motorbike deaths. Thailand's Disease Control Department estimates that only 23 percent of Thai children under 15 can swim. The Public Health Ministry said that from 2006 to 2015, 10,923 children drowned. Of the 8.3 million children aged 5\u201314 nationwide, only two million can swim, according to the Public Health Ministry.\nThe United Nations classifies Thailand as an \"aging society\" (one-tenth of the population above 60), on track to become an \"aged society\" (one-fifth of the population above 60) by 2025. The Fiscal Policy Office projects that the number of Thais aged 60-plus will increase from 14 percent in 2016 to 17.5 percent in 2020, 21.2 percent in 2025, and 25.2 percent in 2030. As of 2016[ [update]] it is estimated that there are 94,000 employees aged 60 years or more in the workforce.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAge structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2012) (Unrevised data.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Data refer to national projections.): \nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\nAlthough the UN classifies the birth and death registration of the National Statistics Office as incomplete the figures below clearly show the decreasing fertility in Thailand since the end of the 1950s. As of 2024 natural growth in Thailand is negative, which means that the number of deaths exceeds the number of births.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUN estimates.\n1 . Sources:&lt;br&gt;\nFigures highlighted in yellow are projections.\nFertility rate.\nUltra-low fertility.\nThailand\u2019s population declined by 100,000 in 2024 to 65.95 million in 2024. The historic demographic shift of 2024 occurred when the annual births fell below 500,000 for the first time since 1949. In 2024, 462,240 births versus 571,646 deaths were recorded. Thailand\u2019s total fertility rate (TFR) declined to 1.0, which is lower than Japan\u2019s 1.2. This makes Thailand an ultra-low fertility country like South Korea and Singapore. Demographic projections predict that the population could shrink to 40 million people in 50 years. This would be a decrease of 25 million or 1 million people per 2 years. A survey with over 1,000 Thais showed that 71% regard the low birthrate as a national crisis, while only 35.8% of fertile people plan to have children. The government's \u201cHaving Children for the Nation\u201d campaign proves to be ineffective.\nThe root cause of the declining birthrate and the rapid population aging is blamed on feelings of inadequate living standards, rising cost of living (housing, education, childrearing), not feeling successful enough compared to peers, societal pressures and unrealistic portrayals of success in social media. The public perception of starting a family is often burdensome, stressful, or overly expensive. Ineffective policies will result in a demographic crisis. Within circa 50 years, the population is projected to decline from over 60 million to just over 30 million. This will negatively affect Thailand's national competitiveness, international bargaining power, and national security.\nTotal fertility rate by province.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) in Thailand by province as of 2020-2022:\nLife expectancy at birth.\nAverage life expectancy at birth of the total population.\nMarriages and divorce.\nIn 2024, the marriage registry had 263,087 new couples, while 147,621 couples divorced.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) in Thailand by region and year:\nEthnic groups.\nThailand's ethnic origins are diverse and continue to evolve. The nation's ethnic makeup is obscured by the pressures of Thaification, Thai nationalism, and social pressure, which is intertwined with a caste-like mentality assigning some groups higher social status than others. In its report to the United Nations for the \"International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination\", the Thai government officially recognized 62 ethnic communities.&lt;ref name=\"CERD/C/THA/1-3\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Twenty million Central Thai (together with approximately 650,000 Khorat Thai) make up approximately 20,650,000 million (34.1 percent) of the nation's population of 60,544,937 at the time of completion of the Mahidol University \"Ethnolinguistic Maps of Thailand\" data (1997).\nThailand's report to the UN provided population numbers for mountain peoples and ethnic communities in the northeast. Thus, though over 3.288 million people in the northeast alone could not be categorised, the population and percentages of other ethnic communities c. 1997 are known and constitute minimum populations. In descending order, the largest (equal to or greater than 400,000) are:\nThailand's Ministry of Social Development and Human Security's 2015 \"Master Plan for the Development of Ethnic Groups in Thailand 2015\u20132017\" omitted the larger, ethnoregional ethnic communities, including the Central Thai majority; it therefore covers only 9.7% of the population.\nThere is a significant number of Thai-Chinese in Thailand. However, Chinese origins as evidenced by surname were erased in the 1920s by royal decree, about one-sixth of Thais may have Chinese origins. One scholar estimated that the Sino-Thai population, itself around 14 per cent of the total, was composed of around 56 percent Teochew, 16 percent Hakka, 12 percent Hainanese, 7 percent Hokkien, 7 percent Cantonese and 2 percent other. Significant intermixing has taken place such that there are few pure ethnic Chinese, and those of partially mixed Chinese ancestry account for as much as a third to a half of the Thai population. Those assigned Thai ethnicity in the census process made up the vast majority of the population in 2010 (95.9 percent); two percent were Burmese, 1.3 percent other, and 0.9 percent unspecified. Thus, the ethnosocial and genetic makeup situation is very different from that which is reported or self-claimed.\nThe vast majority of the Isan people, one-third of Thailand's population, are of ethnic Lao with some belonging to the Khmer minority. They speak the Isan language. Additionally there have been more recent waves of immigration from Vietnam and Cambodia across porous borders due to wars and subsequent poverty over the last few decades, whose immigrants have tried to keep a low profile and blend in.\nIn more recent years the Isan people began mixing with the rest of the nation as urbanization and mobility increase. Myanmar's numerous ethnic wars between the army and tribes who speak more than 40 languages and control large fiefdoms or states, has led to waves of immigrants seeking refuge or work in Thailand. The makeup of Myanmar nationals is complex and includes, for example, people of Nepali ethnicity who escaped Nepal, entered Myanmar, and then emigrated to Thailand.\nFollowing the 2014 Thai coup d'\u00e9tat, Thailand's Department of Employment released figures showing that 408,507 legal workers from Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia worked in Thailand. An additional 1,630,279 Myanmar nationals of all ethnicities, 40,546 Laotians, and 153,683 Cambodians were without legal work authorization, but also worked and resided in Thailand. Some 180,000 Cambodians were said to have left Thailand post-coup due to crackdown rumors, indicating government figures were an under count. These statistics are merely a single snapshot and hardly authoritative as there is constant movement and much eluding of authority.\nThe language of the central Thai population is the educational and administrative language. Other dialects of Thai exist, most notably the Southern Thai language. Several other small Tai (not Thai) groups include the Shan, Lue, and Phu Thai.\nMalay- and Yawi-speaking Muslims of the south are another significant minority group (2.3 percent), yet there are a substantial number of ethnic Malays who speak only Thai. Other groups include the Khmer; the Mon, who are substantially assimilated with the Thai, and the Vietnamese.\nSmaller mountain-dwelling tribes, such as the Hmong and Mien, as well as the Karen, number about 788,024. Some 300,000 Hmong were to have received citizenship in 2010.\nThailand is also home to more than 200,000 foreigners\u2014retirees, extended tourists, and workers from, for example, Europe, North America, and elsewhere.\nLanguages.\nThailand is dominated by languages of the Southwestern Tai family. Karen languages are spoken along the border with Burma, Khmer is spoken near Cambodia (and previously throughout central Thailand), and Malay in the south near Malaysia.\nThe Thai hill tribes speak numerous small languages, many Chinese retain varieties of Chinese, and there are half a dozen sign languages. Thailand has 73 living languages.\nThe following table shows first languages in Thailand with 400,000 or more speakers according to the Royal Thai Government's 2011 Country Report to the Committee Responsible for the \"International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination\".\nThe following table employs 2010 census data. Caution should be exercised with Thai census data on first language. In Thai censuses, the four largest Tai-Kadai languages of Thailand (in order, Central Thai, Isan (majority Lao), Kam Mueang, Pak Tai) are not provided as options for language or ethnic group. People declaring one of these as a first language, including Lao, are assigned to \"Thai\". This explains the disparity between the two tables. For instance, self-reporting as Lao has been prohibited, due to the prohibition of the Lao ethnonym in the context of describing Thai citizens for approximately one hundred years. This was due to the promotion of \"Thai\" national identity to cement Siamese claims over the Lao city-states of what is now northern and northeast Thailand following the 1893 Franco-Siamese crisis and subsequent threats posed by French Indochina to the Lao tributary states of Siam. The birth of a homogenizing Thai ethnocentric national identity sufficient to begin transforming Siam from an absolute monarchy into a modern nation-state was achieved by assimilating the Lao with this Thai \"identity\", equivalent to what is now known as the Tai\u2013Kadai languages, under a \"Greater Thai Empire\", and can be traced back to at least 1902. This homogenization began affecting the Thai census from 1904 onwards. The 2011 UN report data is therefore more comprehensive and better differentiates between the large Tai-Kadai languages of Thailand. As a country submission to a UN convention ratified by Thailand, it is also arguably more authoritative.\nReligion.\nTheravada Buddhism is the official religion of Thailand. 93.5 percent are estimated to be Buddhist; 5.4 percent Muslim; 1.1 percent Christian; and 0.1 percent other or have no religion.\nIn addition to Malay and Yawi speaking Thai and other southerners who are Muslim, the Muslim Cham of Cambodia in recent years began a large scale influx into Thailand. The government permits religious diversity, and other major religions are represented, though there is much social tension, especially in the Muslim south. Spirit worship and animism are widely practiced.\nMigration.\nImmigration.\nThe largest foreign community are the Burmese, followed by the Cambodians and Laotians.\nAs of March 2018[ [update]], Thai government data showed that over 770,900 Cambodian migrants, meaning five percent of the total population of Cambodia, currently live in Thailand. Some NGOs estimate that the actual number may be up to one million.\nLaotians are particularly numerous considering the small size of Laos' population, about seven million, due to the lack of a language barrier. The Chinese expatriate employee population in Thailand, mostly Bangkok, has doubled from 2011 to 2016, making it the largest foreign community in Thailand not originating in a neighbouring country. Chinese hold 13.3 percent of all work permits issued in Thailand, an increase of almost one-fifth since 2015. Japanese expats are on the decline, and now rank sixth, behind Chinese and British. One in every four foreigners working in Thailand formerly were Japanese, and the figure has now dropped slightly to 22.8 percent of the foreign workforce as of late 2016.\nForeign residents in Thailand, according to the 2010 Census. It was found that there were 2,581,141 of foreign origins, composing around 3.87 percent of Thailand's population. Migrants from Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar, the most prevalent, accounted for 1.8 million foreigners.\nResearch by Kasikorn Bank estimated that in 2016, there were 68,300 foreigners over 50 years old\u2014the minimum age for a retirement visa\u2014holding long-stay visas living in Thailand, a 9% increase over the preceding two years. In 2018, Thailand issued almost 80,000 retirement visas, an increase of 30% from 2014, with Britons accounting for the majority of the new visas.\nIn 2010 there were 27,357 Westerners living in the northeastern region, 90 percent living with Thai spouses, according to research by the College of Population Studies at Chulalongkorn University in 2017.\nAs of 2016, up to 145,000 Taiwanese expatriates live in Thailand.\nUpdated in 2025, there some expats that decrease from 2010 as well as some of them have been increase. For instance, Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos have been increase so much from 2010. The decline of Brits and Japanese from 2010. Rise of german and French slightly from 2010.\nAlso reported from news said that there are estimated 30,000 Israeli arrived and settle in Thailand \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30132", "revid": "20992698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30132", "title": "Politics of Thailand", "text": "The politics of Thailand are conducted within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the prime minister is the head of government and a hereditary monarch is head of state. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislative branches.\nFollowing the coup d'\u00e9tat of 22 May 2014 revoking the 2007 constitution, a military organization called National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) had taken over administration. The chief of NCPO abolished the national assembly and assumed the responsibilities of the legislative branch. Under the martial law enforced throughout the kingdom, military courts have been tasked to be responsible for some cases that are normally under the civilian courts. However, the court system, including the Constitutional Court, still remains in existence, even without the constitution. The NCPO was formally dissolved following the swearing-in of the new cabinet on 16 July 2019.\nThe Kingdom of Siam (now known as Thailand) was ruled as an absolute monarchy. After the Siamese revolution in 1932, led by westernized bureaucrats and a tradition-oriented military, Siam officially became a constitutional monarchy with a prime minister as the head of government. The first written constitution was issued. Politics became the arena of fighting factions between old and new elites, bureaucrats, and generals. Coups occurred from time to time, often bringing the country under the rule of military juntas. To date, Thailand has had 20 charters and constitutions, reflecting a high degree of political instability. After successful coups, military regimes have abrogated existing constitutions and promulgated interim charters. Negotiations between politicians, bureaucrats, influence peddlers, corporate leaders and army officers have become a driving force in the restoration of temporary political stability.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Thailand a \"flawed democracy\" in . However, due to the impact of military juntas, Thailand has a status of an electoral autocracy, according to the V-Dem Democracy Indices.\nPolitics of constitutions.\nBefore the 1932 revolution, the kingdom had no written constitution. The monarch was the originator of all laws and the head of the government. In 1932 the first written constitution was issued, expected to be the most important guideline of the kingdom. Constitutions have traditionally been considered to be the \"symbol of democracy\" in Thailand, despite their many abrogations and changes. However, when political disputes took place among the elites, the first military coup occurred in 1933 and the first official constitution was removed, to be replaced by a new one.\nAll of Thailand's charters and constitutions have recognized a unified kingdom with a constitutional monarchy, but with widely differing balances of power between the branches of government. Most Thai governments have stipulated parliamentary systems. Several, however, also called for dictatorships, e.g., the 1959 constitution. Both unicameral and bicameral parliaments have been used, and members of parliament have been both elected and appointed. The direct powers of the monarch have also varied considerably.\nThailand's \"popular constitution\", called the \"people's constitution\" was successfully promulgated in 1997 after the 1992 Bloody May incident. Publicly, constitutional devices have often charged as the root of political turmoil. The 1997 constitution was considered a landmark for the degree of public participation involved in its drafting, as well as the democratic nature of its articles. It prescribed a bicameral legislature, both houses of which are elected. Many civil rights were explicitly acknowledged, and measures were established to increase the stability of elected governments. New organs supervising administrative power such as the Constitutional Court, the Administrative Court, and the Ombudsman also emerged for the first time. These organs later became a threat to politicians, particularly when the financial dealings of Thaksin Shinawatra, one of the most popular politicians in Thai history, became an issue.\nFollowing an army-led coup on 19 September 2006, the 1997 constitution was abrogated. The junta ruled the country by martial law and executive decree for weeks, until it published an interim constitution on 1 October 2006. The interim constitution allowed the junta to appoint a prime minister, a legislature, and a committee to draft a permanent constitution. Local and municipal elections were held as usual. In 2007 the new constitution was eventually issued, said to be a \"junta supported constitution\" by many critics. The 2007 constitution was again abolished in another military takeover on 22 May 2014. According to the 2017 constitution, Thailand's entire political system is under the control of the army, through the appointed Senate but also via an array of military-dominated oversight bodies\nThe King of Thailand has little direct power under the constitution, but is a symbol of national identity and unity. King Bhumibol\u2014on the throne from 1946 to 2016\u2014commanded enormous popular respect and moral authority, which he used on occasion to resolve political crises that threatened national stability.\nDemocracy post-1932.\nThailand was a kingdom under an absolute monarch for over seven centuries before 1932.\nAs a result of imperialism, the kings began minor reforms. The king was the president of the government, consulted with his councillors, mainly his relatives. Though significant reforms had occurred in Rama V's reign, the kingdom still had no national assembly. Men of royal blood held positions in the government as ministers. The situation became tense after the World War I. An economic crisis bedeviled the country. A young generation of students and intellectuals studying in Europe began criticizing the crown's government as backward, corrupt, and ineffective. On 24 June 1932, troops in Bangkok seized government buildings and some key ministers. The 1932 revolution took place. Its leaders were both bureaucrats and young military officers, urging national reforms, including the first written constitution. After negotiation with the king, Rama VII, and the kingdom's elite, changes took place, ending absolute rule by the king. The king remained the titular head of state, but the constitutional government ruled the country with the prime minister at its head. A general election was held for the creation of the first national assembly. The election was the first in which women were permitted to vote.\nThe period 1932\u20131973 has been described as semi-democratic.\nSince becoming a Western-style constitutional democratic monarchy in 1932, most of the time the country has been ruled by military governments. The disputes and struggles among the elites old and new, civilians, politicians, and military have occurred regularly since 1932. The first military coup staged by the 1932 revolutionary, military wing itself, occurred in 1933. The military became a tool for political stability. Political freedom, freedom of speech, and basic human rights were strongly compromised in the first three-quarters of the 20th century.\nDue to the pressure of outside events during the Vietnam War, the politics of the kingdom became even more tense. The military government, with the support of the US, tightened its control over the country's politics, while intellectuals and leftist students strongly opposed the junta.\nThe Communist Party of Thailand staged armed struggle in the countryside in the 1960s. Communist and radical ideas attracted a handful of intellectuals. The communist movement was seen as congruent with the independence movements in other Indochinese countries, waging war against the US. In response, the military junta tightened its grip.\nStudent-led uprisings in October 1973 led to the collapse of the military dictatorship. The media received more freedom to criticize politicians and governments, while revolutionary and socialist movements became more apparent. The new civilian government officially shut US bases amid the fear of communist victory in the Indochinese countries in 1975. In 1976, Admiral Sa-ngad Chaloryu, the armed forces commander, staged a massacre and coup that brought hard-line anti-communists to power and reversed these reforms.\nAt the end of the Indochina War, investment by foreign businesses helped alleviate poor infrastructure and social problems. The middle classes constituted only 10 per cent of the 60 million inhabitants. They enjoyed wealth and increasing freedom, leaving the majority poor in the rural areas and slums.\nThe system of rule fluctuated between unstable civilian governments and interludes of military takeover. During democratic periods, the middle class in the cities ignored the poor in the rural areas. The media accepted bribes. To corrupt bureaucrats and politicians became well-accepted business practice.\nEvery time a coup was staged, scapegoats or excuses were found to justify it. Eventually, the ensuing junta government would hand the government back to elected officials. As a result, there have been 18 coups and 18 constitutions in the history of Thai politics.\nFrom 1932, bureaucrats, generals, and businessmen have run most of the political parties. While the grassroots are always the target of the political parties, no grassroots party has ever led the country. Money seems to be the major factor in gaining power in the country.\nThe Black May uprising, in 1992, lead to more reform when promulgating the 1997 constitution aiming to create checks and balance of powers between strengthened government, separately elected senators, and anti-corruption agencies. Administrative courts, constitutional courts, and election-control committees were established to strengthen the checks and balance of politics.\nThe 2007 constitution, following Thaksin's ousting, was particularly designed to be tighter in its control of corruptions and conflicts of interests while reducing the authority of the government. It was repealed in the 22 May 2014 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nGovernment.\nThailand categorizes itself as a constitutional monarchy, the king has little direct power under the constitution and exercises power through the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, and the Courts in accordance with the 2017 constitution. The king, as the head of state, is the symbol of national identity and unity.\nThe head of government is the prime minister. The Prime Minister is elected by both houses of the National Assembly. Under section 151 of the constitution, members of the House of Representative constituting at least one-fifth of the existing total Members of the house have the right to submit a vote of no-confidence of a single Minister or the Council of Ministers en masse.\nThe National Assembly of Thailand, as the bicameral legislative branch of the government, consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives is the lower house of the National Assembly and consists of 500 members sitting for four years; 350 members are elected from a constituency basis and 150 members are elected from a party-list proportional representation. The Senate consists of 250 senators that hold a five-year term. Under section 107 of the 2017 constitution, senators are selected from professional and social groups, having the knowledge, expertise, and experience in various areas of society.\nCorruption.\nCorruption has plagued Thailand for much of its modern history, with both the private and government sectors partaking in various forms of corruption. Corruption is embedded within Thai society due to its history and culture, where patronage plays a huge role and those with connections thrive. Research shows that the cost of bureaucratic corruption alone in 2018 amounted up to a 100 billion Thai baht, with state officials at various levels embezzling funds from large and small governmental projects. As of 2018, Corruption Perception Index by Transparency International has ranked Thailand as the 99th least corrupt.\nA year after the 2014 Thai coup d'\u00e9tat, the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) declared a war on corruption, a common mission by all military dictatorships following the numerous coup in Thailand's history. However, the junta was also entangled with various embarrassing corruption scandals itself.\nForeign relations.\nThailand is an active participant in international and regional organizations, and maintains a particularly close and longstanding security relationship with the United States. Thailand's foreign policy includes support for ASEAN and it has developed increasingly close ties with the organisation's other members, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos, Cambodia, Burma, and Vietnam. Thailand also attends the annual meetings held by the foreign and economic ministers of the ASEAN nations, including the inaugural East Asia Summit that was held in Kuala Lumpur in December 2005.\nRegional cooperation is progressing for Thailand in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters. In 2003, Thailand served as an APEC host and formulated the meeting's theme: \"A World of Differences: Partnership for the Future\". Supachai Panitchpakdi, the former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, served as Director-General of the World Trade Organization (WTO) between 2002 and 2005.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nVoting Rights.\nThe issue of voting rights in Thailand is addressed under Section 95 of the 2017 constitution.\nA person must have the following qualifications in order to vote:\nResults of 2019 Thai General Election.\nThe 2019 General Election was held on 24 March 2019; it was the first election held in accordance with the new 2017 constitution and also the first election held since the 2014 coup. The election selected 500 members of the House of Representatives, in which 350 were elected from a constituency basis and 150 were elected from a party-list proportional representation. The National Assembly convened on 5 June to elect the new prime minister, in which the incumbent prime minister and coup leader Prayut Chan-o-cha won.\nPolitical history of the democratic era.\nTransition to democracy after 1932.\nFollowing the Siamese revolution of 1932, which imposed constitutional limits on the monarchy, Thai politics were dominated for around fifty years by a military and bureaucratic elite, with the support of businessmen and entrepreneurs. Changes of government were affected primarily by a long series of mostly bloodless coups.\nThe popular uprising of 14 October 1973 resulted in the end of the ruling military dictatorship of anti-communist Thanom Kittikachorn. Notably, it highlighted the growing influence of Thai university students in politics. Only three years later, left-wing movements were cracked down by the extremely violent suppression from right wings and ultra royalists in the 6 October 1976 massacre event, following by a coup to strengthen the monarchy and military status in the Cold War period, including increase of l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9 law jail terms.\nBeginning with a brief experiment in democracy during the mid-1980s, led by Prem Tinsulanonda, civilian democratic political institutions slowly gained greater authority, culminating in 1988 when Chatichai Choonhavan,leader of the Chart Thai Party, assumed office as the country's first democratically elected prime minister in more than a decade. Three years later, another bloodless coup, 1991 Thai coup d'\u00e9tat ended his term and the military junta National Peace Keeping Council was formed.\nShortly thereafter, the royally appointed Anand Panyarachun, a businessman and former diplomat, headed a largely civilian interim government and promised to hold elections in the near future. However, following inconclusive March 1992 Thai general election, former army commander Suchinda Kraprayoon was appointed prime minister. Thais, more than 200,000 people led by Chamlong Srimuang reacted to the appointment by demanding an end to military influence in government, but demonstrations were violently suppressed by the military in Black May events. An estimated 52 to 100 protesters were killed, 696 were injured, and 175 had \"disappeared\", it had not been concluded until today. Shortly, Suchinda regime received sweeping amnesty, signed by Bhumibol Adulyadej.\nDomestic and international reactions to the violence forced Suchinda to resign, and the nation once again turned to Anand, who was appointed interim prime minister until new elections were held in September 1992. In the September 1992 elections, political parties that had opposed the military in May 1992 won by a narrow majority and Chuan Leekpai, a leader of the Democrat Party, became prime minister at the head of a five-party coalition.\nFollowing the defection of a coalition partner, Chuan dissolved parliament in May 1995, and the Chart Thai Party won the largest number of parliamentary seats in the subsequent election. Party leader Banharn Silpa-archa became prime minister, but held the office for little more than a year. Following elections held in November 1996, Chavalit Youngchaiyudh formed a coalition government and became prime minister. However, the onset of the Asian financial crisis caused a loss of confidence in the Chavalit government and forced him to hand over power to Chuan Leekpai in November 1997.\nChuan formed a coalition government based on the themes of economic crisis management. The 1997 constitution was introduced as the first constitution to be drafted by a popularly elected Constitutional Drafting Assembly, hence was popularly called the \"People's Constitution\". The 1997 constitution created a bicameral legislature. For the first time in Thai history, both houses were directly elected.\n2001\u20132006, Thaksin Shinawatra.\nIn the January 2001 elections, telecommunications multimillionaire Thaksin Shinawatra, who had relations with the 1990s junta, and his Thai Rak Thai Party (TRT) won an overwhelming victory on a populist platform of economic growth and development.\nThaksin also narrowly avoided (8:7) a guilty verdict in the Constitutional Court, where he was charged by the Board of Anti-Corruption of hiding shares worth hundreds of millions of baht. A decade later, a Supreme Court ruling in another case accepted the possibility of bribery in the Constitutional Court case.\nAfter absorbing several smaller parties, TRT gained an absolute majority in the lower house of parliament, controlling 296 of 500 seats. In a cabinet reshuffle of October 2002, the Thaksin administration further put its stamp on the government. A package of bureaucratic reform legislation created six new ministries in an effort to streamline the bureaucratic process and increase efficiency and accountability.\nThe general election held on 6 February 2005 resulted in another landslide victory for Thaksin and TRT, which controlled 374 seats in parliament's lower house. Thaksin's populist policies found great favour in rural areas. Thaksin introduced government programs which greatly benefited rural areas of the country. These programs included debt relief for farmers still reeling from the Asian financial crisis and a new healthcare program that brought coverage to all Thais for 30 baht per visit (equivalent to about US$1). During the 2013\u20132014 Thai political crisis older residents of the Baan Dong Yaang village in Udon Thani Province stated: \"Before Thaksin, no politicians came here. Thaksin understood our situation and helped us.\"\nDespite the majority and surging popularity among rural Thais, Thaksin came under severe questioning for selling telecommunication shares to Temasek, a Singapore investor, for about 70,000 million baht without paying any tax. More complex and high-level corruption and conspiracies were discovered and exposed by Sonthi Limthongkul, Manager Media Group owner, who reached the middle class in the capital and the cities through the only small satellite and internet media channel, ASTV.\nThaksin refused to publicly answer the questions of the People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD), a large group of middle class Thais and a coalition of anti-Thaksin protesters led by Sonthi Limthongkul. Due to an inability to clear himself of the corruption allegations, Thaksin's regime fell apart during public protests led by PAD, which led to widespread calls for his resignation and impeachment.\nPAD gathered in Bangkok and demanded that Thaksin resign as prime minister so that the king could directly appoint someone else. Thaksin refused and protests continued for weeks. Thaksin consequently dissolved parliament on 24 February 2006 and called a snap election for 2 April 2006. The election was boycotted by the opposition parties, leading to unopposed TRT candidates for 38 seats failing to obtain the necessary quorum of 20 per cent of eligible votes. As the Thai constitution requires all seats to be filled from the beginning of parliament, this produced a constitutional crisis. After floating several suggestions on 4 April 2006, Thaksin announced that he would step down as prime minister as soon as parliament had selected a successor. In a televised speech to senior judges, King Bhumibol requested that they execute their duty justly.\nCriminal charges and allegations of administrative abuse cases were brought against the Election Committee. The courts voided the election results, jailed the committee for abuse of power, and ordered a new round of elections for 15 October 2006. Thaksin continued to work as caretaker prime minister.\nCivil movements in Thailand were active in the 2000s, with some groups perceiving the Thaksin government as authoritarian, citing extrajudicial killings in his war on drugs, special security laws passed by the administration, and the government's increasingly hardline responses to the insurgency in the southern provinces. Thaksin's government was facing mounting opposition from the urban middle classes, while continuing to remain popular in the predominantly poor and rural north and northeastern regions. However, the most severe critic of Thaksin seemed to be Sondhi Limthongkul, a media tycoon and former colleague.\n2006 coup.\nWhile Thaksin was in New York City to make a speech at UN Headquarters, the military seized power on 19 September 2006.\nThe Council for Democratic Reform under Constitutional Monarchy (CDRM) led by General Sonthi Boonyaratglin was formed. Political activities were banned by the junta after the coup on 19 September 2006. The 1997 constitution was abrogated, although most of the institutions of government remained intact. A new constitution was drafted and promulgated in late-2007.\nA month after the coup, an interim civilian government was formed, including an appointed House of Representatives from a variety of professions and an appointed Constitutional Court. Freedom of speech was restored.\nDuring 2006 and 2007, organized underground terrorist activities took place, including the burning numerous schools in rural areas of the north and the northeast of Thailand and the planting of bombs in ten locations in Bangkok, the latter of which killed and injured several people on New Year's Eve in 2006.\nA national referendum for the 2007 constitution was called by the military and the 2007 constitution was accepted by the majority of the voters. The junta promised a democratic general election, which was finally held on 23 December 2007, 16 months after the coup.\nThe Constitutional Court unanimously dissolved the populist Thai Rak Thai Party following punishment according to the 1997 constitution, banning 111 TRT members from politics for five years.\nThe military drafted a controversial new constitution following allegations of Thaksin's corruption and abuse of power. This constitution was particularly designed to increase control of corruption and of conflicts of interests of politicians while decreasing the previously strengthened authority of the government. A national referendum accepted the 2007 constitution, although there was significant disapproval in Thaksin's stronghold, the north and northeast.\nOn 23 December 2007, a national parliamentary election was held, based on the new constitution, and the People's Power Party (Thai Rak Thai's and Thaksin's proxy party), led by former Bangkok governor Samak Sundaravej, seized the reins of government. Thailand's new parliament convened on 21 January 2008.\nThe People's Power Party (PPP), or Thaksin's proxy party, gained the majority, with just under half of the total seats in parliament, and won the general election by a solid margin after five minor parties joined it to form a coalition government.\nA complaint was filed against PPP in the Thai Supreme Court, charging PPP of being the TRT nominee party. Moreover, in 2008, one of its leading members was charged with electoral fraud. The Election Committee also proposed that the PPP should be dissolved due to the violation of the constitution.\nRed shirts, yellow shirts.\nThe so-called \"Red Shirts\" got their start as supporters of deposed former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Red shirts transferred their support to Thailand's ruling Pheu Thai party led by his sister, Yingluck Shinawatra. In general, red shirts see attempts by the urban and military elite to control Thai politics as a threat to democracy. The \"yellow shirts\" represent those opposed to Thaksin. They were the force behind the street protests that led to the 2006 coup. The yellow shirts are a loose grouping of royalists, ultra-nationalists, and the urban middle class opposed to Thaksin and overarching democratic rule by a rural majority.\n2008 political crisis.\nIn 2008, Thailand saw increasing political turmoil, with the PPP government facing pressure to step down amid mounting civil disobedience and unrest led by PAD. The conflict centred on the constitution. The PPP supported the amendment of the 2007 constitution, while anti-government protesters considered it to be a political amnesty for Thaksin and his followers.\nThe anti-government protesters were, said, mostly better educated, more affluent, urban Thais criticizing a Western-style electoral system corrupted by rich politicians. Thaksin was accused of buying votes, bureaucrats, policemen, military officers, and even political factions. Thaksin became the example of the businessman autocrat, launching so-called populist projects, some of which were controversial, such as the war on drugs. Hundreds of killings and murder cases noted by the police were said by them to be merely fighting among the drug traffickers, but no further investigation ever occurred. The judicial process was seen as useless; instead, decisive justice was seen to be in the hands of the police.\nAs the anti-government movement had criticized Thaksin as an example of a corrupt politician, it discredited the election system, suggesting at once a system in which part of the representatives in the national assembly would be chosen by certain professions or social groups.\nAnti-Thaksin protesters were vastly outnumbered by Thaksin's supporters in the rural majority, who delivered to his party two resounding election victories. Their loyalty was rewarded by generous social and economic welfare programs. The anti-government forces were well-organized, and criticized the behind-the-scenes support of the military, the country's most influential institution, seeing Thaksin supported by anti-royalists, former revolutionaries, and ex-communists aiming at regime change.\nSamak Sundaravej was elected prime minister of the first government under the 2007 constitution.\nSamak Sundaravej, an articulate politician, acknowledged being the \"nominee\" of fugitive Thaksin Shinawatra. Samak Sundaravej's position in power, however, did not put an end to the conflict. People claimed that Thaksin still influenced Thai politics even though he was in exile.\nIn 1973, he ran a prominent month-long propaganda campaign, accusing democratic student movements of being communist rebels, traitors and spies. The event ended in a massacre of hundreds of students at Thammasat University on 14 October 1973, and a further military coup was conducted, giving him the interior minister position in the junta. In 1976 there was another massacre at the university. Thai military personnel, police and others, were seen shooting at protesters at the university. Many were killed and many survivors were abused.\nPrime Minister Samak held daily national state television broadcasts with his own political messages. These were not well received by PAD. NBT, the National Broadcasting Television, the state-owned media enterprise, was openly used to counter the PAD's message, which emphasizes the overturning of the current democratic system.\nFormer PM Thaksin had welcomed offers to come back to Thailand in February 2008 to face corruption charges and to get close control of the PPP, successor of his Thai Rak Thai Party.\nThe opposition forced a no-confidence vote on a constitutional amendment which may have resulted in the reinstatement of Thaksin's reputation. The failure to address dramatically rising food and energy prices, and a temple dispute with Cambodia damaged the coalition government's reputation.\nStreet protests led by PAD, the major opposition movement, began in late-May after the ruling party agreed to amend the constitution. Their main objective was to block any constitutional amendment aimed chiefly at reinstating Thaksin's reputation and saving the PPP from dissolution after one of its leaders was charged with electoral fraud.\nAnother of PAD's objectives was to support the courts and the judicial system in hearing Thaksin's cases. While PM Samak has been successful in controlling the police and civil service, various courts remain independent and issued several independent verdicts.\nThe Constitutional Court concluded that PPP's second-in-command, Yongyuth Tiyapairat, who pressured local officers to support his party in the previous election, would subject the party to dissolution. The Administrative Court also ruled that his government seriously violated the constitution and might have prejudiced national sovereignty in negotiating over the sovereignty of territory immediately adjacent to Preah Vihear, a temple in Cambodia. The case brought the resignation of his first foreign minister, Nopadon Patama. Several other ministers found wrongfully informing the Anti-corruption Board or Election Governing Board of important information, were discharged when this was discovered.\nPreviously Thaksin and Pojaman's three lawyers were caught red-handed attempting to bribe Supreme Court judges and were given jail sentences. That was an ominous sign for Thaksin. Later a criminal court returned a verdict of tax evasion against Pojaman. He was to be jailed for three years. Days later, Thaksin and Pojaman jumped bail and issued a statement from London announcing through Thai TV his decision to seek political asylum in the UK in an attempt to avoid what he called \"biased\" treatment under Thailand's current judicial system.\nThaksin and his family fled to Great Britain on 11 August 2008, to apply for political asylum after his wife was convicted of tax evasion.\nPM Samak Sundaravej, through his parliament, was able to complete budget bills for mega-projects which cost so much that the King of Thailand spoke out in protest and to thank the head of the Bank of Thailand (under threats from the government) for warning that the country was on the brink of disaster because of high expenditures.\nOn 26 August 2008, 30,000 protesters, led by PAD, occupied Sundaravej's Government House compound in central Bangkok, forcing he and his advisers to work at Don Mueang International Airport. Riot police entered the occupied compound and delivered a court order for the eviction of the PAD protesters. Chamlong Srimuang, a leader of PAD, ordered 45 PAD guards to break into the main government building on Saturday. Three regional airports were closed for a short period and 35 trains between Bangkok and the provinces were canceled. Protesters raided the Phuket International Airport tarmac on the resort island of Phuket Province resulting to 118 flights canceled or diverted, affecting 15,000 passengers.\nProtesters also blocked the entrances of the airports in Krabi and Hat Yai (which were later re-opened). Police issued arrest warrants for Sondhi Limthongkul and eight other PAD leaders on charges of insurrection, conspiracy, unlawful assembly and refusing orders to disperse. Meanwhile, General Anupong Paochinda stated: \"The army will not stage a coup. The political crisis should be resolved by political means\". Samak and the ruling coalition called for an urgent parliamentary debate and session for 31 August.\nPM Samak Sundaravej tried using legal means involving civil charges, criminal charges, and police action to remove PAD protesters from government offices on 29 August.\nHowever, PAD managed to get temporary relief from the courts enabling them to legally continue the siege of the government office.\nOne person died and 40 people were wounded in a clash which occurred when the DAAD (NohPohKoh) protesters, supported by Thaksin and the PPP moved toward PAD at about 03:00, 2 September without adequate police intervention.\nBy the second half of September 2008, PM Samak Sundaravej was the subject of several court cases for his past actions. He faced an appeals court judgement of slander and a pending ruling from the Constitutional Court as to whether he had a conflict of interest by being a private employee while holding the premiership. The Anti-Corruption Board contemplated bringing a charge of abuse of power in the Preah Vihear case to the Constitutional Court. These legal difficulties ended PM Samak's political role. Ex-PM Thaksin and Pojaman also faced verdicts from the Supreme Court.\nPeople Power Party's deputy spokesman Kuthep Suthin Klangsang, on 12 September 2008 announced: \"Samak has accepted his nomination for prime minister. Samak said he is confident that parliament will find him fit for office, and that he is happy to accept the post. A majority of party members voted on Thursday to reappoint Samak. Samak is the leader of our party so he is the best choice.\" Despite objections from its five coalition partners, the PPP, in an urgent meeting, unanimously decided to renominate Samak Sundaravej. Five coalition parties, namely Chart Thai, Matchima Thipataya, Pracharaj, Puea Pandin, and Ruam Jai Thai Chart Pattana, unanimously agreed to support the PPP to set up the new government and vote for the person who should be nominated as the new prime minister. Chart Thai deputy leader Somsak Prissananantakul and Ruam Jai Thai Chart Pattana leader Chettha Thanajaro said the next prime minister was nominated. Caretaker prime minister Somchai Wongsawat said PPP secretary-general Surapong Suebwonglee would notify the five parties who the PPP nominated, to take office again. Some lawmakers, however, said they would propose an alternate candidate. Meanwhile, Thailand's army chief General Anupong Paochinda said he backed the creation of a national unity government that would include all the country's parties, and he also asked for the lifting of a state of emergency that Samak imposed on 2 September.\nEmbattled Samak Sundaravej abandoned his bid to regain the premiership, and he also resigned from the PPP's leadership. Meanwhile, PPP's chief party spokesmen, Kudeb Saikrachang and Kan Thiankaew, announced on 13 September that caretaker prime minister Somchai Wongsawat, caretaker justice minister Sompong Amornwiwat, and PPP Secretary-General Surapong Suebwonglee were PPP's candidates for premiership. However, Suriyasai Katasila of People's Alliance for Democracy (a group of royalist businessmen, academics and activists) vowed to continue its occupation of Government House if a PPP candidate were nominated: \"We would accept anyone as prime minister, as long as he is not from the People's Power Party.\"\nOn 14 September the state of emergency was lifted. The ruling People Power Party, on 15 September 2008, named Somchai Wongsawat, candidate for prime minister to succeed Samak Sundaravej. The PPP will endorse Somchai, and his nomination will be set for a parliamentary vote on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court ruled on Wednesday in a corruption case against Thaksin and his wife, to be promulgated after the parliament vote for the new prime minister.\nOn 4 October 2008, Chamlong Srimuang and rally organiser Chaiwat Sinsuwongse of the People's Alliance for Democracy were detained by the Thai police led by Col. Sarathon Pradit, by virtue of 27 August arrest warrant for insurrection, conspiracy, illegal assembly, and refusing orders to disperse (treason) against him and eight other protest leaders. At Government House, Sondhi Limthongkul, however, stated demonstrations would continue: \"I am warning you, the government and police, that you are putting fuel on the fire. Once you arrest me, thousands of people will tear you apart.\" Srimuang's wife, Ying Siriluck visited him at the Border Patrol Police Region 1, Pathum Thani. Other PAD members still wanted by police included Sondhi, activist MP Somkiat Pongpaibul, and PAD leaders Somsak Kosaisuk and Pibhop Dhongchai.\nOn 7 October 2008, Deputy Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh resigned and admitted partial responsibility for violence due to police tear gas clearance of the blockade of the parliament, causing injuries to 116 protesters, 21 seriously. His resignation letter stated: \"Since this action did not achieve what I planned, I want to show my responsibility for this operation.\" After being dispersed, 5,000 demonstrators returned and blocked all four entries to the parliament building.\nThe protesters attempted to hold 320 MPs and senators as hostages inside the parliament building, cutting off the power supply, and forcing Somchai Wongsawat to escape by jumping a back fence after his policy address. But other trapped MPs failed to leave and flee from the mob. The siege on the area beside the near prime minister's office forced the government to transfer its activities to Don Mueang Airport.\nOn 26 November 2008, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) issued a statement saying that the current crisis was a watershed moment for democracy and rule of law in Thailand. It contains harsh critique of PAD and the criminal justice system of Thailand.\n2009\u20132010 protests and crackdowns.\nAbhisit's rise to power was controversial and opposed from the beginning. In April 2009, anti-government protesters, known as \"red shirts\", began a demonstration aimed at the resignation of the prime minister and fresh elections. The major site of the demonstration was Bangkok. From 8 April, the demonstrators spread their activities to significant locations such as major intersections. Streets were blocked and barricaded. The demonstration took place at the same time as the ASEAN summit in Pattaya. Demonstrators moved there to protest, aiming at disrupting the summit. Protesters stormed the site of the summit, causing its cancellation.\nIn Bangkok, the protest became fiercer because of the arrest of the leaders of the Pattaya protest. Protesters blocked the entrances of the Criminal Court, calling for the release of their leaders. Prime Minister Abhisit, at The Ministry of Interior, declared a state of emergency. Protesters blocked the entrance of the ministry, to seize the premier and other ministers. However, the premier escaped. The government began to deploy anti-riot troops. Armored vehicles were deployed in downtown Bangkok. Anti-riot actions took place in the early morning of the next day. Anti-riot troops, armed with shields, batons, and M-16s with live ammo, started dispersing and shooting protesters on Bangkok's streets.\nProtesters charged that the government was killing protesters. The government denied the charge. Although two bodies were found, the government found no evidence that it was involved in the killings. On major avenues and streets, burning buses were seen, as well as wounded people were carried to the hospitals, but the government reported no serious cases.\nBy the afternoon of 14 April, the military controlled all main streets. The leaders of the protest decided to suspend their activities. Thai politics after the pro-Thaksin protest has so far been the stage of the two opposing factions: the Democrat Party-led government allied with their coalition partners, who also have the tacit support of the PAD, the military, and the police, against the Thaksin loyalists, the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD). Both sides have claimed the fighting as the struggle for democracy and the nation.\nResolution to conflict.\nOn 3 May the Thai Prime Minister announced he was willing to hold elections on 14 November should the opposition red shirts accept the offer. The following day red shirt leaders accepted the proposal to leave the occupied parts of Bangkok in return for an election on the scheduled date.\nHowever, one week later, 10 May, protesters had yet to disband despite accepting the road map proposed by the prime minister for early elections. They placed new demands upon the prime minister that Deputy Prime Minister Suthep Thaugsuban, who was in charge of security operations during the clash of 10 April, must first turn himself in for prosecution before they dispersed.\nOn 11 May, Suthep presented himself to the Department of Special Investigation. The red shirt protesters, however, were not satisfied and demanded Suthep be formally charged instead by police. The red shirts failure to disperse was taken as a decline of the conciliatory road map and Prime Minister Abhisit's proposal of early parliamentary elections were withdrawn. This was followed by a warning issued from the prime minister that protesters must disperse or face imminent military action. The red shirts led another protest on 19 May. The army killed over 90 protesters in the ensuing military crackdown. Army tactics were heavily criticised for failing to abide by international standards and using lethal force on unarmed protesters. At least six people including nurses and medics were shot by snipers inside a Buddhist temple set up as a safe area.\nBetween 2001 and 2011, Isan's GDP per capita more than doubled to US$1,475. Over the same period, GDP in the Bangkok area soared from US$7,900 to nearly US$13,000.\n2013 political crisis.\nFollowing the announcement of a proposed amnesty bill by the Yingluck government, protests resurfaced in October 2013. The bill would allow former prime minister Thaksin to re-enter Thailand. Protesters perceived the Yingluck administration as corrupt, illegitimate, and a proxy for her brother. The protest movement was led by Suthep Thaugsuban and was supported by the People's Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC).\nPrime Minister Yingluck dissolved the Thai parliament following the recommencement of protests and announced a new election in accordance with the Thai constitution. The constitution states that elections must be held 45 to 60 days from the date that parliament is dissolved. The protest movement opposed the election announcement and the PDRC stated that it would boycott the process, with Suthep calling for the appointment of an unelected council to lead the country until reforms can be implemented. Protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013 to block the work of the Election Commission (EC).\nProtesters at the Thai-Japanese sports stadium clashed with police on 26 December 2013, resulting in two fatalities (one police officer was killed by a live bullet fired by a protester). Protesters armed themselves with sling shots and wore gas masks to fight with police, and around 200 people were injured. Due to the escalation in violence, the EC released a statement in which it urged the government to consider postponing the elections. The government explained that it was unable to change the date of the election, but remained open to discussions with protesters.\nIn his response to the media on 27 December 2013, Thailand's army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha did not rule out the possibility of a military coup, stating, \"Whether it is going to happen, time will tell. We don't want to overstep the bounds of our authority. We don't want to use force. We try to use peaceful means, talks and meetings to solve the problem.\" During the same period, an arrest warrant was issued for Suthep by authorities who cited insurrection as the reason, but police did not act on the order for fear of further provocation.\nFollowing the announcement of a 60-day emergency decree on 21 January 2014, Yingluck met with the EC on 27 January to discuss the possibility of postponing the election due to the latter's fear of violence on the day of the election. However, following a three-hour meeting, caretaker Deputy Prime Minister Pongthep Thepkanchana informed media that the polling date remained unchanged. Election commissioner Somchai Srisuthiyakorn stated that the EC would organise the 2 February vote to the best of its ability, including the enactment of measures to prevent violence and the staging of a second round of elections to accommodate voters hindered during the inaugural voting stage. During the meeting at the Army Club, an anti-government protester sustained a gunshot wound; the gunman was arrested.\nThe smooth completion of the 2 February election did not resolve Thailand's political situation, as issues of continuing relevancy remained of concern to the caretaker government: firstly, due to protester blockades, 28 constituencies failed to register candidates; secondly, the constitution required at least 475 filled seats, or 95 per cent of the total number of seats, and the problems caused by protesters meant that this target was not reached\u2014the EC, which believes that the final result will fall three seats short, explained that it would be necessary to hold by-elections over several months in problematic constituencies until all 500 members of the parliament's lower house were selected. In the 2011 elections, a 75 per cent voter turnout rate was registered.\nOn 29 January, the Thai Army announced its support of the CMPO operation to protect the election. Deputy army spokesman Winthai Suvari provided details of the deployment of additional military personnel in areas of particular concern and a joint operation with the CMPO to ensure the safety of state officials and others. The army's other key responsibilities will involve providing medical aid in areas close to protest sites, as well as traffic co-ordination duties in such areas. Assistant national police chief Amnart Unartngarm stated that its 200,000 police officers, plus 1,450 rapid-deployment units, would guard 93,535 polling stations in 76 provinces and Bangkok.\n2014 Coup.\nOn 22 May 2014, the military staged a coup. Prayut Chan-o-cha quickly cracked down on dissent. He put in place controls on the media, imposed Internet censorship, declared a nationwide curfew, banned gatherings of five or more persons and arrested politicians and anti-coup activists, some of whom were charged with sedition and tried in military courts. On 26 May, King Bhumibol Adulyadej endorsed the coup, formally appointing Prayut to \"take charge of public administration\" as of 24 May. On 22 July 2014, Prayut issued an interim constitution granting himself an amnesty for leading the coup and new sweeping powers. The junta legislature unanimously voted Prayut, the sole candidate, as the new prime minister. The formal appointment was made on 24 August 2014, in which King Bhumibol Adulyadej officially endorsed Prayut as prime minister. Prayut activated Article 44 of the interim constitution. It authorises Prayut to issue \"any order to suppress\" any act that \"undermines public peace and order or national security, the monarchy\". Political rights had been a free fall since Prayut took control. On 13 October 2016, Bhumibol died; King Vajiralongkorn became the new monarch. On 16 July 2017, Prayut and military junta legislator issued the Crown Property law, making King Vajiralongkorn in control of the world's biggest royal fortune.\n2017 military junta constitution.\nUnder the 2017 constitution, the senate was appointed by the NCPO and would select the prime minister alongside the House of Representatives. Political parties were able to nominate anyone as their prime minister candidate, including non-party members, which led commentators to believe that Prayut planned to be selected as prime minister with votes from 250 senators and MPs from pro-junta parties, namely the Phalang Pracharat Party, which has close ties to the junta and is led by Prayut's cabinet ministers,\nAfter the 2019 election, Prayut Chan-o-cha became prime minister, defeating Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit of the anti-junta Future Forward Party 500 votes to 244, in which 249 of 500 votes came from a near-unanimous body of senators appointed by the junta (NCPO).\n2020\u20132021 protests.\nThe protests began in early 2020 with demonstrations against the government of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha. They later expanded to include the unprecedented demands for reform of the Thai monarchy. The protests were initially triggered by the dissolution of the Future Forward Party (FFP) in late February 2020 which was critical of Prayut, the changes to the Thai constitution in 2017 and the country's political landscape that it gave rise to.\nIn November 2021, The Constitutional Court ruled that demands for reform of the Thai monarchy have abused of the rights and freedoms and harmed the state's security and ordered an end to all movements, declaring unconstitutional. It has been likened to judicial coup.\nSince 2022.\nIn September 2022, Thailand's Constitutional Court ruled that Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha can stay in office. The opposition had challenged him, because the new constitution limits the term for prime minister as a total period of eight years in office. The Constitutional Court's ruling was that his term in office began in April 2017, simultaneously with the new constitution, although General Prayuth had ruled as the leader of the government since the 2014 military coup.\nIn May 2023, Thailand's reformist opposition, the progressive Move Forward Party (MFP) and the populist Pheu Thai Party, won the general election, meaning the royalist-military parties that supported Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha lost power. On 22 August 2023, Srettha Thavisin of the populist Pheu Thai party, became Thailand's new prime minister, while the Pheu Thai party's billionaire figurehead Thaksin Shinawatra returned to Thailand after years in self-imposed exile.\nIdeas of power.\nAccording to Sopranzetti, who studied Thai ideas of power, in politics, power is seen in terms of moral authority (\"barami\") and amoral power (\"amnat\").\nBarami.\n\"Barami\" is a form of power in moral people. It comes from karmic merit.\n\"Barami\" can be loosely translated as \"charismatic power\" too. Despite its cosmological roots,\u00a0barami\u00a0is important in politics. Since a person's possession of\u00a0\"barami\"\u00a0could be the basis for their claim to power, their lack of it could be the rallying point for a person's enemies to dispose of them.\nThroughout the Bangkok period (1783\u2013present), the representation and maintenance of one's\u00a0\"barami\"\u00a0is a crucial means by which political and social power is maintained or seized, according to Veal.\nPolitical power in Thailand is often strongly associated with the charismatic power of \"barami\".\nThis has implications for business and political institutions, one being the notion that \"the truth is only accessible to spiritually powerful people\". For example, in 2011, a newspaper wrote that a Lieutenant said that only those with enough merit (\"bun\") should have the privilege of reading top-secret documents. Since there is an association, in political institutions, between \"barami\", truth, and political participation; in the 1970s, unpopular politicians were compared with animals low on the biological hierarchy\u2014such as monitor lizards and water buffalo\u2014to portray them as having less of and residing farther away from \"barami\".\nAs moral authority, barami is\u00a0based \"in the spiritual world of Buddhism\", the consequence of the merit of previous lives and earned through good deeds. \"Barami\" can be lost (\"sia barami\") when holders of \"barami\" don't live up to their demands of their character.\nFor example, Phibun's political regime had moral legitimacy (and\u00a0\"barami\") because Phibun had the reputation of duty to the nation; Sarit's regime had \"barami\" because Sarit had the reputation of defence of the monarchy and promotion of national development; Prem's regime had legitimacy because Prem had the reputation of trusted service and discourse on \"good people\"; and Thaksin's political regime had \"barami\" because Thaksin had the reputation of popular support.\nAmnat.\n\"Amnat\" is a form of authority that comes from a formal position, according to Sopranzetti. It is not intrinsic. Amnat\u00a0can also be translated as \"power,\" raw amoral power used for either good or evil, Chachavalpongpun said.\nAs raw power, amnat is\u00a0\"temporal\", through reaching a position of power. Amnat is the power of superiors over subordinates. \"Amnat\"\u00a0can be lost (\"sia amnat\") when used without a form of moral legitimacy, or the support of \"barami\". Fear, in this context, can be contested.\nFor example, \"amnat\" was used in politics in order to enact policy, to promote moral precepts in a top-down way, to eliminate opponents, to not be constrained by constitution, and to promote and demote subordinates in an arbitrary manner.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30133", "revid": "1099904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30133", "title": "Economy of Thailand", "text": "The economy of Thailand is dependent on exports, which accounted for about 58 percent of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2021. Thailand itself is a newly industrialized country, with a GDP of 17.922 trillion baht (US$514.8\u00a0billion) in 2023, the 9th largest economy in Asia. As of 2018, Thailand has an average inflation of 1.06% and an account surplus of 7.5% of the country's GDP. Its currency, the baht, is ranked as the tenth most frequently used world payment currency in 2017.\nThe industrial and service sectors are the main sectors in the Thai gross domestic product, with the former accounting for 39.2 percent of GDP. Thailand's agricultural sector produces 8.4 percent of GDP\u2014lower than the trade and logistics and communication sectors, which account for 13.4 percent and 9.8 percent of GDP respectively. The construction and mining sector adds 4.3 percent to the country's gross domestic product. Other service sectors (including the financial, education, and hotel and restaurant sectors) account for 24.9 percent of the country's GDP. Telecommunications and trade in services are emerging as centers of industrial expansion and economic competitiveness.\nThailand is the second-largest economy in Southeast Asia, after Indonesia. Its per capita GDP 255,362 baht (US$7,336) in 2023 ranks fourth in Southeast Asian per capita GDP, after Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia. In July 2018, Thailand held US$237.5 billion in international reserves, the second-largest in Southeast Asia (after Singapore). Its surplus in the current account balance ranks tenth of the world, made US$37.898 billion to the country in 2018. Thailand ranks second in Southeast Asia in external trade volume, after Singapore.\nThe nation is recognized by the World Bank as \"one of the great development success stories\" in social and development indicators. Despite a per capita gross national income (GNI) of US$7,090 and ranking 66th in the Human Development Index (HDI), the percentage of people below the national poverty line decreased from 65.26 percent in 1988 to 8.61 percent in 2016, according to the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council's (NESDC) new poverty baseline.\nThailand is one of the countries with the lowest unemployment rates in the world, reported as one percent for the first quarter of 2014. This is due to a large proportion of the population working in subsistence agriculture or on other vulnerable employment (own-account work and unpaid family work).\nKingdom of Thailand budget.\nThe Kingdom of Thailand's FY2017 budget was 2.733 trillion baht.\nIn May 2018, the Thai Cabinet approved a FY2019 budget of three trillion baht, up 3.4 percent\u2014100 billion baht\u2014from FY2018. Annual revenue is projected to reach 2.55 trillion baht, up 4.1 percent, or 100 billion baht. Overall, the national budget will face a deficit of 450 billion baht. The cabinet also approved a budget deficit until 2022 in order to drive the economy to a growth of 3.5\u20134.5 percent a year.\nHistory.\nAyutthaya era (1351\u20131767).\nThailand, formerly known as Siam, opened to foreign contact in the pre-industrial era. The diverse natural resources of Siam were underutilized. However, coastal ports and cities at the river mouths were early economic centers which welcomed merchants from Persia, Arab countries, Chinese dynasties and various kingdoms in South and Southeast Asia. The rise of Ayutthaya during the 14th century was connected to renewed maritime trade with China, India and Southeast Asia. Ayutthaya became one of the most prosperous trade centers in Asia. However, the Burmese\u2013Siamese War (1765\u20131767) caused immense economic harm with trade disruption and the eventual destruction of Ayutthaya in 1767.\nRattanakosin era (1782\u20131932).\nWhen the capital of the kingdom moved to Bangkok during the 19th century, foreign trade (particularly with China) became the focus of the government. Chinese merchants came to trade; some settled in the country and received official positions. A number of Chinese merchants and migrants became high dignitaries in the court.\nFrom the mid-19th century onward, European merchants were increasingly active. The Bowring Treaty, signed in 1855, guaranteed the privileges of British traders. The Harris Treaty of 1856, which updated the Roberts Treaty of 1833, extended the same guarantees to American traders. There were multiple costly conflicts with French Indochina from the 18th till the mid 20th century. Siam lost major disputed territories such as Laos and Cambodia to the French colonists. The British Empire gained control over Siamese provinces in the Malay peninsula and on the western border with British Burma. Nevertheless, Thailand was the only Southeast Asian country that remained sovereign from European colonial powers.\nThe domestic market developed slowly, with serfdom, slavery related to the sakdina system as major causes of domestic stagnation. Most of the male population in Siam was in the service of court officials, while their wives and daughters may have traded on a small scale in local markets. Those who were heavily indebted might sell themselves as slaves. King Rama V abolished serfdom and slavery in 1901 and 1905, respectively.\nThailand was a member of the Allies of World War I. From the early 20th century to the end of World War II, Siam's economy gradually became globalized. Major entrepreneurs were ethnic Chinese who became Siamese nationals. Exports of agricultural products (especially rice) were very important and Thailand has been among the top rice exporters in the world. The Siamese economy suffered greatly from the Great Depression, a cause of the Siamese revolution of 1932.\nSignificant investment in education in the 1930s (and again in the 1950s) laid the basis for economic growth, as did a liberal approach to trade and investment.\nBhumibol era (1946\u20132016).\nPost-war era (1945\u20131955).\nPostwar domestic and international politics played significant roles in Thai economic development for most of the Cold War era. From 1945 to 1947 (when the Cold War had not yet begun), the Thai economy suffered because of World War II. During the war, the Thai government (led by Field Marshal Plaek Phibunsongkram) allied with Japan and declared war against the Allies. After the war, Thailand had to supply 1.5 million tons of rice to Western countries without charge, a burden on the country's economic recovery. The government tried to solve the problem by establishing a rice office to oversee the rice trade. During this period, a multiple-exchange-rate system was introduced amid fiscal problems, and the kingdom experienced a shortage of consumer goods.\nIn November 1947, a brief democratic period was ended by a military coup and the Thai economy regained its momentum. In his dissertation, Somsak Nilnopkoon considers the period from 1947 to 1951 one of prosperity. By April 1948, Phibunsongkram, the wartime prime minister, returned to his previous office. However, he was caught in a power struggle between his subordinates. To preserve his power, Phibunsongkram began an anti-communist campaign to seek support from the United States. As a result, from 1950 onward, Thailand received military and economic aid from the US. The Phibunsongkram government established many state enterprises, which were seen as economic nationalism. The state (and its bureaucrats) dominated capital allocation in the kingdom. Ammar Siamwalla, one of Thailand's most prominent economists, calls it the period of \"bureaucratic capitalism\".\nPower struggle and reform (1955\u20131985).\nIn 1955, Thailand began to see a change in its economy fueled by domestic and international politics. The power struggle between the two main factions of the Phibun regime\u2014led by Police General Phao Sriyanond and General (later, Field Marshal) Sarit Thanarat\u2014increased, causing Sriyanond to unsuccessfully seek support from the US for a coup against Phibunsongkram regime. Plaek Phibunsongkram attempted to democratize his regime, seeking popular support by developing the economy. He again turned to the US, asking for economic rather than military aid. The US responded with unprecedented economic aid to the kingdom from 1955 to 1959. The Phibunsongkram government also made important changes to the country's fiscal policies, including scrapping the multiple-exchange-rate system in favor of a fixed, unified system which was in use until 1984. The government also neutralized trade and conducted secret diplomacy with the People's Republic of China (PRC), displeasing the United States.\nDespite his attempts to maintain power, Plaek Phibunsongkram was deposed (with Field Marshal Phin Choonhavan and Police General Phao Siyanon) on 16 September 1957 in a coup led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat. The Thanarat regime (in power from 1957 to 1973) maintained the course set by the Phibunsongkram regime with US support after severing all ties with the PRC and supporting US operations in Mainland Southeast Asia and the ongoing Vietnam War (1955-1975). It developed the country's infrastructure and privatized state enterprises unrelated to that infrastructure. During this period, a number of economic institutions were established, including the Bureau of Budget, the NESDC, and the Thailand Board of Investment (BOI). The National Economic and Social Development Plan was implemented in 1961. During this period, the market-oriented Import-Substituting Industrialization (ISI) led to economic expansion in the kingdom during the 1960s. According to former President Richard Nixon's 1967 \"Foreign Affairs\" article, Thailand entered a period of rapid growth in 1958 (with an average growth rate of 7 percent per year).\nEconomic problems (1970\u20131984).\nFrom the 1970s to 1984, Thailand suffered from many economic problems: decreasing US investment, budget deficits, oil-price spikes, and inflation. Domestic politics were also unstable. With the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia on 25 December 1978, Thailand became the front-line state in the struggle against communism, surrounded by two communist countries and a socialist Burma under General Ne Win. Successive governments tried to solve the economic problems by promoting exports and tourism, still important for the Thai economy.\nOne of the best-known measures to deal with the economic problems of that time was implemented under General Prem Tinsulanonda's government, in power from 1980 to 1988. Between 1981 and 1984, the government devalued the national currency, the Thai baht (THB), three times. On 12 May 1981, it was devalued by 1.07 percent, from THB20.775/US$ to THB21/US$. On 15 July 1981, it was again devalued, this time by 8.7 percent (from THB21/US$ to THB23/US$). The third devaluation, on 5 November 1984, was the most significant: 15 percent, from THB23/US$ to THB27/US$. The government also replaced the country's fixed exchange rate (where it was pegged to the US dollar) with a \"multiple currency basket peg system\" in which the US dollar bore 80 percent of the weight. Calculated from the IMF's World Economic Outlook Database, in the period 1980\u20131984, the Thai economy had an average GDP growth rate of 5.4 percent.\nEconomic boom (1985\u20131997).\nConcurrent with the third devaluation of the Thai baht, on 22 September 1985, Japan, the US, the United Kingdom, France, and West Germany signed the Plaza Accord to depreciate the US dollar in relation to the yen and the Deutsche Mark. Since the dollar accounted for 80 percent of the Thai currency basket, the baht was depreciated further, making Thailand's exports more competitive and the country more attractive to foreign direct investment (FDI) (especially from Japan, whose currency had appreciated since 1985). In 1988, Prem Tinsulanonda resigned and was succeeded by Chatichai Choonhavan, the first democratically elected prime minister of Thailand since 1976. The Cambodian-Vietnamese War was ending; Vietnam gradually retreated from Cambodia by 1989, enhancing Thai economic development.\nAfter the 1984 baht devaluation and the 1985 Plaza Accord, although the public sector struggled due to fiscal constraints, the private sector grew. The country's improved foreign trade and an influx of foreign direct investment (mainly from Japan) triggered an economic boom from 1987 to 1996. Although Thailand had previously promoted its exports, during this period the country shifted from import-substitution (ISI) to export-oriented industrialization (EOI). During this decade the Thai GDP (calculated from the IMF World Economic Outlook database) had an average growth rate of 9.5 percent per year, with a peak of 13.3 percent in 1988. In the same period, the volume of Thai exports of goods and services had an average growth rate of 14.8 percent, with a peak of 26.1 percent in 1988.\nEconomic problems persisted. From 1987 to 1996, Thailand experienced a current account deficit averaging \u22125.4 percent of GDP per year, and the deficit continued to increase. In 1996, the current account deficit accounted for \u22127.887 percent of GDP (US$14.351\u00a0billion). A shortage of capital was another problem. The first Chuan Leekpai government, in office from September 1992 to May 1995, tried to solve this problem by granting Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF) licenses to Thai banks in 1993. This allowed BIBF banks to benefit from Thailand's high-interest rate by borrowing from foreign financial institutions at low interest and loaning to Thai businesses. By 1997, foreign debt had risen to US$109,276 billion (65% of which was short-term debt), while Thailand had US$38,700 billion in international reserves. Many loans were backed by real estate, creating an economic bubble. By late 1996, there was a loss of confidence in the country's financial institutions; the government closed 18 trust companies and three commercial banks. The following year, 56 financial institutions were closed by the government.\nAnother problem was foreign speculation. Aware of Thailand's economic problems and its currency basket exchange rate, foreign speculators (including hedge funds) were certain that the government would again devalue the baht, under pressure on both the spot and forward markets. In the spot market, to force devaluation, speculators took out loans in baht and made loans in dollars. In the forward market, speculators (believing that the baht would soon be devalued) bet against the currency by contracting with dealers who would give dollars in return for an agreement to repay a specific amount of baht several months in the future.\nIn the government, there was a call from Virapong Ramangkul (an economic advisor of Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh) to devalue the baht, which was supported by former Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda. Yongchaiyudh ignored them, relying on the Bank of Thailand (led by Governor Rerngchai Marakanond, who spent as much as US$24 billion \u2013 about two-thirds of Thailand's international reserves) to protect the baht. On 2 July 1997, Thailand had US$2,850 billion remaining in international reserves, and could no longer protect the baht. That day Marakanond decided to float the baht, triggering the 1997 Asian financial crisis.\nFinancial crisis (1997\u20132000).\nThe Thai economy collapsed as a result of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Within a few months, the value of the baht floated from THB25/US$ (its lowest point) to THB56/US$. The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) dropped from a peak of 1,753.73 in 1994 to a low of 207.31 in 1998. The country's GDP dropped from THB3.115 trillion at the end of 1996 to THB2.749 trillion at the end of 1998. In dollar terms, it took Thailand as long as 10 years to regain its 1996 GDP. The unemployment rate went up nearly threefold: from 1.5 percent of the labor force in 1996 to 4.4 percent in 1998.\nA sharp decrease in the value of the baht abruptly increased foreign debt, undermining financial institutions. Many were sold, in part, to foreign investors while others went bankrupt. Due to low international reserves from the Bank of Thailand's currency-protection measures, the government had to accept a loan from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Overall, Thailand received US$17.2 billion in aid.\nThe crisis impacted Thai politics. One direct effect was that Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh resigned under pressure on 6 November 1997, succeeded by opposition leader Chuan Leekpai. The second Leekpai government, in office from November 1997 to February 2001, tried to implement economic reforms based on IMF-guided neo-liberal capitalism. It pursued strict fiscal policies (keeping interest rates high and cutting government spending), enacting 11 laws it called \"bitter medicine\" and critics called \"the 11 nation-selling laws\". The Thai government and its supporters maintained that with these measures, the Thai economy improved.\nIn 1999, Thailand had a positive GDP growth rate for the first time since the crisis. Many critics, however, mistrusted the IMF and maintained that government-spending cuts harmed the recovery. Unlike economic problems in Latin America and Africa, they asserted, the Asian financial crisis was born in the private sector and the IMF measures were inappropriate. The positive growth rate in 1999 was because the country's GDP had gone down for two consecutive years, as much as \u221210.5 percent in 1998 alone. In terms of the baht, it was not until 2002 (in dollar terms, not until 2006) that Thailand would regain its 1996 GDP. An additional 1999 loan from the Miyazawa Plan made the question of whether (or to what extent) the Leekpai government helped the Thai economy controversial.\nEarly 21st century.\nAn indirect effect of the financial crisis on Thai politics was the rise of Thaksin Shinawatra. In reaction to the government's economic policies, Thaksin Shinawatra's Thai Rak Thai Party won a landslide victory over Chuan Leekpai's Democrat Party in the 2001 general election and took office in February 2001. Although weak export demand held the GDP growth rate to 2.2 percent in the first year of his administration, the first Thaksin Shinawatra government performed well from 2002 to 2004 with growth rates of 5.3, 7.1 and 6.3 percent respectively. His policy was later called Thaksinomics. During Thaksin's first term, Thailand's economy regained momentum and the country paid off its IMF debt by July 2003 (two years ahead of schedule). Despite criticism of Thaksinomics, Thaksin's party won another landslide victory over the Democrat Party in the 2005 general election. The official economic data related to Thaksinomics reveals that between 2001 and 2011, the GDP per capita of Isan, the country's large north-eastern region, more than doubled to US$1,475, while, over the same period, GDP in the Bangkok area rose from US$7,900 to nearly US$13,000. The cost of air and water pollution in Thailand is around 1.6\u20132.6% of GDP per year based on a 2004 indicator.\nThaksin's second term was less successful. The 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami caused a big human toll, damage and negatively impacted the first-quarter Thai GDP in 2005. The Yellow Shirts, a coalition of protesters against Thaksin, also emerged in 2005. In 2006, Thaksin dissolved the parliament and called for a general election. The April 2006 general election was boycotted by the main opposition parties. Thaksin's party won again, but the election was declared invalid by the Constitutional Court. Another general election, scheduled for October 2006, was cancelled. On 19 September a group of soldiers calling themselves the Council for Democratic Reform under the Constitutional Monarchy led by Sonthi Boonyaratglin organized a coup, ousting Thaksin while he was in New York City preparing for a speech at the United Nations General Assembly. During the last year of the second Thaksin government, the Thai GDP grew by 5.1 percent. Under his government, Thailand's overall ranking in the IMD Global Competitiveness Scoreboard rose from 31st in 2002 to 25th in 2005 before falling to 29th in 2006.\nAfter the coup, Thailand's economy again suffered. From the last quarter of 2006 through 2007, the country was ruled by a military junta led by General Surayud Chulanont, who was appointed prime minister in October 2006. The 2006 GDP growth rate slowed from 6.1, 5.1 and 4.8 percent year-over-year in the first three-quarters to 4.4 percent (YoY) in Q4. Thailand's ranking on the IMD Global Competitiveness Scoreboard fell from 26th in 2005 to 29th in 2006 and 33rd in 2007. Thaksin's plan for massive infrastructure investments was unmentioned until 2011, when his younger sister Yingluck Shinawatra entered office. In 2007, the Thai economy grew by 5 percent. On 23 December 2007, the military government held a general election. The pro-Thaksin People's Power Party, led by Samak Sundaravej, won a landslide victory over Abhisit Vejjajiva's Democrat Party.\nUnder the People's Power Party-led government the country fell into political turmoil. This, combined with the 2008 financial crisis cut the 2008 Thai GDP growth rate to 2.5%. Before the People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD) and the Yellow Shirts reconvened in March 2008, the GDP grew by 6.5 percent (YoY) in the first quarter of the year. Thailand's ranking on the IMD World Competitiveness Scoreboard rose from 33rd in 2007 to 27th in 2008. The Yellow Shirts occupied the Government House of Thailand in August 2008, and on 9 September the Constitutional Court delivered a decision removing Samak Sundaravej from the prime ministership.\nSomchai Wongsawat, Thaksin's brother-in-law, succeeded Samak Sundaravej as prime minister on 18 September. In the US, the 2008 financial crisis reached its peak while the Yellow Shirts were still in Government House, impeding government operations. GDP growth dropped from 5.2 percent (YoY) in Q2 2008 to 3.1 percent (YoY) and \u22124.1 percent (YoY) in Q3 and Q4. From 25 November to 3 December 2008 the Yellow Shirts, protesting Somchai Wongsawat's prime ministership, seized the two Bangkok airports, (Suvarnabhumi and Don Mueang), and damaged Thailand's image and economy. On 2 December the Thai Constitutional Court issued a decision dissolving the People's Power Party, ousting Somchai Wongsawat as prime minister.\nBy the end of 2008, a coalition government led by Abhisit Vejjajiva's Democrat Party was formed: \"[The] legitimacy of the Abhisit government has been questioned since the first day that the Democrat party took the office in 2008 as it was allegedly formed by the military in a military camp\". The government was under pressure from the 2008 financial crisis and the Red Shirts, who refused to acknowledge Abhisit Vejjajiva's prime ministry and called for new elections as soon as possible. However, Abhisit rejected the call until he dissolved the parliament for a new election in May 2011. In 2009, his first year in office, Thailand experienced a negative growth rate for the first time since the 1997 Asian financial crisis: a GDP of \u22122.3 percent.\nIn 2010, the country's growth rate increased to 7.8 percent. However, with the instability surrounding the major 2010 protests, the GDP growth of Thailand settled at around 4\u20135 percent from highs of 5\u20137 percent under the previous civilian administration\u2014political uncertainty was identified as the primary cause of a decline in investor and consumer confidence. The IMF predicted that the Thai economy would rebound strongly from the low 0.1 percent GDP growth in 2011, to 5.5 percent in 2012 and then 7.5 percent in 2013, due to the accommodating monetary policy of the Bank of Thailand, as well as a package of fiscal stimulus measures introduced by the incumbent Yingluck Shinawatra government.\nIn the first two-quarters of 2011, when the political situation was relatively calm, the Thai GDP grew by 3.2 and 2.7 percent (YoY). Under Abhisit's administration, Thailand's ranking fell from 26 in 2009, to 27 in 2010 and 2011, and the country's infrastructure declined since 2009.\nIn the 2011 general election, the pro-Thaksin Pheu Thai Party again won a decisive victory over the Democrat Party, and Thaksin's youngest sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, succeeded Abhisit as prime minister. Elected in July, the Pheu Thai Party-led government began its administration in late-August, and when Yingluck Shinawatra entered office, the 2011 Thailand floods threatened the country\u2014from 25 July 2011 to 16 January 2012, flood waters covered 65 of the country's 76 provinces. The World Bank assessed the total damage in December 2011 and reported a cost of THB1.425 trillion (about US$45.7\u00a0billion).\nThe 2011 GDP growth rate fell to 0.1 percent, with a contraction of 8.9 percent (YoY) in Q4 alone.&lt;ref name=\"Gross Domestic Product: Q2/2012\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The country's overall competitiveness ranking, according to the IMD World Competitiveness Scoreboard, fell from 27 in 2011 to 30 in 2012.\nIn 2012, Thailand was recovering from the previous year's severe flood. The Yingluck government planned to develop the country's infrastructure, ranging from a long-term water-management system to logistics. The Euro area crisis reportedly harmed Thailand's economic growth in 2012, directly and indirectly affecting the country's exports. Thailand's GDP grew by 6.5 percent, with a headline inflation rate of 3.02 percent, and a current account surplus of 0.7 percent of the country's GDP.\nOn 23 December 2013, the Thai baht dropped to a three-year low due to the political unrest during the preceding months. According to \"Bloomberg\", the Thai currency lost 4.6 percent over November and December, while the main stock index also dropped (9.1 percent).\nFollowing the Thai military coup in May 2014, Agence France Presse (AFP) published an article claiming that the nation was on the \"verge of recession\". Published on 17 June 2014, the article's main subject is the departure of nearly 180,000 Cambodians from Thailand due to fears of an immigration \"clampdown\", but concluded with information on the Thai economy's contraction of 2.1 percent quarter-on-quarter, from January to the end of March 2014.\nSince the cessation of the curfew that was enacted by the military in May 2014, the Federation of Thai Industries (FTI)'s chairman, Supant Mongkolsuthree, said that he projects growth of 2.5\u20133 percent for the Thai economy in 2014, as well as a revitalisation of the Thai tourism industry in the second half of 2014. Furthermore, Supant also cited the Board of Investment's future consideration of a backlog of investment projects, estimated at 700 billion baht, as an economically beneficial process that would occur around October 2014. Thailand's flagging economic performance led, at the end of 2015, to increased criticism of the National Council for Peace and Order's (NCPO) handling of the economy, both at home and in influential Western media. The country's economic growth of 2.8% in the first quarter of 2019 was recorded to be the slowest since 2014.\nVajiralongkorn era (2016\u2013present).\nThe military government unveiled its newest economic initiative, \"Thailand 4.0\", in 2016. Thailand 4.0 is the \"...master plan to free Thailand from the middle-income trap, making it a high-income nation in five years.\"\nThe government narrative describes Thailand 1.0 as the agrarian economy of Thailand decades ago. Thailand 1.0 gave way to Thailand 2.0, when the nation's economy moved on to light industry, textiles, and food processing. Thailand 3.0 describes the present day, with heavy industry and energy accounting for up to 70 percent of the Thai GDP. Thailand 4.0 is described as an economy driven by high tech industries and innovation that will lead to the production of value-added products and services. According to General Prayut Chan-o-cha, the prime minister, Thailand 4.0 is composed of three elements: 1. Make Thailand a high-income nation, 2. Make Thailand a more inclusive society, and 3. Focus on sustainable growth and development.\nCritics of Thailand 4.0 point out that Thailand lacks the specialists and experts, especially in high-technology, needed to modernise the Thai industry. \"...the government will have to allow the import of foreign specialists to help bring forward Thailand 4.0,\" said Dr. Somchai Jitsuchon, research director for inclusive development at the Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI). \"...that won't be easy as local professional associations will oppose the idea as they want to reserve those professional careers for Thais only\". He went on to point out that only 56 percent of Thailand's population has access to the Internet, an obstacle to the creation of a high-tech workforce. A major thrust of Thailand 4.0 is encouraging a move to industrial robot manufacturing. However, Thailand's membership in the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), makes cheap workers from neighbouring countries even more readily available, which will make it harder to make the economic case to switch to robots. Somchai also pointed out that the bureaucratic nature of the Thai government will make realisation of Thailand 4.0 difficult. Every action plan calls for results from several ministries, \"all of which are big, clumsily-run organisations\" slow to perform.\nIn September 2020, the World Bank Group forecasted that the Thai economy would contract 8.9% by the end of the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Thai government reduced the jet fuel tax between April 2020 and June 2023.\nIn August 2024, the dismissal of Thai Prime Minister Srettha Thavisin exacerbated Thailand's economic difficulties, impeding the implementation of significant financial measures. This political upheaval intensified existing issues such as high household debt and economic stagnation, further undermining investor confidence and economic stability.\nMacroeconomic trends.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation under 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOver the past 32 years, the economy of Thailand has expanded. The GDP at current prices shows that from 1980 to 2012 the Thai economy has expanded nearly sixteen-fold when measured in baht, or nearly eleven-fold when measured in dollars. This makes Thailand the 32nd-biggest economy in the world, according to the IMF. With regard to GDP, Thailand has undergone five periods of economic growth. From 1980 to 1984, the economy has grown by an average of 5.4 percent per year. Regional businesses account for 70 percent of GDP, with Bangkok contributing 30 percent.\nAfter the 1984 baht devaluation and the 1985 Plaza Accord, a significant amount of foreign direct investment (mainly from Japan) raised the average growth rate per year to 8.8 percent from 1985 to 1996 before slumping to \u22125.9 percent per year from 1997 to 1998. From 1999 to 2006, Thailand averaged a growth rate of 5.0% per year. Since 2007, the country has faced a number of challenges: a military coup in late 2006, political turmoil from 2008 to 2011, the 2008 financial crisis, floods in 2010 and 2011, and the Euro area crisis. As a result, from 2007 to 2012 the average GDP growth rate was 3.25% per year.\nAccording to the IMF, in 2012 Thailand ranked 92nd in the world in its nominal GDP per capita.\nPoverty and inequality.\nThe number of Thailand's poor declined from 7.1 million people in 2014 (10.5 percent of the population), to 4.9 million people in 2015 (7.2 percent of the population). Thailand's 2014 poverty line was defined as an income of 2,647 baht per month. For 2015 it was 2,644 baht per month. According to the NESDC in a report entitled, \"Poverty and Inequality in Thailand\", the country's growth in 2014 was 0.8 percent and 2.8 percent in 2015. NESDC Secretary-General Porametee Vimolsiri said that the growth was due to the effect of governmental policies. The report also noted that 10 percent of the Thai population earned 35 percent of Thailand's aggregate income and owned 61.5 percent of its land.\nThailand was ranked as the world's third most unequal nation, behind Russia and India, in the Credit Suisse \"Global Wealth Databook 2016\" (companion volume to the \"Global Wealth Report 2016\"), with one percent of the Thai population estimated to own 58 percent of Thailand's wealth.\nIndustries.\nSMEs.\nVirtually all of Thailand's firms, 99.7 percent, or 2.7 million enterprises, are classified as small or medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). As of 2017[ [update]], SMEs account for 80.3 percent (13 million) of Thailand's total employment. Despite the large number of SMEs, their contribution to the nation's GDP decreased from 41.3 percent of GDP in 2002 to 37.4 percent in 2013. Their declining contribution is reflected in their turnover rate: seventy percent fail within \"...a few years\".\nAgriculture, forestry and fishing.\nDevelopments in agriculture since the 1960s have supported Thailand's transition to an industrialised economy. As recently as 1980, agriculture supplied 70 percent of employment. In 2008, agriculture, forestry and fishing contributed 8.4 percent to GDP; in rural areas, farm jobs supply half of employment. Rice is the most important crop in the country and Thailand had long been the world's number one exporter of rice, until recently falling behind both India and Vietnam. It is a major exporter of shrimp. Other crops include coconuts, corn, rubber, soybeans, sugarcane and tapioca.\nThailand is the world's third-largest seafood exporter. Overall fish exports were worth around US$3 billion in 2014, according to the Thai Frozen Foods Association. Thailand's fishing industry employs more than 300,000 persons.\nIn 1985, Thailand designated 25 percent of its land area for forest protection and 15 percent for timber production. Forests have been set aside for conservation and recreation, and timber forests are available for the forestry industry. Between 1992 and 2001, exports of logs and sawn timber increased from 50,000 to 2,000,000 cubic meters per year.\nThe regional avian-flu outbreak contracted Thailand's agricultural sector in 2004, and the tsunami of 26 December devastated the Andaman Sea fishing industry. In 2005 and 2006, agricultural GDP was reported to have contracted by 10 percent.\nThailand is the world's second-largest exporter of gypsum (after Canada), although government policy limits gypsum exports to support prices. In 2003 Thailand produced more than 40 different minerals, with an annual value of about US$740 million. In September 2003, to encourage foreign investment in mining the government relaxed its restrictions on mining by foreign companies and reduced mineral royalties owed to the state.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nIn 2007 industry contributed 43.9 percent of GDP, employing 14 percent of the workforce. Industry expanded at an average annual rate of 3.4 percent from 1995 to 2005. The most important sub-sector of industry is manufacturing, which accounted for 34.5 percent of GDP in 2004.\nElectrical and electronics.\nElectrical and electronics (E&amp;E) equipment is Thailand's largest export sector, amounting to about 15 percent of total exports. In 2014 Thailand's E&amp;E exports totaled US$55 billion. The E&amp;E sector employed approximately 780,000 workers in 2015, representing 12.2 per cent of the total employment in manufacturing.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], Thailand is the largest exporter of computers and computer components in ASEAN. Thailand is the world's second-biggest maker of hard disk drives (HDDs) after China, with Western Digital and Seagate Technology among the biggest producers. But problems may loom for Thailand's high-tech sector. In January 2015, the country's manufacturing index fell for the 22nd consecutive month, with production of goods like televisions and radios down 38 percent year-on-year. Manufacturers are relocating to nations where labour is cheaper than in Thailand. In April 2015, production will cease at an LG Electronics factory in Rayong Province. Production is being moved to Vietnam, where labour costs per day are US$6.35 versus US$9.14 in Thailand. Samsung Electronics will site two large smartphone factories in Vietnam. It made around US$11 billion worth of investment pledges to the Vietnamese economy in 2014. As technologies evolve, e.g., as HDDs are replaced by solid-state drives (SSDs), manufacturers are reexamining where best to produce these latest technologies. In addition, 74 percent of salaried workers in the sector face a high risk of being replaced by robots, as these positions consist of \"repetitive, non-cognitive tasks\".\nAutomotive.\nThailand is the ASEAN leader in automotive production and sales. The sector employed approximately 417,000 workers in 2015, representing 6.5 per cent of total employment across all manufacturing industries and accounting for roughly 10 percent of the country's GDP. In 2014, Thailand exported US$25.8 billion in automotive goods. As many as 73 percent of automotive sector workers in Thailand face a high risk of job loss due to automation.\n\"Source: Federation of Thai Industries\"\nGems and jewelry.\nGem and jewelry exports are Thailand's third-largest export category by value, trailing automotive and parts and computer components. In 2019, gem and jewelry exports, including gold, exceeded US$15.7 billion, up 30.3% from 2018 (486 billion baht, up 26.6%). Key export markets included ASEAN, India, the Middle East, and Hong Kong. The industry employs more than 700,000 workers according to the Gem and Jewelry Institute of Thailand (GIT).\nEnergy.\nThailand's 2004 energy consumption was estimated at 3.4\u00a0quadrillion British thermal units, representing about 0.7 percent of total world energy consumption. Thailand is a net importer of oil and natural gas; however, the government is promoting ethanol to reduce imports of petroleum and the gasoline additive methyl tertiary butyl ether.\nIn 2005 Thailand's daily oil consumption of exceeded its production of . Thailand's four oil refineries have a combined capacity of . The government is considering a regional oil-processing and transportation hub serving south-central China. In 2004, Thailand's natural-gas consumption of exceeded its production of .\nThailand's 2004 estimated coal consumption of 30.4\u00a0million short tons exceeded its production of 22.1 million. As of January 2007, proven oil reserves totaled and proven natural-gas reserves were . In 2003, recoverable coal reserves totalled 1,493\u00a0million short tons.\nIn 2005, Thailand used about 118 billion kilowatt hours of electricity. Consumption rose by 4.7 percent in 2006, to 133 billion kWh. According to the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (the national electricity utility), power consumption by residential users is increasing due to more favorable rates for residential customers than for the industry and business sectors. Thailand's electric utility and petroleum companies (also state-controlled) are being restructured.\nServices.\nIn 2007 the service sector (which includes tourism, banking and finance), contributed 44.7 percent of GDP and employed 37 percent of the workforce. Thailand's service industry is competitive, contributing to its export growth.\nBanking and finance.\nDangerous levels of non-performing assets at Thai banks helped trigger an attack on the baht by currency speculators which led to the Asian financial crisis in 1997\u20131998. By 2003, nonperforming assets had been cut in half (to about 30 percent).\nDespite a return to profitability, Thailand's banks continue to struggle with unrealized losses and inadequate capital. The government is considering reforms, including an integrated financial regulatory agency which would enable the Bank of Thailand to focus on monetary policy. In addition, the government is attempting to strengthen the financial sector through the consolidation of commercial, state- and foreign-owned institutions. The 2004 Financial Sector Reform Master Plan provides tax breaks to financial institutions engaging in mergers and acquisitions. The reform program has been deemed successful by outside experts. In 2007 there were three state-owned commercial banks, five state-owned specialized banks, fifteen Thai commercial banks, and seventeen foreign banks in Thailand.\nThe Bank of Thailand sought to stem the flow of foreign funds into the country in December 2006, leading to the largest one-day drop in stock prices on the Stock Exchange of Thailand since the 1997 Asian financial crisis. The sell-off by foreign investors amounted to more than US$708\u00a0million.\nIn 2019, the Bank of Thailand kept its benchmark interest rate unchanged for a fourth straight meeting, with the concerns of high household debt and financial stability risks.\nRetail.\nRetail employs more than 6 million Thai workers. Most are employed by small businesses. Large multinational and national retail players (such as Lotus's, 7-Eleven, Siam Makro, Big C, Villa Market, Central Group and The Mall Group) are estimated to employ fewer than 400,000 workers. This accounts for less than seven percent of Thailand's total employment in retail.\nTourism.\nIn 2016, tourism revenue, 2.53 trillion baht, accounted for 17.7 percent of Thailand's GDP, up from 16.7 percent in 2015. It is expected to generate 2.71 trillion baht in 2017. The global average for GDP contribution from tourism is nine percent.\nCryptocurrencies\nThailand's Ministry of Finance approved four licensed brokers and dealers of cryptocurrencies in the country: Bx, Bitkub, Coins and Satang Pro. The country still did not elaborated regulation for ICOs, though it announced in late 2018 to loosen the rules.\nLabour.\nThailand's labour force has been estimated at from 36.8 million employed (of 55.6 million adults of working age) to 38.3\u00a0million (1Q2016). About 49 percent were employed in agriculture, 37 percent in the service sector and 14 percent in industry. In 2005 women constituted 48 percent of the labour force, and held an increased share of professional jobs. Thailand's unemployment rate was 0.9 percent as of 2014, down from two percent in 2004. A World Bank survey showed that 83.5 percent of the Thai workforce is unskilled.\nA joint study by the Quality Learning Foundation (QLF), Dhurakij Pundit University (DPU), and the World Bank suggests that 12 million Thais may lose their jobs to automation over the next 20 years, wiping out one-third of the positions in the workforce. The World Bank estimates that Thai workers are two times and five times less productive than Malaysian and Singaporean workers respectively. The report assesses the average output of Thai workers at US$25,000 (879,200 baht) in 2014 compared to Malaysia's US$50,000 and US$122,000 for Singapore. A 2016 report by the International Labor Office (ILO) estimates that over 70 percent of Thai workers are in danger of being displaced by automation. Factories in Thailand are estimated to be adding from 2,500 to 4,500 industrial robots per year.\nIn fiscal year 2015, 71,000 Thais worked abroad in foreign countries. Taiwan employed the most Thai employees overall with 59,220 persons, followed by South Korea at 24,228, Israel at 23,479, Singapore at 20,000, and the UAE at 14,000. Most employees work in metal production, agriculture, textile manufacturing, and electronic part manufacturing fields. As of 2020, Thai migrant labourers overseas generate remittances worth 140 billion baht.\nThe number of migrant workers in Thailand is unknown. The official number\u20141,339,834 registered migrant workers from Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar\u2014reported by the Office of Foreign Workers Administration under the Ministry of Labour, represents only legal migrant workers. Many more are presumed to be non-registered or illegal migrants. The Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI) estimates that there may yet be more illegal migrant workers than legal ones in Thailand.\nForeign trade.\nChina has replaced the United States as Thailand's largest export market while the latter still holds its position as its second-largest supplier (after Japan). While Thailand's traditional major markets have been North America, Japan, and Europe, economic recovery in Thailand's regional trading partners has helped Thai export growth.\nAs of 2022, China is Thailand's largest trading partner with 3.69 trillion baht ($106 billion) worth of trade, accounting for almost 20% of all Thai foreign trade. In 2022, China also became the largest foreign investor in Thailand, totaling 77.4 billion baht, more than Japan and USA.\nRecovery from financial crisis depended heavily on increased exports to the rest of Asia and the United States. Since 2005 the increase in export of automobiles from Japanese manufacturers (particularly Toyota, Nissan and Isuzu) has helped improve the trade balance, with over one million cars produced annually since then. Thailand has joined the ranks of the world's top ten automobile-exporting nations.\nMachinery and parts, vehicles, integrated circuits, chemicals, crude oil, fuels, iron and steel are among Thailand's principal imports. The increase in imports reflects a need to fuel production of high-tech items and vehicles.\nThailand is a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Cairns Group of agricultural exporters and the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), and has pursued free-trade agreements. A China-Thailand Free Trade Agreement (FTA) began in October 2003. This agreement was limited to agricultural products, with a more comprehensive FTA planned to be signed by 2010. Thailand also has a limited free-trade agreement with India (since 2003) and a comprehensive Australia-Thailand Free Trade Agreement, which began on 1 January 2005.\nThailand began free trade negotiations with Japan in February 2004, and an in-principle agreement was agreed to in September 2005. Negotiations for a US-Thailand free trade agreement have been underway, with a fifth round of meetings held in November 2005.\nSeveral industries are restricted to foreign investment by the 1999 Foreign Business Act. These industries include media, agriculture, distribution of land, professional services, tourism, hotels, and construction. Share ownership of companies engaged in these activities must be limited to a 49 percent minority stake. The 1966 US-Thailand Treaty of Amity and Economic Relations provides exemption of these restrictions for shareholders with United States citizenship.\nThe Bangkok area is one of the most prosperous parts of Thailand and heavily dominates the national economy, with the infertile northeast being the poorest. A concern of successive Thai governments, and a focus of the recently ousted Thaksin government, has been to reduce the regional disparities which have been exacerbated by rapid economic growth in Bangkok and financial crisis.\nAlthough little economic investment reaches other parts of the country except for tourist zones, the government has stimulated provincial economic growth in the eastern seaboard and the Chiang Mai area. Despite talk of other regional development, these three regions and other tourist zones still dominate the national economy.\nAlthough some US rights holders report good cooperation with Thai enforcement authorities (including the Royal Thai Police and Royal Thai Customs), Thailand remained on the priority watch list in 2012. The United States is encouraged that Thailand's government has affirmed its commitment to improving IPR protection and enforcement, but more must be done for Thailand to be removed from the list.\nAlthough the economy has grown moderately since 1999, future performance depends on continued reform of the financial sector, corporate-debt restructuring, attracting foreign investment and increasing exports. Telecommunications, roads, electricity generation and ports showed increasing strain during the period of sustained economic growth. Thailand is experiencing a growing shortage of engineers and skilled technical personnel.\nMajor Trade Partners.\nThe following table shows the largest trading partners for Thailand in 2021 by total trade value in billions of USD.\nRegional economies.\nIsan.\nThe economy of Isan is dominated by agriculture, although output is poor and this sector is decreasing in importance at the expense of trade and the service sector. Most of the population is poor and badly educated. Many labourers have been driven by poverty to seek work in other parts of Thailand or abroad.\nAlthough Isan accounts for around a third of Thailand's population and a third of its area, it produces only 8.9 percent of GDP. Its economy grew at 6.2 percent per annum during the 1990s.\nIn 1995, 28 percent of the population was classed as below the poverty line, compared to just 7 percent in central Thailand. In 2000, per capita income was 26,317 baht, compared to 208,434 in Bangkok. Even within Isan, there is a rural/urban divide. In 1995, all of Thailand's ten poorest provinces were in Isan, the poorest being Sisaket. However, most wealth and investment is concentrated in the four major cities of Khorat, Ubon, Udon, and Khon Kaen. These four provinces account for 40 percent of the region's population.\nSpecial Economic Zones (SEZ).\nIn his televised national address on 23 January 2015 in the program \"Return Happiness to the People\", Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha addressed the government's policy on the establishment of special economic zones.\nHe said that the policy would promote connectivity and regional economic development on a sustainable basis. There are currently 10 SEZs in Thailand, with trade and investment valued at almost 800 billion baht a year.\nIn 2014, the government launched a pilot project to set up six special economic zones in five provinces: Tak, Mukdahan, Sa Kaeo, Songkhla, and Trat. In the second phase, which is expected to begin in 2016, seven special economic zones will be established in another five provinces: Chiang Rai, Kanchanaburi, Nong Khai, Nakhon Phanom, and Narathiwat.\nIn early 2015, the government approved an infrastructure development plan in special economic zones. In 2015, the plan includes 45 projects, budgeted at 2.6 billion baht. Another 79 projects, worth 7.9 billion baht, will be carried out in 2016. Relying on a mix of government revenue, bond sales, and other funding, Prayut plans to spend US$83 billion over seven years on new railways, roads, and customs posts to establish cross-border trade routes. The idea is to link some 2.4 billion consumers in China and India with Asia's newest economic grouping, the ASEAN Economic Community, of which Thailand is a member.\nCritics of the SEZs maintain that free trade agreements and SEZs are incompatible with the principles of the late-King Bhumibol's sufficiency economy, claimed by the government to be the inspiration for governmental economic and social policies.\nShadow economy.\n\"Thailand's shadow economy ranks globally among the highest,\" according to Friedrich Schneider, an economist at Johannes Kepler University Linz in Austria, author of \"Hiding in the Shadows: The Growth of the Underground Economy\". He estimates that Thailand's shadow economy accounted for about 40.9 percent of official GDP in 2014, a figure that includes gambling and small-arms trafficking, but largely excludes narcotics. Schneider defines the shadow economy as market-based legal production that is intentionally concealed to avoid taxes, social-security payments, labour standards or administrative rules. His definition excludes purely illegal activities such as robbery, burglary or drug trafficking. The shadow economy also encompasses widespread loan sharking. Government studies estimate around 200 000 informal lenders operate nationwide, many charging interest rates that place a heavy burden on low-income borrowers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30134", "revid": "1317838930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30134", "title": "Telecommunications in Thailand", "text": "Modern telecommunications in Thailand began in 1875 with the deployment of the first telegraph service. Historically, the development of telecommunication networks in Thailand were in the hands of the public sector. Government organisations were established to provide telegraph, telephone, radio, and television services, and other government agencies, especially the military, still control a large estate of radio and television spectra. Private telecommunication operators initially acquired concession agreements with state enterprises. For mobile phone services, all the concessions have been amended by successive government to last 25 years have gradually ended in 2015. For other services, the concession terms and conditions vary, ranging from one to fifteen years. Nearly all of the concessions are build-operate-transfer (BTO) contracts. The private investor has to build all the required facilities and transfer them to the state before they can operate or offer services to public.\nLiberalisation took place in the 1990s and 2000s. State enterprises, the Telephone Organization of Thailand, Communications Authority of Thailand, and Mass Communication Organization of Thailand, were corporatised in 2003 and 2004. The Constitution of 1997 prompted the institutional changes when it declared that all the spectrum is a \"national communication resource for public welfare\". The 1997 Constitution further requires the establishment of \"an independent regulator\" who shall be authorized to allocate spectra and monitor and regulate communications in Thailand. In 1998, to comply with the constitutional mandate, the parliament passed a law establishing two independent regulators, the National Telecommunication Commission (NTC) and the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC). The regulatory practice began in Thailand when the NTC was appointed by the king through the complex nomination procedure in 2005. The inception of NTC automatically terminates and transfers all power and authority in telecommunication sector from the Post and Telegraph Department (PTD) to the newly established independent commission.\nIn September 2006, the military wrested control from a civilian government and merged the telecommunications and broadcasting regulators into a convergence regulator. The task had not been completed when a civilian government came into power and introduced the new bill. The new law dubbed the \"Act on Spectrum Allocation Authority, Regulatory &amp; Control over Radio &amp; TV Broadcast and Telecommunications of 2010\" (\"aka\" NRA Act of 2010), eliminated the NTC and created a new \"convergence regulator\" to manage both telecommunications and broadcast in Thailand. The new law also requires that the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission which was established in 2010 as an independent regulator, must allocate all commercial spectrum licenses via auction. In 2012, in order to license the 3G spectrum and services, the Telecom Commission (TC) hosted a spectrum auction which resulted in three new licenses for 2.1\u00a0GHz to three incumbents (AIS, True, and DTAC). In 2013, the Broadcast Commission (BC) auctioned 42 new DTTV licenses. Both auctions together earned record sums for money paid to the public sector via auction. Later the record was beaten by another auction by sister agency, the Broadcast Commission who launched the DTTV auction in December 2013. The NBTC Act in force then allowed NBTC to keep the proceeds of the DTTV auction. But when the military took over the country, it amended the NBTC Act to require return of auction proceeds to the treasury.\nOn 22 May 2014 when the coup d'\u00e9tat took place, the military decided that it would scrutinize the regulatory practices of both sectors. The government, led by General Prayut Chan-o-cha, announced that his government would move Thailand into the \"digital economy\" and would transform the Ministry of Information and Telecommunications into a Digital Economy Ministry. NBTC reform would be a part of the plan. In June 2014, the junta issued two new orders demanding that a) all the proceeds from spectrum auctions must be returned to the public purse and, b) all community radio stations must comply with a new junta order which would require examination and investigation of compliance before offering programming to the public. Temporary licenses were issued in September 2014 to compliant radio stations that signed voluntary memoranda of understanding (MOU) as \"a condition precedent\" to be able to broadcast while awaiting more thorough vetting from BC before issuance of the \"de jur\u00e9\" license. The time required to an investigation was ambiguous. New community radio licenses must be in compliance with a junta order that supersedes the Radio and Television Act of 2008.\nThe mobile network market is dominated by three large operators who have a market penetration rate of 100 percent. All main mobile operators now utilise GSM/3GPP family technologies including GSM, EDGE, UMTS, and LTE. Thailand has six analogue terrestrial television channels, and 24 commercial digital terrestrial channels began broadcasting in 2014.\nUnder the Trade Competition Act 2017, which became effective in October 2017, the trade competition authority relinquished its authority to regulate specific sectors including broadcasting and telecommunications businesses. In other words, since the Trade Competition Act 2017 became effective, the broadcasting and telecom sectors that used to be regulated by specific legislation on trade competition have been exempted from complying with general competition laws and are only subject to sectoral regulations on competition. However, although the Trade Competition Act (\u201cTCA\u201d) BE 2560 (2017), states that the TCA does not apply to sectors that have specific legislation (i.e.: Banking, Broadcasting and Telecom), the Telecommunications Business Act (\u201cTBA\u201d) B.E. 2544 (2001) \u2013 Section 21 states: \u201cIn the telecommunications business operation, \"other than being subject to the law on trade competition\"\u2026\u201d. Therefore, a merger in the telecom sector for example, would be under both acts and authorities, because the specific legislation (The Telecommunications Business Act) points back to the law on trade competition.\nTelephone.\nFixed-line.\nThere are three fixed-line telephone operators in Thailand: state-owned TOT Public Company Limited (now known as National Telecom (NT)), True Corporation, and TT&amp;T (Currently name \"3BB\"). As of 2014, there were 5,687,038 fixed-line subscriptions. That number has been in decline since 2008.\nThe first fixed-line telephone system was installed in Thailand (Siam) under the Ministry of Defence in 1881, and later its operation was transferred to the Post and Telegraph Department. The Telephone Organization of Thailand (TOT) was established in 1954 to manage the telephone system.\nThe penetration of telephone remained relatively limited for most of the 20th century. In 1992, the ratio of telephone lines per population was 3.3 lines per 100 population. In 1991, two private corporations were given concessions to build and operate telephone lines: Telecom-Asia (later renamed True Corporation) for the Bangkok Metropolitan Region and Thai Telephone &amp; Telecommunications (TT&amp;T) for the provinces.\nMobile networks.\nAs of 2014, there were 97.6 million mobile subscribers in Thailand, a penetration rate of 146 percent of the total population. The Thai market is predominantly prepaid with 84.8 million prepaid subscribers. More than 99 percent of the market share belongs to three large operators (including their subsidiaries): Advanced Info Service (AIS), 46.52 percent market share, DTAC, 28.50 percent market share, and Truemove, 24.26 percent. Other operators include the state enterprises TOT Public Company Limited (TOT) with 0.57 percent market share, and CAT Telecom with 0.15 percent market share and Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs).\nIn 1980s and 1990s, private mobile operators were given concessions from TOT and CAT. TOT and CAT were corporatised in 2002\u20132003, and the Thai telecommunications landscape transitioned towards spectrum allocation by independent regulator. The 2007 constitution and the \"Act on Organization to Assign Radio Frequency and to Regulate the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Services\" include the provisions that a national independent regulator is established and frequencies for commercial activities must be allocated via auction. The first successful spectrum auction by the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission was organised in 2012, allocating 45\u00a0MHz of IMT (2100) frequency band to three mobile phone operators.\nLegislation that governs the Mobile networks includes the Act on the Organisation to Assign Radio Frequency and to Regulate Broadcasting and Telecommunications Services 2010 (the NBTC Act) and the Telecommunications Business Act 2001 (the Telecommunications Business Act). Additionally, any operator wishing to issue telephone numbers shall obtain a separate licence from the NBTC, subject to a Telecommunications Numbering Plan issued by the NBTC.\nIn 2015 the NBTC arranged two rounds of auctions for 1800\u00a0MHz and 900Mhz. In November, Advance Info Service and True Corporation won the 1800\u00a0MHz license in the auction which takes nearly 33 hours to complete. In December, True Corporation and Jasmine International won the 900\u00a0MHz auction. The significance of this auction is the establishment of Jasmine International in the telecommunication business which didn't have a new player for many years. There are many rumours following this auction questioning Jasmine International on its ability to pay the license fee to NBTC.\nIn 2017, the number of mobile subscribers has reached 121.53 million, and in 2018 has already reached 125.6 million. To purchase a SIM card in Thailand, it is necessary to present an ID to register.\nAt the end of 2021, the total number of mobile subscriptions in Thailand was 99.4 million, representing a mobile penetration rate of 150 percent of the total population. More than 96.5 percent of the total market share belongs to three large operators (including their subsidiaries): Advanced Info Service (AIS), 44.38 percent market share, Truemove, 32.44 percent and DTAC, 19.68 percent market share. Other operators include the state enterprises National Telecom (NT) with 3.45 percent market share, and mobile virtual network operators (MVNO) with 0.05 percent market share, resulting in a (HHI) of 3,421\nOn November 22, 2021, Telenor and Charoen Pokphand Group, officially announced they have agreed to explore a USD 8.6 billion merger plan between Thailand\u2019s second and third largest telecom operators (by subscribers), True Corporation (TRUE) and Total Access Communication (DTAC) \u2013 The proposed merger is subject to regulatory approvals. The merger was \"acknowledged\" by the regulator NBTC at a meeting on October 20, 2022. The newly merged company still retain the True Corporation name, which was founded on March 1, 2023 and it was listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand under the stock ticker symbol TRUE on March 3, 2023.\nMobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO).\nAs of July 2025, Thailand's Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) sector has effectively ceased operations, with all MVNOs having ceased their service. This outcome is attributed to the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC)'s spectrum auctions and the persistent lack of wholesale network access from the dominant Mobile Network Operators (MNOs), AIS and the merged TRUE/DTAC. \nThe situation was exacerbated by the NBTC's 2025 spectrum auction. National Telecom (NT), which served as the only host for MVNOs, saw its allocated spectrum significantly reduced as its right to use the 850MHz, 2100MHz, and 2300MHz bands expired in August 2025. This development directly led to the termination of services for MVNOs that relied on NT's infrastructure. \nDespite a regulatory mandate requiring MNOs to allocate at least 10% of their network capacity for MVNAs/MVNOs since 2013, critics allege that the NBTC has neglected its duty and has not enforced this provision, thereby preventing MVNOs from securing fair and reasonable wholesale agreements with AIS and TRUE/DTAC. \nConsequently, all remaining MVNOs, including Feels Telecom (https://), Infinite SIM (https://), Penguin SIM (Whitespace) (https://), and i-Kool (Loxley) (http://), officially announced the termination of their services, citing the expiration of contracts with NT and the inability to establish viable alternative agreements with other MNOs. \nCritics contend that the NBTC's regulatory approach has inadvertently fostered a duopoly, severely limiting competition and consumer choice in the Thai mobile market. The Thailand Consumer Council has also raised concerns, questioning the impact of the spectrum auction on MVNOs and advocating for stronger regulatory oversight.\nMobile Virtual Network Aggregator (MVNA) / Mobile Virtual Network Enabler (MVNE).\nThe National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC), has awarded a Type 1 Mobile Virtual Network Aggregator (MVNA) license to the MVNA and Mobile virtual network enabler (MVNE) company https://\nNumbering.\nFixed-line telephone numbers have nine digits, while mobile numbers have ten digits, both including the trunk prefix \"0\".\nRadio.\nThere are 13.96 million radios in use (1997). But there were some cases like in this year (2015), expecting there will be more than 25 million radios are in use as of now.\nTelevision.\nBefore the transition to digital terrestrial television, there were six free-to-air analogue terrestrial television stations in Thailand:\nThe transition to digital terrestrial television began in 2014. The National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission arranged an auction for commercial television licenses in December 2013. The spectrum are allocated to four groups of commercial television services: seven high-definition general licenses, seven standard-definition general licenses, seven news station licenses, and four children-and-family licenses. In addition, spectrum are allocated for 12 national public services channels and 12 regional community channels. The commercial licensees began experimental broadcasts on 1 April 2014.\nSubmarine cables.\nThere are five submarine cables used for communications landing in Thailand. Thailand has cable landing points in Satun, Petchaburi and Chonburi.\nThe Asia-America Gateway (AAG) is under construction and is in service since November 2009.\nThe Asia Pacific Gateway (APG), a new submarine cable, is under planning stage and is expected to be operational in Q3 2014.\nSatellite.\nThaicom is the name of a series of communications satellites operated out of Thailand and the name Thaicom Public Company Limited, which is the company that owns and operates the Thaicom satellite fleet and other telecommunication businesses in Thailand and throughout the Asia-Pacific.\nThe official name of satellite project known as THAICOM named by His Majesty the King Bhumibol Adulyadej, as a symbol of the linkage between Thailand and modern communications technology.\nThailand-based Shinawatra Computer and Communications Co. Ltd. (now InTouch Group) signed a US$100 million contract with Hughes Space and Communications Company Ltd. in 1991 to launch Thailand's first satellite communications project. The first Thaicom satellite was launched on December 17, 1993. This satellite carried 12 C-band transponders covering a region from Japan to Singapore. Thaksin Shinawatra sold Shin Corporation, which owns 41% of Thaicom Public Company Limited.\nTelecommunications regulatory environment in Thailand.\nNational Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC)\nThe NRA Organization Act of 2010 established the new National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) in December 2010 as a single converged regulator for the telecoms and broadcasting sectors in Thailand.\nThe Telecommunications Business Act of 2001 laid down the rules for Thailand's telecommunications industry by requiring telecoms operators to obtain a license from the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC). The Act classifies telecommunication licenses into three categories. \nThe 2001 Act was amended in 2006 under the supervision of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra to allow foreigners to own a larger holding in a Thai telecommunications business.\nIn 2001, foreigners were not permitted to apply for type-two or type-three licenses under Thailand's Foreign Business Act (FBA).\nThe applicant applying for type two and type three licenses must be organizations where Thai nationals hold at least 75% shares and at least three quarters of the applicant's firm directors and the person authorized to sign any binding commitments as a representation of the applicant firm must be Thai nationals.\nThe 2006 amendments repealed all the additional requirements of an applicant of type-two and type-three licenses, stating foreigners can now hold up to 49% in a telecommunications operator of type-two or type-three; no restrictions on the number of their foreign directors\u2019 representation; and the authorized person signing binding commitments as a representation of the applicant firm can be a foreigner.\nThe telecoms license fee is composed of three types of fees - permission for license, renewal and an annual fee.\nAs of June 2013 the NBTC has granted 186 telecoms licensees, listed as follows: \nAs of December 2018 the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) had issued 58 MVNO licenses, however only 9 had launched.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30135", "revid": "5941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30135", "title": "Transport in Thailand", "text": "Transport in Thailand is varied, with no one dominant means of transport. For long-distance travel, bus transport dominates. Low-speed rail travel has long been a rural long-distance transport mechanism, though plans are underway to expand services with high-speed rail lines extending to several major regions of Thailand. Road transportation is the primary form of freight transport across the country.\nFor short trips motorbikes are common. There are public motorcycle taxis in Bangkok, Pattaya, and other large cities. An overwhelming number of taxis can also be found in Bangkok. Since the country's first rapid rail transit line opened in 1999 in Bangkok, daily ridership on Bangkok's various transit lines has risen to over 800,000, with multiple additional lines either under construction or being proposed.\nPrivate automobiles, whose rapid growth contributed to Bangkok's notorious traffic congestion over the past two decades, have risen in popularity, especially among tourists, expats, the upper class, and the growing middle class. A motorway network across Thailand has been gradually implemented, with motorways completed in Bangkok and most of central Thailand.\nDomestic air transport, which had been dominated by a select few air carriers, saw a surge in popularity since 2010 due in large part to the expanding services of low-cost carriers such as Thai Air Asia and Nok Air.\nAreas with navigable waterways often have boats or boat service, and many innovative means of transport exist such as tuk-tuk, vanpool, songthaew, and even elephants in rural areas.\nRail transport.\nThe State Railway of Thailand (SRT) operates all of Thailand's national rail lines. Krung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal is the main terminus of all routes, replacing the former main station, Bangkok Railway Station (Hua Lamphong Station), in 2023. Phahonyothin and ICD Lat Krabang are the main freight terminals.\nAs of 2025[ [update]] SRT had of track, all of it meter gauge except the Airport Link. Nearly all is single-track (2702.1\u00a0km), although some important sections around Bangkok are double () or triple-tracked () and there are plans to extend this. By comparison, Thailand has 390,000\u00a0km (242,335 miles) of highways.\nThe SRT has long been perceived by the public as inefficient and resistant to change. Trains are usually late, and most of its equipment is old and poorly maintained. The worst financially performing state enterprise, the SRT consistently operates at a loss despite being endowed with large amounts of property and receiving large government budgets; it reported a preliminary loss of 7.58 billion baht in 2010. Recurring government attempts at restructuring and/or privatization throughout the 2000s have always been strongly opposed by the union and have not made any progress.\nThere are two active rail links to adjacent countries. The line to Malaysia uses the same gauge, as does the line to Laos across the Mekong River on the First Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge. The line to Cambodia is currently disused and is being rebuilt, while the line to Myanmar is defunct (see Death Railway). A projected extension will rebuild the route and in 2011 a link was also proposed from Kanchanaburi to Port Dawei.\nRail transport in Bangkok includes long-distance services, and some daily commuter trains running from and to the outskirts of the city during the rush hour, but passenger numbers have remained low. There are also three rapid transit rail systems in the capital.\nRail rapid transit systems.\nBangkok Metropolitan Region.\nBangkok is served by four rail rapid transit systems:\nOther Provinces.\nSeveral other rapid transit systems have been proposed but have not been approved or started construction as of 2025[ [update]]: Chiang Mai LRT, Pattaya LRT, Phuket LRT, Hat Yai monorail and Khon Kaen LRT.\nTram.\nThailand had two tramway systems, both of which are now defunct. Trams operated in Bangkok between 1888 and 1968 when it was closed to make way for road traffic. At its peak, a total of eleven tram lines operated in the city, with a cumulative total length of 53.5\u00a0km.\nAnother short-lived tramway system operated in Lopburi, which operated between 1955 and 1962. This system consisted of a single 6.5\u00a0km line.\nAutomated people mover.\nThe Suvarnabhumi Airport Automated People Mover is an automated people mover in Suvarnabhumi Airport, first opened for service on 28 September 2023, running between the main terminal building and Satellite-1 terminal (SAT-1), with a distance of 1 kilometer. Currently, there is only one service in Suvarnabhumi Airport.\nRoad transport.\nThailand has 390,000\u00a0km (242,335 miles) of highways. According to the BBC, Thailand has 462,133 roads and many multi-lane highways. As of 2017[ [update]] Thailand had 37 million registered vehicles, 20 million of them two or three-wheeled motorbikes, and millions more that are unregistered. It also had one million \"heavy trucks\", 158,000 buses, and 624,000 \"other\" vehicles. By mid-2019 the number of registered vehicles in Thailand had risen to 40,190,328. The majority\u201421,051,977\u2014are motorbikes. Private automobiles with up to seven seats numbered 9,713,980.\nRoad safety.\nAccording to the World Health Organization's, \"Global Status Report on Road Safety 2018\", Thailand had an estimated traffic fatality rate (all vehicle types) of 32.7 persons per 100,000 population in 2016. The only nations exceeding Thailand's death toll were Liberia; Saint Lucia (population: 178,000); Burundi; Zimbabwe; Dominican Republic; Democratic Republic of Congo; Venezuela; and the Central African Republic.\nThailand's death rate for operators and passengers of motorized two- and three-wheeled motorbikes was the world's highest in 2016 at 74.4 fatalities per 100,000 population.\nSixty-six persons die every day on Thai roads, one every 22 minutes, seven of them children. In 2015, Thailand's roads were the second deadliest in the world in 2015. Among public transport options, passenger vans, with a monthly average of 19.5 accidents resulting in a monthly average of 9.4 deaths, rank as the most dangerous of all public transport services involved in road accidents. Regular tour buses on fixed routes were in second place with a total of 141 accidents, resulting in 56 deaths and 1,252 injuries. Third on the list were irregular tour buses, involved in 52 accidents, resulting in 47 deaths and 576 injuries. Taxis were fourth with 77 accidents, resulting in seven deaths and 84 injuries. Ordinary buses were involved in 48 accidents with 10 deaths and 75 injuries. As of 2016[ [update]], there were 156,089 legally registered public transport vehicles in Thailand, 42,202 of which were passenger vans, including 16,002 regular vans, 24,136 irregular vans, and 1,064 private vans.\nFrom 2013 to 2017, an average of 17,634 children between the ages of 10\u201319 died on Thailand's roads. Most of the fatalities involved motorbikes.\nThe two most dangerous travel periods in Thailand are at the New Year and at Songkran. Songkran 2016 (11-17 April) saw 442 deaths and 3,656 injuries. New Year 2017's death toll for the seven-day period between 29 December 2016 and 4 January 2017 was 478 compared to the previous year's record of 380. A total of 4,128 people were injured in road accidents during the period. The Centre for the Prevention and Reduction of Road Accidents said that the death toll in 2016 was the highest of the last ten years. Death toll records from road accidents for the last ten New Year periods are: 449 deaths in 2007, 401 in 2008, 357 in 2009, 347 in 2010, 358 in 2011, 321 in 2012, 365 in 2013, 366 in 2014, 341 in 2015, 380 in 2016. Lax enforcement of traffic laws appears to be a major contributor to traffic accidents: the World Health Organization's Collaborating Centre for Injury Prevention and Safety Promotion found that only 20 percent of traffic violators on Thai roads are given tickets and only four percent of those cited pay their traffic fines.\nGovernment attempts to reduce the toll of deaths and injuries have proven ineffectual. In 2011 the government declared the following ten years to be Thailand's \"decade of action on road safety\". It named 2012 as the year of 100 percent helmet use on motorbikes. In 2015, about 1.3 million school-age children in Thailand regularly traveled on the back of motorcycles each day but only seven percent wore helmets. In 2018, the WHO reported that motorcycle helmet use was 51 percent by operators and 20 percent by passengers. In 2015 the Interior Ministry's Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation's (DDPM) Road Safety Collaboration Centre announced a target of reducing road deaths by 80 percent. According to \"The New York Times\", in 2015, Thailand vowed at a United Nations forum to halve traffic deaths by 2020. But DDPM's published mandate makes no mention of road safety. Road safety falls under the purview of the Ministry of Interior's DDPM. Responsibility for roads falls under the Ministry of Transport.\nThailand had no laws requiring child safety features or a rear seating position in vehicles, but, the government has announced that the use of child seat is mandatory and the violators will be fined since Sep 2022.\nNational speed limits.\nThe maximum rural speed limit is 90 km/h. For motorways it is 120\u00a0km/h. The maximum urban speed limit is 80\u00a0km/h, far above the best practice limit of 50\u00a0km/h recommended by the WHO.\nPublic bus service.\nBuses are a major method of transportation for people, freight, and small parcels, and are the most popular means of long-distance travel. Tour and VIP class long-distance buses tend to be luxurious, while city- and other-class buses are often very colorful with paint schemes and advertising.\nThere are fundamentally two types of long-distance buses in Thailand:\nPublic bus service in Bangkok.\nIn Bangkok, the Bangkok Mass Transit Authority or BMTA, is the main operator of public transit buses within the Greater Bangkok area. The Bangkok Mass Transit Authority offers bus and van routes throughout the city and its suburban provinces. Many bus routes in Bangkok are served by several private companies, sometimes duplicating those from BMTA. Examples include orange minibuses, and cream-blue buses. The buses have the BMTA symbol on them, mostly seen below the driver's side window. These often follow slightly different routings from the main big BMTA bus or do not run along the whole route.\nBMTA currently operates bus routes in Bangkok and its metropolitan area namely Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon and Nakhon Pathom.\nLocal buses and Bangkok city buses come in various sizes, types, and prices, from half size, full size, double length, open window, fan, and air conditioned.\nBus rapid transit system in Bangkok.\nThe Bangkok BRT is a bus rapid transit system in Bangkok. Of five routes that were originally planned, only one line has been operating since 2010. The route has twelve stations in the centre of the road that give at-grade access to the right-hand side of the buses. Both terminals connect to the Silom Line of the BTS Skytrain; at Chong Nonsi (S3) and Talat Phlu (S10). The buses used are all Sunlong SLK6125CNG buses. \nHighway network.\nThe Thai highway network links every part of Thailand. Most highways are in good state of repair, greatly enhancing safety and speed. The four-lane highways often have overhead concrete pedestrian crossings interspersed about every 250 meters in populated areas. There are few on and off ramps on eight-lane highways, most highways are separated by medians with breakage for U-turns, except on major roads where ramp style U-turns predominate.\nA number of undivided two-lane highways have been converted into divided four-lane highways. A Bangkok \u2013 Chon Buri motorway (Route 7) now links to the new airport and Eastern seaboard.\nMotorway network.\nThe Thai motorway network is small. Coupled with Bangkok's extensive expressway network, the motorways provide a relief from regular traffic in Bangkok. The Thai Government is planning infrastructure investment in various \"megaprojects\", including motorway expansion to approximately 6,877 kilometers.\nExpressway network.\nThailand uses the expressway term for the toll road or highway network. Most expressways are elevated with some sections at ground level. The current expressway network covers major parts of Bangkok and suburban areas. Expressways are used to avoid heavy traffic jams in Bangkok and reduce traffic time but are sometimes congested in rush hour.\nUtility cycling.\nThe Thai state has failed at promoting utility cycling as a mode of transport. Officials regard bicycles as toys, and cycling as a leisure activity, not as a means of transport that could help solve traffic and environmental problems. Their attitude was on display at Bangkok's celebration of World Car-Free Day 2018, celebrated on 22 September. Bangkok's Deputy Governor, Sakoltee Phattiyakul, who presided over the event, arrived in his official automobile, as did his entourage. He then mounted a bicycle for a ceremonial ride. Prior to the event, which encouraged the non-use of cars, the BMA announced there would be extensive free automobile parking spaces available for participants who were to ride bicycles in the parade.\nIn his first year office, Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha launched a cycling initiative, encouraging members of the public to cycle. But state investment in cycling lanes ended up a being a waste as they quickly devolved into parking lanes for motorists. All Thai rail companies, whether commuter or long distance, make on-board transport of bicycles difficult or impractical. Without state intervention, direction, and education, the public lacks the impetus to adopt a mode of transport that remains ignored by urban development projects.\nOther public transport.\nOther forms of road transport includes tuk-tuks, taxis\u2014as of November 2018, Thailand has 80,647 registered taxis nationwide\u2014vans (minibus), motorbike taxis, and songthaews.\nThere are 4,125 public vans operating on 114 routes from Bangkok to the provinces alone. They are classed as Category 2 public transport vehicles (routes within 300 kilometres). Until 2016, most operated from a Bangkok terminus at Victory Monument. They are being moved from there to the Department of Land Transport's three Bangkok bus terminals.\nPassenger vans have a disturbing safety record. The Safe Public Transport Travel Project of the Foundation for Consumers, reports that passenger vans in 2018 were involved in 75 accidents, causing 314 injuries and 41 deaths. In 2017 the numbers were 113 dead and 906 injured, and in 2016, 105 people died and 1,102 others were injured in passenger van accidents. A government initiative to replace existing vans with larger minibuses in 2017, then delayed to 2019, was put on hold by the incoming Prayut administration.\nAir transport.\nAirports.\nAs of 2012, Thailand had 103 airports with 63 paved runways, in addition to 6 heliports. The busiest airport in the county is Bangkok's Suvarnabhumi Airport. \nMajor international airports\nAirlines.\nThe national carrier of Thailand is Thai Airways International, founded in 1959. Bangkok Airways has been operating since 1968 and now markets itself as \"Asia's Boutique Airline\". Low-cost carriers have become prevalent since 2003, including Thai Smile, Thai AirAsia, Thai AirAsia X, Thai Lion Air, Thai Vietjet Air and Nok Air.\nWater transport.\nAs of 2011 there were 3,999\u00a0km of principal waterways, of which 3,701\u00a0km had navigable depths of 0.9 m or more throughout the year. There are numerous minor waterways navigable by shallow-draft native craft, such as long-tailed boats.\nRiver and canal transport.\nIn Bangkok, the Chao Phraya River is a major transportation artery, with ferries, water taxis (the Chao Phraya Express Boat) and long-tailed boats. There are local, semi-express, and express lines for commuters, though the winding river means trips can be much farther than by bus. There is also the Khlong Saen Saeb boat service, which provides fast, inexpensive transport in central Bangkok.\nFerries.\nFerry service between hundreds of islands and the mainland is available, as well as across navigable rivers, such as Chao Phraya and Mae Khong (Mekong). There are a number of international ferries. In November 2018, Hua Hin deputy chief Chareewat Phramanee confirmed the ferry service, suspended due to low tourist numbers during low season, would be up and running again for high season between Hua Hin and Pattaya, a 2.5-hour journey for 1,250 Thai Bhat on a catamaran with a maximum capacity of 340.\nSea transport.\nIn Thailand, the Gulf of Thailand and Andaman Sea is a transportation system:\nMerchant marine fleet.\nAs of 2023 Thailand's merchant marine fleet consisted of 880 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 4,696,000 tonnes deadweight (DWT).\nPipelines.\nPipelines are used for bulk transport of gas (1,889\u00a0km as of 2010), liquid petroleum (85\u00a0km) and refined products: (1,099\u00a0km).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30136", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30136", "title": "Royal Thai Armed Forces", "text": "Unified military forces of Thailand\nThe Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTARF; ; RTGS:\u00a0) are the armed forces of Thailand.\nThe Highest Commander of the Royal Thai Armed Forces (\u0e08\u0e2d\u0e21\u0e17\u0e31\u0e1e\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22; RTGS:\u00a0) is the King of Thailand. The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence of Thailand, which is headed by the minister of defence and commanded by the Royal Thai Armed Forces Headquarters, which in turn is headed by the Chief of Defence Forces. The commander-in-chief of the Royal Thai Army is considered the most powerful position in the Thai Armed Forces.\nRoyal Thai Armed Forces Day is celebrated on 18 January to commemorate the victory of King Naresuan the Great in battle against the Viceroy of Burma in 1593.\nRole.\nThe Royal Thai Armed Forces primarily aim to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Thailand. Their duties include defending the Thai monarchy against all threats, maintaining public order, and assisting in national disaster relief and drug control. Additionally, they support social development by cooperating with civilian government initiatives.\nThere are differing perspectives on the roles of the Thai armed forces. While their official duties are well-defined, some critics argue that their functions extend to preserving ruling class hegemony against democratic movements and facilitating the self-enrichment of high-ranking military officials\nThe Royal Thai Armed Forces have also played a role in international peacekeeping efforts. Notably, they contributed to the United Nations peacekeeping forces, including their participation in the International Force for East Timor (INTERFET) from 1999 to 2002. Additionally, they were part of the multinational force in Iraq, contributing 423 personnel from 2003 to 2004. This international involvement reflects their expanding role beyond national borders.\nPersonnel.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], the Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTARF) comprised approximately 360,850 active duty and 200,000 reserve personnel, which is nearly one percent of Thailand's population of 70 million. This proportion of military personnel in relation to the total population is higher than that of the United States but lower than Vietnam's. The Thai military includes over 1,700 flag officers (generals and admirals), equating to about one general for every 212 troops. This ratio is notably higher than that of the United States military, which as of November 1, 2018, had 920 active duty general and flag officers for a force of 1,317,325 personnel, resulting in one flag officer for every 1,430 troops. On May 2, 2015, 1,043 new flag officers from all three services of the Thai military were sworn in. The number of officers who retired during the same period is not specified.\nObservations by some analysts suggest that the goals of Thai generals include aligning with politically favorable parties, securing advantageous postings, and personal enrichment, which reportedly involves sharing gains with subordinates to maintain loyalty.\nIn early 2021, Thailand's Ministry of Defence announced a plan to reduce the number of flag officers by 25% by 2029. As of March 2021, the RTARF had about 1,400 generals and admirals: 250 at RTARF headquarters, 400 in the army, 250 in the navy, 190 in the air force, and 300 in the Office of the Permanent Secretary of Defence.\nConscription.\nConscription, a national duty outlined in the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand, was initiated in 1905. It mandates military service for all Thai citizens, although in practice, it primarily applies to males over 21 years of age who have not completed reserve training. The annual conscription process, typically held in early April, begins with eligible individuals reporting to their selection center at 07:00 on the designated day.\nDuring this process, draftees have the option to volunteer for service or participate in a lottery if they do not volunteer. Those who choose to volunteer undergo thorough physical and mental health evaluations, including a drug test. The results of these drug tests are recorded in the Narcotics Control Board's database. In 2018, data showed that out of 182,910 men tested, 12,209, or 6.7 percent, tested positive for drugs, with the majority detected for methamphetamine, followed by marijuana, and other substances.\nIndividuals who test positive for drugs are subject to different treatments based on their conscription status. Over 3,000 men who tested positive and were drafted into the military received drug rehabilitation treatment as part of their service. Conversely, those who tested positive but were not drafted underwent a 13-day rehabilitation program in their home provinces.\nCandidates who do not meet the physical and mental health standards are exempted from service. Those who pass the examinations and volunteer for enlistment select their preferred service branch (Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy, or Royal Thai Air Force) and a reporting date. They receive official documentation summarizing the draft selection of the year, along with an enlistment order detailing the specifics of their basic training, including the time and location. The process concludes for the day with the dismissal of the enlistees, who then await their reporting date for basic training.\nFollowing the dismissal of the volunteers, the conscription lottery commences at each selection center. The number of individuals conscripted via the lottery is determined by the center's set quota, minus the number of volunteers. Like the volunteers, those participating in the lottery undergo the same physical and mental health assessments, with ineligible individuals being similarly dismissed.\nDuring the lottery, each man draws a card from an opaque box. A black card signifies exemption from military service, and the individual receives a letter of exemption. Conversely, drawing a red card mandates military service, with the induction date specified on the card. Individuals with higher educational qualifications may request a reduction in their service obligation.\nIn 2018, over 500,000 men were called for selection by the Royal Thai Armed Forces. The combined quota across the forces was approximately 104,000, including 80,000 for the Royal Thai Army, 16,000 for the Royal Thai Navy, and 8,700 for the Royal Thai Air Force. On the selection day, 44,800 men volunteered for service. After accounting for these volunteers and those dismissed due to ineligibility, the remaining quota was approximately 60,000 slots. This quota was to be filled by the approximately 450,000 men participating in the draft lottery, making the overall probability of drawing a red card about 13 percent.\nIn 2017, a total of 103,097 men participated in the military draft in Thailand, conducted from April 1 to 12. The armed forces required 77,000 conscripts annually. In some cases, certain selection centers did not need to conduct the balloting lottery because their quotas were already fulfilled by volunteers. In these instances, individuals who opted not to volunteer and instead waited for the lottery were issued certificates of exemption.\nThe duration of military service in Thailand varies depending on whether an individual volunteers and their level of educational attainment. Volunteers are generally required to serve for shorter periods. Those without a high school diploma must serve for two years, irrespective of their volunteer status. High school graduates who volunteer are obligated to serve for one year, whereas those who do not volunteer and draw red cards during the lottery are required to serve for two years. Individuals holding an associate degree or higher and who volunteer have a six-month service period. Those with similar educational qualifications who draw red cards during the lottery may request a reduction in their service time, up to a maximum of one year. University students are permitted to defer their conscription until they have completed their degree or reached the age of 26.\nAll conscripts in the Thai military are assigned the rank of Private, Seaman, or Aircraftman (OR-1), and they retain this rank throughout their service, regardless of their educational qualifications. Their wages are subject to increase after completing basic training and with time-in-grade.\nIt is reported by some sources that a significant number of conscripts, over half according to these claims, are utilized as servants to senior officers or clerks in military cooperative shops. However, it is important to note that the placement of conscripts, irrespective of their volunteer status and educational background, is typically determined by the operational needs of their respective service branches. The most common roles assigned include infantryman for Royal Thai Army conscripts, Royal Marine for Royal Thai Navy conscripts, and security forces specialist for Royal Thai Air Force conscripts. Their duties can vary, encompassing military operations, manning security checkpoints, force generation, and performing manual labor or clerical tasks as required by their unit.\nUpon completing their service, conscripts are presented with the option to reenlist. In April 2020, for instance, only 5,460 out of 42,000 conscripts eligible for discharge at the end of the month chose to continue their service in the military.\nTop government officials in Thailand maintain that conscription is essential for the country. However, there is an ongoing debate regarding the necessity and effectiveness of conscription in 21st-century Thailand. Critics argue that, as of 2019, the external threats to Thailand are minimal. This perspective seems to align with Thailand's new National Security Plan, published in the Royal Gazette on November 22, 2019. Effective from November 19, 2019, to September 30, 2022, the plan suggests that external geopolitical threats are not significant in the forthcoming years, focusing instead on domestic issues, notably concerns about declining faith in the monarchy and political divisions. In September 2023, the Defence Minister announced that conscription will be gradually abolished from April 2024 to 2027.\nAmnesty International, in a report from March 2020, alleges that Thai military conscripts are subjected to institutionalized abuse, which is often overlooked by military authorities. The report describes this practice as a \"long-standing open secret in Thai society\". One notable case cited by Amnesty occurred in 2011, involving the death of Wichian Pueksom, allegedly due to torture by 10 officers. In 2023, eight soldiers involved in his death were convicted of causing bodily harm and received sentences of only 2-4 years in prison. \nBudget.\nThe defence budget nearly tripled from 78.1 billion baht in 2005 to 207 billion baht for FY2016 (1 October 2015 \u2013 30 September 2016), amounting to roughly 1.5% of GDP. The budget for FY2017 is 214 billion baht (US$6.1 billion)\u2014including funds for a submarine purchase\u2014a nominal increase of three percent. The proposed budget again represents around 1.5% of GDP and eight percent of total government spending for FY2017. The FY2018 defence budget is 220 billion baht, 7.65% of the total budget. According to \"Jane's Defence Budgets\", the Royal Thai Army generally receives 50% of defense expenditures while the air force and navy receive 22% each.\nThe Ministry of Defense budget for FY2021 is 223,464 million baht, down from 231,745M baht in FY2020.\nHistory.\nAncient military forces.\nThe Royal Siamese Armed Forces was the military arm of the Siamese monarchy from the 12th to the 19th centuries. It refers to the military forces of the Sukhothai Kingdom, the Ayutthaya Kingdom, the Thonburi Kingdom and the early Rattanakosin Kingdom in chronological order. The Siamese army was one of the dominant armed forces in Southeast Asia. As Thailand has never been colonized by a European power, the Royal Thai Armed Forces boasts one of the longest and uninterrupted military traditions in Asia.\nThe army was organized into a small standing army of a few thousand, which defended the capital and the palace, and a much larger conscription-based wartime army. Conscription was based on the \"ahmudan\" system, which required local chiefs to supply, in times of war, a predetermined quota of men from their jurisdiction on the basis of population. The wartime army also consisted of elephantry, cavalry, artillery, and naval units.\nIn 1852, the Royal Siamese Armed Forces came into existence as permanent force at the behest of King Mongkut, who needed a European trained military force to thwart any Western threat and any attempts at colonialisation. By 1887, during the next reign of King Chulalongkorn, a permanent military command in the \"Kalahom\" Department was established. The office of \"Kalahom\", as a permanent office of war department, was established by King Borommatrailokkanat (1431\u20131488) in the mid-15th century during the Ayutthaya Kingdom. Siam's history of organized warfare is thus one of Asia's longest and uninterrupted military traditions. However, since 1932, when the military, with the help of civilians, overthrew the system of absolute monarchy and instead created a constitutional system, the military has dominated and been in control of Thai politics, providing it with many prime ministers and carrying out many coups d'\u00e9tat, the most recent being in 2014.\nConflicts.\nThe Royal Thai Armed Forces were involved in many conflicts throughout its history, including global, regional and internal conflicts. However, most these were within Southeast Asia. The only three foreign incursions into Thai territory were the Franco-Siamese conflict of 1893, the Japanese invasion of Thailand in December 1941, and in the 1980s with Vietnamese incursions into Thailand that led to several battles with the Thai Army. Operations on foreign territory were either territorial wars (such as the Laos Civil War) or conflicts mandated by the United Nations.\nFranco-Siamese conflict (1893).\nWith the rapid expansion of the French Empire into Indochina, conflicts necessarily occurred. War became inevitable when a French mission led by Auguste Pavie to King Chulalongkorn to try to bring Laos under French rule ended in failure. The French colonialists invaded Siam from the northeast and sent two warships to fight their way past the river forts and train their guns on the Grand Palace in Bangkok (the Paknam Incident). The French also declared a blockade around Bangkok, which almost brought them into conflict with the United Kingdom. Siam was forced to accept the French ultimatum and surrendered Laos to France, also allowing French troops to occupy the Thai province of Chantaburi for several decades.\nWorld War I (1917\u20131918).\nKing Vajiravudh on 22 July 1917 declared war on the Central Powers and joined the Entente Powers on the Western Front. He sent a volunteer corps, the Siamese Expeditionary Force, composed of 1,233 modern-equipped and trained men commanded by Field Marshal Prince Chakrabongse Bhuvanath. The force included air and medical personnel, the medical units actually seeing combat. Siam became the only independent Asian nation with forces in Europe during the Great War. Although Siam's participation militarily was minimal, it enabled the revision or complete cancellation of so-called \"unequal treaties\" with the Western powers. The Expeditionary Force was given the honour of marching in the victory parade under the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. Nineteen Siamese soldiers died during the conflict, and their ashes are interred in the World War I monument at the north end of Bangkok's Pramane Grounds.\nFranco-Thai War (1940\u20131941).\nThe Franco-Thai War began in October 1940, when the country under the rule of Field Marshal Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram followed up border clashes by invading a French Indo-China, under the Vichy regime (after the Nazi occupation of Paris) to regain lost land and settle territorial disputes. The war also bolstered Phibun's program of promoting Thai nationalism. The war ended indecisively, with Thai victories on land and a naval defeat at sea. However, the disputed territories in French Indochina were ceded to Thailand.\nWorld War II (1942\u20131945).\nTo attack British India, British Burma and British Malaya, the Empire of Japan needed to use bases in Thailand. By playing both nations against one another, Prime Minister Phibunsongkhram was able to maintain a degree of neutrality for some time. However, this ended in the early hours of 8 December 1941, when Japan launched a surprise attack on Thailand at nine places along the coastline and from French Indo-China. The greatly outnumbered Thai forces put up resistance, but were soon overwhelmed. By 07:30, Phibun ordered an end to hostilities, though resistance continued for at least another day until all units could be notified. Phibun signed an armistice with Japan that allowed the empire to move its troops through Thai territory. Impressed by Japan's easy conquest of British Malaya, Phibun formally made Thailand part of the Axis by declaring war on the United Kingdom and the United States, though the Regent refused to sign it in the young king's name. (The Thai ambassador to Washington refused to deliver the declaration, and the United States continued to consider Thailand an occupied country.) An active and foreign-assisted underground resistance movement, the Free Thai, was largely successful and helped Thailand to be viewed positively in the eyes of the victorious Allies after the war and be treated as an occupied nation rather than a defeated enemy.\nKorean War (1950\u20131953).\nDuring the United Nations-mandated conflict in the Korean peninsula, Thailand provided the reinforced 1st Battalion of the 21st Infantry Regiment, Some 65,000 Thais served in Korea during the war. Thai foot soldiers took part in the 1953 Battle of Pork Chop Hill. During the war the battalion was attached at various times to U.S. 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team and the British 29th Infantry Brigade. The kingdom also provided four naval vessels, the HTMS \"Bangprakong\", \"Bangpako\", \"Tachin\", and \"Prasae\", and an air transport unit to the UN command structure. The Thai contingent was actively engaged and suffered heavy casualties, including 139 dead and more than 300 wounded. They remained in South Korea after the cease fire, returning to Thailand in 1955.\nVietnam War (1955\u20131975).\nDue to its proximity to Thailand, Vietnam's conflicts were closely monitored by Bangkok. Thai involvement did not become official until the total involvement of the United States in support of South Vietnam in 1963. The Thai government then allowed the United States Air Force in Thailand to use its air and naval bases. At the height of the war, almost 50,000 American military personnel were stationed in Thailand, mainly airmen.\nIn October 1967 a regiment-size Thai unit, the Queen's Cobras, were sent to Camp Bearcat at Bien Hoa, to fight alongside the Americans, Australians, New Zealanders and South Vietnamese. About 40,000 Thai military would serve in South Vietnam, with 351 killed in action and 1,358 wounded. Thai troops earned a reputation for bravery and would serve in Vietnam until 1971, when the men of the Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division (Black Panthers) returned home.\nThailand was also involved in the Laotian Civil War, supporting covert operations against the communist Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese from 1964 to 1972.\nBy 1975 relations between Bangkok and Washington had soured, and the government of Kukrit Pramoj requested the withdrawal of all US military personnel and the closure of all US bases. This was completed by March 1976.\nCommunist insurgency (1976\u20131980s).\nThe communist victory in Vietnam in 1975 emboldened the communist movement in Thailand, which had been in existence since the 1920s. After the Thammasat University massacre of leftist student demonstrators in 1976 and the repressive policies of right-wing Prime Minister Tanin Kraivixien, sympathies for the movement increased. By the late-1970s, it is estimated that the movement had as many as 12,000 armed insurgents, mostly based in the northeast along the Laotian border and receiving foreign support. By the 1980s, however, all insurgent activities had been defeated. In 1982 Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda issued a general amnesty for all former communist insurgents.\nVietnamese border raids (1979\u20131988).\nWith the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1978, communist Vietnam had a combined force of about 300,000 in Laos and Cambodia. This posed a massive potential threat to the Thais, as they could no longer rely on Cambodia to act as a buffer state. Small encounters occasionally took place when Vietnamese forces crossed into Thailand in pursuit of fleeing Khmer Rouge troops. However, a full and official conflict was never declared, as neither country wanted it.\nThai\u2013Laotian Border War (1987\u20131988).\nThis was a small conflict over mountainous territory including three disputed villages on the border between Sainyabuli Province in Laos and Phitsanulok Province in Thailand, whose ownership had been left unclear by the map drawn by the French some 80 years earlier. Caused by then-Army commander Chavalit Yongchaiyudh against the wishes of the government, the war ended with a stalemate and return to status quo ante bellum. The two nations suffered combined casualties of about 1,000.\nEast Timor (1999\u20132002).\nAfter the East Timor crisis, Thailand, with 28 other nations, provided troops for the International Force for East Timor or INTERFET. Thailand also provided the force commander, Lieutenant General Winai Phattiyakul. The force was based in Dili and lasted from 25 October 1999 to 20 May 2002.\nIraq War (2003\u20132004).\nAfter the successful US invasion of Iraq, Thai Humanitarian Assistance Task Force 976 Thai-Iraq Thailand contributed 423 non-combat troops in August 2003 to nation building and medical assistance in post-Saddam Iraq. The Thais could not leave their base in Karbala as their rules governing their participation restricted them to humanitarian assistance which could not be accomplished due to the insurgency during the Thai's tenure in Iraq. Troops of the Royal Thai Army were attacked in the 2003 Karbala bombings, which killed two soldiers and wounded five others. However, the Thai mission in Iraq was considered an overall success, and Thailand withdrew its forces in August 2004. The mission is considered the main reason the United States decided to designate Thailand as a major non-NATO ally in 2003.\nSouth Thailand insurgency (2001\u2013ongoing).\nThe ongoing southern insurgency had begun in response to Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram's 1944 National Cultural Act, which replaced the use of Malaya in the region's schools with the Thai language and also abolished the local Islamic courts in the three ethnic Malay and Muslim majority border provinces of Yala, Pattani, and Narathiwat. However, it had always been on a comparatively small scale. The insurgency intensified in 2001, during the government of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Terrorist attacks were now extended to the ethnic Thai minority in the provinces. The Royal Thai Armed Forces also went beyond their orders and retaliated with strong armed tactics that only encouraged more violence. By the end of 2012 the conflict had claimed 3,380 lives, including 2,316 civilians, 372 soldiers, 278 police, 250 suspected insurgents, 157 education officials, and seven Buddhist monks. Many of the dead were Muslims themselves, but they had been targeted because of their presumed support of the Thai government.\nCambodian\u2013Thai border stand-off (2008\u20132011).\nThe latent territorial dispute over the Angkorian temple of Preah Vihear turned violent in 2008, escalating from military incursions to clashes and expanding to other contested temples, before a troop\u2011withdrawal agreement in December 2011. Later, in 2013, an International Court of Justice ruling affirmed Cambodia's sovereignty over the temple and particularly bounded surrounding land.\nSudan (2010\u20132011).\nThai soldiers joined UNMIS in 2011.\nCurrent developments.\nThai military deputized as police.\nOn 29 March 2016, in a move that the \"Bangkok Post\" said will \"...will inflict serious and long-term damage...\", the NCPO, under a Section 44 order (NCPO Order 13/2559) signed by junta chief Prayut Chan-o-cha, granted to commissioned officers of the Royal Thai Armed Forces broad police powers to suppress and arrest anyone they suspect of criminal activity without a warrant and detain them secretly at almost any location without charge for up to seven days. Bank accounts can be frozen, and documents and property can be seized. Travel can be banned. Automatic immunity for military personnel has been built into the order, and there is no independent oversight or recourse in the event of abuse. The order came into immediate effect. The net result is that the military will have more power than the police and less oversight.\nThe government has stated that the purpose of this order is to enable military officers to render their assistance in an effort to \"...suppress organized crimes such as extortion, human trafficking, child and labor abuses, gambling, prostitution, illegal tour guide services, price collusion, and firearms. It neither aims to stifle nor intimidate dissenting voices. Defendants in such cases will go through normal judicial process, with police as the main investigator...trial[s] will be conducted in civilian courts, not military ones. Moreover, this order does not deprive the right of the defendants to file complaints against military officers who have abused their power.\"\nThe NCPO said that the reason for its latest order is that there are simply not enough police, in spite of the fact that there are about 230,000 officers in the Royal Thai Police force. They make up about 17 percent of all non-military public servants. This amounts to 344 police officers for every for every 100,000 persons in Thailand, more than twice the ratio in Myanmar and the Philippines, one and a half times that of Japan and Indonesia and roughly the same proportion as the United States.\nIn a joint statement released on 5 April 2016, six groups, including Human Rights Watch (HRW), Amnesty International, and the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), condemned the move.\nCorruption.\nThe \"Asia Sentinel\" in 2014 called the Thai military one of the most deeply corrupt militaries in Asia. The Thai armed forces have a history of procurement scandals and dodgy dealings dating back to at least the 1980s.\nWeapons and equipment.\nThailand's defense spending has soared since 2006. Since then the military has seized control from civilian governments on two occasions. Defense spending has increased by US$1 billion since the latest coup in 2014.\nUniforms, ranks, insignia.\nTo build institutional solidarity and esprit de corps, each Thai service component has developed its own distinctive uniforms, ranking system, and insignia. Many Thai military uniforms reflect historical foreign influences. For example, most of the distinctive service uniforms were patterned on those of the US, but lower ranking enlisted navy personnel wear uniforms resembling those of their French counterparts. The early influence of British advisers to the Thai royal court and the historical role of the military in royal pomp and ceremony contributed to the splendor of formal dress uniforms worn by high-ranking officers and guards of honour on ceremonial occasions.\nThe rank structures of the three armed services are similar to those of the respective branches of the US Armed Forces, although the Thai system has fewer NCO and warrant officer designations. The king, as head of state and constitutional head of the armed forces, commissions all officers. Appointments to NCO ranks are authorised by the minister of defence. In theory, the authority and responsibilities of officers of various ranks correspond to those of their US counterparts. However, because of a perennial surplus of senior officers\u2014in 1987 there were some 600 generals and admirals in a total force of about 273,000\u2014Thai staff positions are often held by officers of higher rank than would be the case in the US or other Western military establishments.\nThai military personnel are highly conscious of rank distinctions and of the duties, obligations, and benefits they entail. Relationships among officers of different grades and among officers, NCOs, and the enlisted ranks are governed by military tradition in a society where observance of differences in status are highly formalised. The social distance between officers and NCOs is widened by the fact that officers usually are college or military academy graduates, while most NCOs have not gone beyond secondary school. There is a wider gap between officers and conscripts, most of whom have even less formal education, service experience, or specialised training.\nFormal honours and symbols of merit occupy an important place in Thai military tradition. The government grants numerous awards, and outstanding acts of heroism, courage, and meritorious service receive prompt recognition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "}
{"id": "30137", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30137", "title": "Foreign relations of Thailand", "text": "The foreign relations of Thailand are handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand.\nThailand participates fully in international and regional organizations. It has developed close ties with other ASEAN members\u2014Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos, and Vietnam\u2014whose foreign and economic ministers hold annual meetings. Regional cooperation is progressing in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters. In 2003, Thailand served as APEC host. Dr. Supachai Panitchpakdi, the former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, served as Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) from 2005 until 31 August 2015. In 2005 Thailand attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.\nSince the military coup of May 2014, Thailand's global reputation has plunged, according to Professor Thitinan Pongsudhirak of Chulalongkorn University. He maintains that, \"When the fourth anniversary of Thailand's coup comes to pass later this month [May 2018], Thailand's foreign relations will be one of the many costs to be counted from the military government...Instead of moving ahead in its relations with the outside world, Thailand has regressed to a standstill.\nDisputes.\nParts of the border with Laos are undefined. A maritime boundary dispute with Vietnam was resolved, August 1997. Parts of maritime border with Cambodia are disputed. Sporadic conflict with Myanmar over alignment of border.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Thailand maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30138", "revid": "49125732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30138", "title": "Togo", "text": "Country in West Africa\nTogo, officially the Togolese Republic, is a country in West Africa. It is bordered by Ghana to the west, Benin to the east and Burkina Faso to the north. It is one of the least developed countries and extends south to the Gulf of Guinea, where its capital, Lom\u00e9, is located. It is a small, tropical country, spanning with a population of approximately 8 million, and it has a width of less than between Ghana and its eastern neighbor Benin.\nVarious peoples settled the boundaries of present-day Togo between the 11th and 16th centuries. Between the 16th and 18th centuries, the coastal region served primarily as a European slave trading outpost, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name \"The Slave Coast\". In 1884, during the scramble for Africa, Germany established a protectorate in the region called Togoland. After World War I, Togo was transferred to France with its contemporary borders. Togo gained independence from France in 1960. In 1967, Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma led a successful military coup d'\u00e9tat and became president of an anti-communist, single-party state. In 1993, Eyad\u00e9ma faced multiparty elections marred by irregularities, and won the presidency three times. At the time of his death, Eyad\u00e9ma was the \"longest-serving leader in modern African history\", having been president for 38 years. In 2005, his son Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 was elected president.\nTogo is a tropical, sub-Saharan nation whose economy depends mostly on agriculture. The official language is French, but other languages are spoken, particularly those of the Gbe family. 47.8% of the population adhere to Christianity, making it the largest religion in the country. Togo is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone, Francophonie, Commonwealth of Nations, and Economic Community of West African States.\nHistory.\nArchaeological finds indicate that societies were able to produce pottery and process iron. The name Togo is translated from the Ewe language as \"behind the river\". During the period from the 11th century to the 16th century, the Ew\u00e9 entered the area from the west, and the Mina and Gun from the east. Most of them settled on the coast. The Atlantic slave trade began in the 16th century, and for the next two hundred years the coastal region was a trading centre for Europeans in search of slaves, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name \"The Slave Coast\".\nIn 1884, a paper was forcibly signed at Togoville with King Mlapa III, whereby Germany claimed a protectorate over a stretch of territory along the coast and gradually extended its control inland. Its borders were defined after the capture of the hinterland by German forces and signing agreements with France and Britain. In 1905, this became the German colony of Togoland. The local population was forced to work, cultivate cotton, coffee, and cocoa and pay taxes. A railway and the port of Lom\u00e9 were built for export of agricultural products. The Germans introduced techniques of cultivation of cocoa, coffee and cotton and developed the infrastructure.\nDuring World War I, Togoland was invaded by Britain and France, proclaiming the Anglo-French condominium, during the West African Campaign. Following the Allied invasion of the colony in August 1914, German forces were defeated, forcing the colony's surrender on 26 August 1914. On 7 December 1916, the condominium collapsed and Togoland was subsequently partitioned into British and French zones, creating the colonies of British Togoland and French Togoland. On 20 July 1922, Great Britain received the League of Nations mandate to govern the western part of Togo and France to govern the eastern part. In 1945, the country received the right to send three representatives to the French parliament.\nAfter World War II, these mandates became UN Trust Territories. The residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the independent nation of Ghana in 1957. French Togoland became an autonomous republic within the French Union in 1959, while France retained the right to control defence, foreign relations, and finances.\nIndependence.\nThe Togolese Republic was proclaimed on 27 April 1960. In the Togolese general election, 1961, Sylvanus Olympio became the first president, gaining 100 per cent of the vote in elections boycotted by the opposition. On 9 April 1961, the Constitution of the Togolese Republic was adopted, according to which the supreme legislative body was the National Assembly of Togo. In December 1961, leaders of opposition parties were arrested because they were accused of the preparation of an anti-government conspiracy. A decree was issued on the dissolution of the opposition parties. Olympio tried to reduce dependence on France by establishing cooperation with the United States, United Kingdom, and West Germany. He rejected the efforts of French soldiers who were demobilized after the Algerian War and tried to get a position in the Togolese army. These factors eventually led to a military coup on 13 January 1963 during which he was assassinated by a group of soldiers under the direction of Sergeant Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma. A state of emergency was declared in Togo. The military handed over power to an interim government led by Nicolas Grunitzky. In May 1963, Grunitzky was elected President of the Republic. The new leadership pursued a policy of developing relations with France. His main aim was to dampen the divisions between north and south, promulgate a new constitution, and introduce a multiparty system.\nOn 13 January 1967, Eyad\u00e9ma overthrew Grunitzky in a bloodless coup and assumed the presidency. He created the Rally of the Togolese People Party, banned activities of other political parties and introduced a one-party system in November 1969. He was reelected in 1979 and 1986. In 1983, the privatization program launched and in 1991 other political parties were allowed. In 1993, the European Union froze the partnership, describing Eyad\u00e9ma's re-election in 1993, 1998 and 2003, as a seizure of power. In April 2004, in Brussels, talks were held between the EU and Togo on the resumption of cooperation.\nEyad\u00e9ma Gnassingb\u00e9 died on Saturday, 5 February 2005. The military's installation of his son, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9, as president provoked international condemnation, except from France. Some \"democratically elected\" African leaders such as Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal and Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria supported the move, creating a rift within the African Union. Gnassingb\u00e9 left power and held elections, which he won two months later. The opposition declared that the election results were fraudulent. The events of 2005 led to questions regarding the government's commitment to democracy that had been made in an attempt to normalize relations with the EU which cut off aid in 1993 due to questions about Togo's human rights situation. Up to 400 people were killed in the violence surrounding the presidential elections, according to the UN. Around 40,000 Togolese fled to neighbouring countries. Gnassingb\u00e9 was reelected in 2010 and 2015.\nTogo became the first African nation to win an Olympic medal in canoeing at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing when Benjamin Boukpeti won bronze in the K-1 slalom.\nIn 2017, anti-government protests erupted. UN condemned the resulting crackdown by security forces, and The Gambia's foreign minister, Ousainou Darboe, had to issue a correction after saying that Gnassingb\u00e9 should resign.\nIn the February 2020 presidential elections, Gnassingb\u00e9 won his fourth presidential term in office as the president of Togo. According to the official result, he won with a margin of around 72% of the vote share. This enabled him to defeat his closest challenger, former prime minister Agbeyome Kodjo, who had 18%. On 4 May 2020, Bitala Madjoulba, the commander of a Togolese military battalion, was found dead in his office one day after Gnassingb\u00e9 was sworn in for his fourth term. An investigation was opened for this case, resulting in Major General Kadangha Abalo Felix being prosecuted and tried for involvement in Madjoulba's assassination and 'conspiracy against the internal security of the state'.\nJoining the Commonwealth.\nTogo joined the Commonwealth in June 2022. Prior to its admission at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Foreign Minister Robert Dussey said that he expected Commonwealth membership to provide new export markets, funding for development projects and opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English and access new educational and cultural resources.\nGovernment.\nThe president is indirectly elected for a double term of four years, and is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces and has the right to initiate legislation and dissolve parliament. Executive power is exercised by the council of ministers and its president which is the head of government and is also a position that was formerly known as the prime minister. The president appoints the president of the Council of Ministers.\nPresident Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma, who until 1993, ruled Togo under a one-party system, died of a heart attack on 5 February 2005. Under the Togolese Constitution, the President of the Parliament, Fambar\u00e9 Ouattara Natchaba, should have become president of the country, pending a presidential election to be called within 60 days. Natchaba was out of the country, returning on an Air France plane from Paris. The Togolese army, known as Forces Arm\u00e9es Togolaises (FAT), or Togolese Armed Forces, closed the nation's borders, forcing the plane to land in Benin. With an engineered power vacuum, the Parliament voted to remove the constitutional clause that would have required an election within 60 days and declared that Eyadema's son, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9, would inherit the presidency and hold office for the rest of his father's term. Faure was sworn in on 7 February 2005, with international criticism of the succession. The African Union described the takeover as a military coup d'\u00e9tat. International pressure also came from the United Nations. Within Togo, opposition to the takeover culminated in riots in which between 400 and 500 people died. There were uprisings in cities and towns mainly in the southern part of the country. In the town of An\u00e9ho reports of a general civilian uprising followed by a massacre by government troops. In response, Gnassingb\u00e9 agreed to hold elections and on 25 February, Gnassingb\u00e9 resigned as president, and afterward accepted the nomination to run for the office in April.\nOn 24 April 2005, Gnassingb\u00e9 was elected president of Togo, receiving over 60% of the vote according to official results. His main rival in the race had been Emmanuel Bob-Akitani from the Union des Forces du Changement (UFC). Electoral fraud was suspected due to a lack of independent domestic or foreign oversight. Parliament designated Deputy President Bonfoh Abbass as interim president until the inauguration. On 3 May 2005, Gnassingb\u00e9 was sworn in as the new president and the European Union suspended aid to Togo in support of the opposition claims, unlike the African Union and the United States which declared the vote \"reasonably fair\". The Nigerian president and Chair of AU, Olus\u1eb9gun \u1eccbasanj\u1ecd, sought to negotiate between the incumbent government and the opposition to establish a coalition government, and rejected an AU Commission appointment of former Zambian president, Kenneth Kaunda, as special AU envoy to Togo. In June, Gnassingb\u00e9 named opposition leader Edem Kodjo as the prime minister.\nIn October 2007, after postponements, elections were held under proportional representation. This allowed the less populated north to seat as many MPs as the more populated south. The president-backed party Rally of the Togolese People (RPT) won a majority with UFC coming second and the other parties claiming inconsequential representation. Vote rigging accusations were levelled at RPT supported by the civil and military security apparatus. With the presence of an EU observer mission, cancelled ballots and illegal voting took place, the majority of which in RPT strongholds. On 3 December 2007 Komlan Mally of RPT was appointed to prime minister succeeding Agboyibor. On 5 September 2008, Mally resigned as prime minister of Togo.\nGnassingb\u00e9 won re-election in the March 2010 presidential election, taking 61% of the vote against Jean-Pierre Fabre from UFC, who had been backed by an opposition coalition called FRAC (Republican Front for Change). Electoral observers noted \"procedural errors\" and technical problems, and the opposition did not recognize the results, claiming irregularities had affected the outcome. Periodic protests against Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 followed the election. In May 2010, opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio announced that he would enter into a power-sharing deal with the government, a coalition arrangement which provides UFC with eight ministerial posts. In June 2012, electoral reforms prompted protesters to take to the street in Lom\u00e9 for days; protesters sought a return to the 1992 constitution that would re-establish presidential term limits. July 2012 saw the resignation of the prime minister, Gilbert Houngbo. Days later, the commerce minister, Kwesi Ahoomey-Zunu, was named to lead the new government. In the same month, the home of opposition leader Jean-Pierre Fabre was raided by security forces, and thousands of protesters again rallied publicly against the government crackdown.\nIn April 2015, Gnassingb\u00e9 was re-elected for a third term. In February 2020, Gnassingb\u00e9 was again re-elected for his fourth presidential term. The opposition had accusations of fraud and irregularities. The Gnassingb\u00e9 family has ruled Togo since 1967, making it Africa's longest lasting dynasty.\n2024 constitutional reform.\nIn March 2024, Gnassingb\u00e9 presented a new constitution. One of the constitutional changes in the new constitution has Togo go from being under a presidential system to being under a parliamentary system, as well as weakening the power of the president, it becoming a mostly ceremonial role; strengthening the power of parliament; and strengthening the power of the prime minister and renaming the office \"President of the Council of Ministers\" (). The term of the new office will be six years, renewable indefinitely, whereas the term of the president is lowered to four from the previous five, renewable once. In April 2024, the Togolese parliament voted in favour of the new constitution and the new constitution was officially adopted on 6 May 2024.\nThe reform officially came into effect on 3 May 2025, where the first indirect election of the country was held. Jean-Lucien Savi de Tov\u00e9 was uninamously elected as the new president, while Gnassingb\u00e9 became the president of the Council of Ministers. Aged nearly 86, Savi de Tov\u00e9 is the oldest ever president in history.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTogo is divided into 5 regions which are subdivided in turn into 39 prefectures. From north to south the regions are Savanes, Kara, Centrale, Plateaux and Maritime.\nForeign relations.\nWhile Togo's foreign policy is nonaligned, it has historical and cultural ties with western Europe, especially France and Germany. Togo recognizes the People's Republic of China, North Korea, and Cuba. It re-established relations with Israel in 1987. Togo pursues an active foreign policy and participates in international organizations. It is particularly active in West African regional affairs and in the African Union.\nIn 2017, Togo signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. Togo joined the Commonwealth of Nations, along with Gabon, at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kigali, Rwanda. In joining the Commonwealth, Foreign Minister Robert Dussey told Reuters\",\" the country sought to expand its \"diplomatic, political and economic network\" and to \"forge closer ties with the anglophone world.\"\nMilitary.\nFAT (, \"Togolese armed forces\"), consists of the army, navy, air force, and gendarmerie. Total military expenditures during the fiscal year of 2005 totalled 1.6% of the country's GDP. Military bases exist in Lom\u00e9, Temedja, Kara, Niamtougou, and Dapaong. The current Chief of the General Staff is Brigadier General Titikpina Atcha Mohamed, who took office on 19 May 2009. The air force is equipped with Alpha jets.\nHuman rights.\nTogo was labelled \"Not Free\" by Freedom House from 1972 to 1998 and from 2002 to 2006, and has been categorized as \"Partly Free\" from 1999 to 2001 and from 2007. According to a U.S. State Department report based on conditions in 2010, human rights problems include \"security force use of excessive force, including torture, which resulted in deaths and injuries; official impunity; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and detention; lengthy pretrial detention; executive influence over the judiciary; infringement of citizens' privacy rights; restrictions on freedoms of press, assembly, and movement; official corruption; discrimination and violence against women; child abuse, including female genital mutilation (FGM), and sexual exploitation of children; regional and ethnic discrimination; trafficking in persons, especially women and children; societal discrimination against persons with disabilities; official and societal discrimination against homosexual persons; societal discrimination against persons with HIV; and forced labour, including by children.\" Same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Togo, with a penalty of one to three years imprisonment.\nGeography.\nTogo has an area equal to . It borders the Bight of Benin in the south; Ghana lies to the west; Benin to the east; and to the north, it is bound by Burkina Faso. North of the equator, it lies mostly between latitudes 6\u00b0 and 11\u00b0N, and longitudes 0\u00b0 and 2\u00b0E.\nThe coast of Togo in the Gulf of Guinea is long and consists of lagoons with sandy beaches. In the north, the land is characterized by a rolling savanna in contrast to the centre of the country, which is characterized by hills. The south of Togo is characterized by a savanna and woodland plateau which reaches a coastal plain with lagoons and marshes. The highest mountain of the country is the Mont Agou at above sea level. The longest river is the Mono River with a length of . It runs from north to south.\nThe climate is \"generally tropical\" with average temperatures ranging from on the coast to about in the northernmost regions, with a drier climate and characteristics of a tropical savanna.\nTogo contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Guinean forests, Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, and West Sudanian savanna. The coast of Togo is characterized by marshes and mangroves. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.88/10, ranking it 92nd globally out of 172 countries.\nAt least five parks and reserves have been established: Abdoulaye Faunal Reserve, Fazao Malfakassa National Park, Fosse aux Lions National Park, Koutammakou, and K\u00e9ran National Park.\nEconomy.\nThe country possesses phosphate deposits and an export sector based on agricultural products such as coffee, cocoa bean, and peanuts (groundnuts), which together generate roughly 30% of export earnings. Cotton is a cash crop. The fertile land occupies 11.3% of the country, most of which is developed. Some crops are cassava, jasmine rice, maize and millet. Some other sectors are brewery and the textile industry. Low market prices for Togo's major export commodities coupled with the volatile political situation of the 1990s and 2000s had a negative effect on the economy.\nIt is listed in the least developed country group. It serves as a regional commercial and trade centre. The government's decade-long efforts supported by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to carry out economic reforms, to encourage investments, and to create the balance between income and consumption has stalled. Political unrest, including private and public sector strikes throughout 1992 and 1993, jeopardized the reform program, shrank the tax base, and disrupted economic activities in the country. Togo was ranked 117th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nIt imports machinery, equipment, petroleum products, and food. Its main import partners are France (21.1%), the Netherlands (12.1%), C\u00f4te d'Ivoire (5.9%), Germany (4.6%), Italy (4.4%), South Africa (4.3%) and China (4.1%). The main exports are cocoa, coffee, re-export of goods, phosphates and cotton. \"Major export partners\" are Burkina Faso (16.6%), China (15.4%), the Netherlands (13%), Benin (9.6%) and Mali (7.4%).\nIn terms of structural reforms, it has made progress in the liberalization of the economy, namely in the fields of trade and port activities. The privatization program of the cotton sector, telecommunications and water supply has stalled.\nOn 12 January 1994, the devaluation of the currency by 50% provided an impetus to renewed structural adjustment; these efforts were facilitated by the end of strife in 1994 and a return to overt political calm. Progress depends on increased openness in government financial operations (to accommodate increased social service outlays) and possible downsizing of the armed forces, on which the regime has depended to stay in place. Lack of aid and depressed cocoa prices generated a 1% fall in GDP in 1998, with growth resuming in 1999. Togo is a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).\nAgriculture is the \"backbone\" of the economy. A shortage of funds for the purchase of irrigation equipment and fertilizers has reduced agricultural output. Agriculture generated 28.2% of GDP in 2012 and employed 49% of the working population in 2010. The country is essentially self-sufficient in food production. Livestock production is dominated by cattle breeding.\nMining generated about 33.9% of GDP in 2012 and employed 12% of the population in 2010. Togo's gold production in 2015 is 16 metric tons. Togo has the fourth-largest phosphate deposits in the world. Their production is 2.1 million tons per year. There are reserves of limestone, marble and salt. Industry provides 20.4% of Togo's national income, as it consists of light industries and builders. Some reserves of limestone allow Togo to produce cement.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nTogo's road network plays a pivotal role in the nation's transportation infrastructure, facilitating both domestic mobility and international trade. The country boasts a total road length of approximately 11,734 kilometers, equating to about 1.26 meters of road per inhabitant. Of this network, 1,794 kilometers are paved, accounting for roughly 15% of the total roadways.\nThe primary arterial routes include a paved highway extending northward from the capital city, Lom\u00e9, to the Burkina Faso border, and another running east\u2013west along the coast, linking Lom\u00e9 to neighboring Benin and Ghana. These corridors are integral to regional connectivity and are part of the Trans-West African Coastal Highway system, which aims to enhance trade and movement across West African nations.\nChallenges and developments.\nDespite the extensive network, Togo's road infrastructure faces several challenges. Many roads, especially unpaved ones, are in poor condition, characterized by deep potholes and inadequate maintenance. This deterioration contributes to hazardous driving conditions, compounded by the presence of pedestrians, livestock, and a high density of motorcycles. Overland travel off the main roads often necessitates the use of four-wheel-drive vehicles due to the challenging terrain.\nIn response to these issues, Togo has embarked on initiatives to modernize its road transport sector. With support from the World Bank and guidance from the International Road Transport Union, the Togolese government has introduced new transport legislation aimed at formalizing and professionalizing the industry. This legal framework seeks to improve the efficiency and safety of road transport, addressing longstanding infrastructural and operational challenges.\nUrban transportation.\nWithin urban centers like Lom\u00e9, various modes of transportation are prevalent. Taxis, identifiable by their yellow license plates, offer a common means of travel. Additionally, motorcycle taxis, known as \"moto-taxis,\" provide a popular alternative, especially for navigating congested city streets. While moto-taxis are more economical and adept at maneuvering through traffic, they may not be suitable for passengers with significant luggage.\nRailways.\nTogo has a railway network of as of 2008, with no further updates in the network as of 2023. It follows a track gauge of (narrow gauge) Trains are operated by (SNCT), which was established as a result of the restructuring and renaming of from 1997 to 1998. Between Hahoto\u00e9 and the port of Kp\u00e9m\u00e9, the (CTMB) operated phosphate trains.\nThe following are the railway networks present in the country:\nAir.\nTogo has a total of eight airports, as of 2012, out of which two are international airports and six are domestic airports. The only major airport of the country is Lom\u00e9\u2013Tokoin International Airport serving the capital, Lom\u00e9, and another Niamtougou International Airport in Niamtougou, serving the country's northern part.\nWater.\nTogo, in terms of water transport, is only navigable, mostly seasonally on the Mono River, depending on rainfall, as of 2011. Togo has only one large container port for carrying trade operations in and out of the country, the Port of Lom\u00e9, in the capital.\nDemographics.\nThe November 2010 census gave Togo a population of 6,191,155, more than double the total counted in the last census; in 2022 the Togo population was 8,680,832. That census, taken in 1981, showed the nation had a population of 2,719,567. The capital, Lom\u00e9, grew from 375,499 in 1981 to 837,437 in 2010. When the urban population of surrounding Golfe prefecture is added, the Lom\u00e9 Agglomeration contained 1,477,660 residents in 2010.\nOther cities in Togo according to the new census were Sokod\u00e9 (95,070), Kara (94,878), Kpalim\u00e9 (75,084), Atakpam\u00e9 (69,261), Dapaong (58,071) and Ts\u00e9vi\u00e9 (54,474). With an estimated population of (as of [ [update]]), Togo is the 107th largest country by population. Most of the population (65%) live in rural villages dedicated to agriculture or pastures. The population of Togo shows a stronger growth: from 1961 (the year after independence) to 2003 it quintupled.\nEthnic groups.\nIn Togo, there are about 40 different ethnic groups, the most numerous of which are the Ewe in the south who make up 32% of the population. Along the southern coastline, they account for 21% of the population. Also found are Kotokoli or Tem and Tchamba in the centre and the Kabye people in the north (22%). The Ouatchis are 14% of the population. Sometimes the Ewes and Ouatchis are considered the same, while the French who studied both groups considered them different people.\nOther ethnic groups include the Mina, Mossi, the Moba and Bassar, the Tchokossi of Mango (about 8%). Non-Africans include French people and Portuguese people.\nThe Adele people.\nThe Adele, who call themselves B\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9, speak G\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9, a language of the Gur family. Their villages number about twenty, divided between eastern Ghana and the western edge of Togo\u2019s Blitta prefecture.\nAccording to their oral tradition, in the original village of Dibemkpa, the deity Ouroubwar\u00e9 lowered four men and three women from the sky, who brought essential skills such as pottery, spinning, basketry, forging, and weaving. Over time, new migrations spread the community to Dikp\u00e9l\u00e9ou, site of the Nayo shrine, and then into multiple villages founded by different lineages.\nAd\u00e9l\u00e9 settlements are known for their distinctive round, windowless houses with thatched roofs supported by external wooden posts. The village of Dibemkpa still holds numerous archaeological remains and is considered key for understanding the group\u2019s historical or mythical origins.\nThe Akebou people.\nThe Akebou live in one of the plateaus of the Atakora mountains in central Togo, accessible by road from Atakpam\u00e9 to Badou. Early settlement in the upper Gbankpar\u00e9 valley developed around independent villages, each maintaining shrines dedicated to local protective deities and affirming its autochthonous roots.\nOver time, several groups joined this area. The first Ewe migrants, led by a figure named Ak\u00e9 or Ek\u00e9, arrived in the late 18th century, settling near Lonfo and spreading into villages such as V\u00e9 and Kougnohou. A second wave of Ewe migrants in the late 19th century founded Djakpodji, which gave rise to other settlements. Additional groups included the Anyanga, who settled after conflicts in the plains, and the Ntribou, who fled Ashanti raids to find refuge in Akebou lands.\nTo organize these diverse communities, a central chieftaincy was established at Lonfo, creating a unique political center in what had been an acephalous society. Lonfo\u2019s dry hilltop site and stone-walled palace, unlike the forested villages around it, symbolized a place reserved for leadership rather than everyday settlement. Oral accounts recall three successive chiefs, culminating in the reign of Akountsou, whose rule ended the system amid local resistance.\nArchaeological remains of Lonfo\u2019s stone structures still stand today, and libations are made in memory of the chiefs. The plii (chief) held significant ritual authority, separate from religious sanctuaries maintained by older villages. Despite the centralized role, each group retained its distinct identity and village territory within Ak\u00e9bou society.\nConflicts with neighboring Ashanti and occasional disputes with Akposso communities marked parts of Ak\u00e9bou history. The introduction of firearms, possibly linked to coastal trade, may have reinforced the power of Lonfo\u2019s leadership during regional conflicts.\nThe Ntrubo people.\nThe Ntrubo are represented in Togo by two small villages\u2014Diguinge and Abosomkope\u2014located in the southern part of the Adele plateau. Most Ntrubo communities, however, live in Ghana, just west of this area.\nIn Togo, the Ntrubo coexist closely with the Adele, speaking both Delo, their own language, and the Adele language. Delo belongs to the Tem language group, which includes Tem (Kotokoli), Kabiye, Bago, and Lamba. This connection is linguistically puzzling because the Ntrubo are geographically isolated from other Tem speakers, suggesting that the region once formed a more continuous mountain settlement zone before later ethnic reshaping.\nLocal genealogies trace the Diguinge community to an ancestor named Boisa, whose descendants spread across multiple villages. Abosomkope, by contrast, traces its origins to Gounou, a neighbor of Boisa, with settlement movements linked to the early rubber trade promoted by the Germans.\nHistorical evidence suggests that the Ntrubo once formed part of an extensive mountain settlement area stretching from the Lamba in the north to the Adele in the south. Over time, migrations and the arrival of other groups\u2014such as the Adele and Anyanga\u2014have made the Ntribou a linguistic and cultural frontier at the southern edge of the Tem-speaking region.\nThe Akposso people.\nThe Akposso trace their origins to two main traditions: a belief in local autochthony, especially strong in the Logbo area, and a more widespread migration narrative from Nots\u00e9, likely symbolic but possibly linked to the arrival of Ewe groups.\nAccording to oral accounts, the ancestor Ida founded , a fortified hilltop site between the Logbo and Haito mountains. From there, the Akposso moved westward to Akposso-Koubi in present-day Ghana, where they reportedly resisted expansionist neighbors like the Akwamu in the 17th century. Subsequent migrations spread eastward into today\u2019s Akposso Plateau through multiple waves and lineages.\nThe Akposso society consists of several major groups, including the Litime, Ouwui, Ikponou, Logbo, and Ouma, each with its own villages. Linguistically, the Akposso speak Akposso, classified by early scholars in the Avatime-Bouem group. Contacts with neighboring peoples have shaped distinct dialects: Ikposso, Logbo, and Ikpana, with additional Ewe and Ashanti influences.\nPolitically, traditional Akposso communities were decentralized, governed by village elders whose authority was primarily ritual. There was no overarching chiefdom until the colonial era introduced the role of awli (supreme chief). Despite this, they maintained a strong cultural cohesion through shared religious practices, notably the cult of the deity Kolissa, guardian of agricultural rites like the fonio harvest festival known today as Ovazau.\nThe Bogo (Ahlon) people.\nThe Bogo (also called Ahlon) are a small group of about 6,000 people living in the valleys of Danyi, Togo, and parts of Ghana. They descend from a mix of an ancient clan, the Issassoum\u00e8, and later migrant groups possibly from Il\u00e9-If\u00e8 or Nots\u00e9.\nTheir society is structured around three main clans (Bolo\u00e8, Bougli, Bono\u00e8) plus the Issassoum\u00e8, who are recognized as the original landowners. Political power is shared: the Bolo\u00e8 hold the chieftaincy, the Bono\u00e8 manage regalia, and the Bougli provide warriors. The Issassoum\u00e8 alone grant the sacred clay used in chief installation rituals.\nReligious life centers on the Danyi River and the Odo sanctuary at In\u00e9n\u00e9bia. Despite Ewe influence, the Bogo remain culturally distinct and keep their Igo language alive.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to a 2012 US government religious freedoms report, in 2004 the University of Lom\u00e9 estimated that 33% of the population were traditional animists, 28% were Roman Catholic, 20% Sunni Muslim, 9% Protestant and another 5% belonged to other Christian denominations. The remaining 5% were reported to include persons not affiliated with any religious group. The report noted that \"many\" Christians and Muslims continue to perform indigenous religious practices.\nIn 2023, The World Factbook stated that 42.3% of the population was Christian and 14% Muslim, with 36.9% being followers of indigenous beliefs, less than one percent being Hindus, Jews, and followers of other religions, and 6.2% being unaffiliated.\nChristianity began to spread from the middle of the 15th century, after the arrival of Portuguese Catholic missionaries. Germans introduced Protestantism in the second half of the 19th century when a hundred missionaries of the Bremen Missionary Society were sent to the coastal areas of Togo and Ghana. Togo's Protestants were known as \"Brema\", a corruption of the word \"Bremen\". After World War I, German missionaries had to leave, which gave birth to the early autonomy of the Ewe Evangelical Church.\nIn 2022, Freedom House rated Togo's religious freedom as 3 out of 4, noting that religious freedom is constitutionally protected and generally respected in practice. Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism are recognised by the state; other groups must register as religious associations to receive similar benefits. The registration process has been subject to long delays with almost 900 applications pending at the beginning of 2021.\nLanguages.\nAccording to Ethnologue, 39 distinct languages are spoken in the country, some of them by communities that number fewer than 100,000 members. Of the 39 languages, the sole official language is French. Two spoken indigenous languages were designated politically as national languages in 1975: Ew\u00e9 (; ) and Kabiy\u00e9.\nThough not native to most groups, French is used in formal education, legislature, all forms of media, administration and commerce. Ewe is a language of wider communication in the south. Tem functions to a limited extent as a trade language in some northern towns. Officially, Ewe and Kabiye are \"national languages\", which in the Togolese context means languages that are promoted in formal education and used in the media. Others are Gen, Aja, Moba, Ntcham, and Ife. In joining the Commonwealth, the Togolese government has anticipated opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English.\nHealth.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that Togo is fulfilling 73.1% of what it should be fulfilling for the right to health based on its level of income. When looking at the right to health with respect to children, Togo achieves 93.8% of what is expected based on its current income. In regards to the right to health amongst the adult population, the country achieves 88.2% of what is expected based on the nation's level of income. It falls into the \"very bad\" category when evaluating the right to reproductive health because the nation is fulfilling 37.3% of what the nation is expected to achieve based on the resources (income) it has available.\nHealth expenditure in Togo was 5.2% of GDP in 2014, which ranks the country in 45th place in the world. The infant mortality rate is approximately 43.7 deaths per 1,000 children in 2016. Male life expectancy at birth was at 62.3 in 2016, whereas it was at 67.7 years for females. There were 5 physicians per 100,000 people in 2008 According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 4% of women in Togo have undergone female genital mutilation.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Togo is 368, compared with 350 in 2010 and 539.7 in 1990. The under 5 mortality rate per 1,000 births is 100, and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5's mortality is 32. In Togo the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 2 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women is 1 in 67.\nIn 2016, Togo had 4100 (2400\u20136100) new HIV infections and 5100 (3100\u20137700) AIDS-related deaths. There were 100,000 (73,000-130,000) people living with HIV in 2016, among whom 51% (37-67%) were accessing antiretroviral therapy. Among pregnant women living with HIV, 86% (59% - &gt;95%) were accessing treatment or prophylaxis to prevent transmission of HIV to their children. An estimated &lt;1000 (&lt;500-1400) children were newly infected with HIV due to mother-to-child transmission. Among people living with HIV, approximately 42% (30-55%) had suppressed viral loads.\nAFD is working to enhance living conditions in Lom\u00e9, the coastal city with a population of 1.4 million, by modernizing solid waste management services. The project involves enhancing garbage collection through the construction of a new landfill that meets international standards.\nIn 2024, a Universal Health Insurance program was launched, covering 800,000 people within six months and implemented through the National Social Security Fund and the National Health Insurance Institute.\nEducation.\nEducation in Togo is compulsory for six years. In 1996, the gross primary enrollment rate was 119.6%, and the net primary enrollment rate was 81.3%. In 2011, the net enrollment rate was 94%. The education system has \"suffered from teacher shortages, lower educational quality in rural areas, and high repetition and dropout rates\".\nCulture.\nTogo's cultural life reflects traditions of its major groups: Ewe/Mina in the south and Kabye/Tem in the north, notably the regional use of Ewe and Kabiye as widely spoken languages, Ewe-Mina religious practices centered on the creator god Mawu and associated vodun, and among the Kabye the Evala wrestling initiation rite, while the Guin community (linked historically to the Mina on the southeast coast) marks the new year with the Ep\u00e9-Ekp\u00e9 \"taking of the stone\" ceremony at Glidji.\nAmong Ewe communities, twin statuettes known as venavi (and hohovi among the Fon) venerate and memorialize twins; the Yoruba counterpart is the \u00e8re \u00ecbej\u00ec (ibeji). In the Kloto/Kpalim\u00e9 carving tradition, artisans are noted for \"marriage chains\" linking two figures with rings carved from a single block of wood.https://\nWeaving traditions are also prominent in Togo (e.g., the Bafilo weaving centre), with ceremonial garments produced by local artisans. Beyond weaving, wax-print cloth (pagne) is central to dress and social life in Togo: Togolese women traders shaped the design and circulation of these textiles, which function as valued attire for ceremonies and markers of taste and status in colonial and postcolonial contexts.\nBasketball is Togo's \"second most practiced sport\". Togo featured a national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018\u20132020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup in the men's section.\nMass media in Togo includes radio, television, and online and print formats. The Agence Togolaise de Presse news agency began in 1975. The Union des Journalistes Independants du Togo press association is headquartered in Lom\u00e9. Togolese Television is the state-owned service.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30139", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30139", "title": "History of Togo", "text": "The history of Togo can be traced to archaeological finds which indicate that ancient tribes were able to produce pottery and process tin. During the period from the 11th century to the 16th century, the Ew\u00e9, the Mina, the Gun, and various other tribes entered the region. Most of them settled in coastal areas. The Portuguese arrived in the late 15th century, followed by other European powers. Until the 19th century, the coastal region was a major slave trade centre, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name \"The Slave Coast\".\nIn 1884, Germany claimed a coastal protectorate, which grew inland until it became the German colony of Togoland in 1905. A railway, the port of Lom\u00e9, and other infrastructure were developed. During the First World War, Togoland was invaded by Britain and France. In 1922, Great Britain received the League of Nations mandate to govern the western part of Togo and France to govern the eastern part. After World War II, these mandates became UN Trust Territories. The residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the new independent nation of Ghana in 1957.\nFrench Togoland became the Togolese Republic in 1960. Its Constitution, adopted in 1961, instituted the National Assembly of Togo as the supreme legislative body. In the same year, the first president, Sylvanus Olympio, dissolved the opposition parties and arrested their leaders. When he was assassinated in a coup in 1963, the military handed over power to an interim government led by Nicolas Grunitzky.\nThe military leader Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma overthrew Grunitzky in a bloodless coup in 1967. He assumed the presidency and introduced a one-party system in 1969. Eyad\u00e9ma remained in power for the next 38 years. When he died in 2005, the military installed his son, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9, as president. Gnassingbe held elections and won, but the opposition claimed fraud. Because of political violence, around 40,000 Togolese fled to neighboring countries. Gnassingb\u00e9 was re-elected two more times. In late 2017, anti-government protests were suppressed by security forces.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeological discoveries in Togo have revealed a deep and continuous human presence stretching from the Late Paleolithic to the 19th century. Surveys and excavations carried out between 1979 and the early 1990s unearthed significant material remains across the country.\nIn the Oti prefecture, evidence of human habitation dating to the probable Late Stone Age includes lithic industries, rock paintings, stone pavements, and early iron smelting remains, indicating both symbolic expression and metallurgical knowledge.\nIn the Binah and Kozah regions, archaeologists documented sacred groves, terracotta figurines, and remains of domestic and ritual pavements, as well as iron production installations. These finds suggest complex spiritual practices linked to settled communities with metallurgical technologies.\nIn Haho, remains of earthen and stone enclosures, soil engineering features, and metal smelting workshops were uncovered. These point to organized land use and craft specialization within structured settlements.\nIn the Kloto region, similar stone enclosures and metallurgical debris attest to widespread use of iron and the development of local production networks.\nIndigenous settlement structures.\nArchaeological and ethnographic evidence reveals that Togo was continuously inhabited long before the arrival of historically recorded migrant groups. The earliest populations are often associated with mountainous regions and interfluves, which offered favorable conditions: cooler climate, fertile soils, protection from disease vectors, and strategic defense against slave raids.\nOral traditions in various regions affirm an autochthonous status through myths of emergence from the earth or descent from the sky. In some areas, groups that settled later tend to conceal or deny the presence of earlier populations, often for political reasons related to customary legitimacy or local authority.\nMaterial traces of these early populations include stone architecture, ancient metallurgy, agricultural terracing, and localized language variants. Linguistic data suggest that Kwa languages in the south developed in situ, with their internal diversity (e.g., Ewe, Fon, Guin, Ouatchi) reflecting long-term contact with now-vanished earlier tongues.\nResearchers classify the autochthonous populations into three main groups:\nThese autochthonous communities played a foundational role in shaping Togo's human landscape prior to external migrations and colonial influence.\nA \"stone civilization\" in the highlands.\nSome of Togo's oldest populations are found in the Atakora range and Kabiy\u00e8 uplands. These mountainous zones functioned historically as cultural refuges, shielded from external influences. As a result, many highland communities preserved ancestral ways of life to an exceptional degree. Anthropologist Jean-Claude Froelich described these populations as \u201cpaleonigritics\u201d, indicating both their antiquity relative to neighboring plains groups and the homogeneity of their cultural substratum.\nEmergence of the first forms of state.\nAjatado cultural area.\nBetween the 12th and 16th centuries, the territory of present-day Togo witnessed the emergence of some of its earliest relatively centralized political formations. These developments, in both the north and the south, marked the beginning of a more endogenous historical dynamic.\nThe southern population of Togo can only be understood within the broader Ajatado cultural area, a historical and linguistic region encompassing the lands between the lower courses of the Amou (Volta) River to the west and the Ou\u00e9m\u00e9 River to the east. These boundaries placed it in contact with Akan and Yoruba cultural zones. Inland, the area extended roughly 150 to 200 kilometers north, bordered by Akpafu, Ana, and Sa peoples, while to the south it opened onto the Atlantic coast.\nThe term Ajatado reflects the predominance of Aja-origin populations in the region. It corrects earlier linguistic misconceptions\u2014especially the influence of German ethnolinguists like Westermann, who had portrayed Ewe as the parent language of the region. In reality, modern scholarship affirms that Aja is the original linguistic substratum from which Ewe and related languages have emerged.\nHistorically, the prominence of the Fon kingdom of Dahomey, particularly under King Agaja in the 1730s, led many European accounts to conflate all coastal peoples with the Fon. This overshadowed the distinct Aja-speaking groups such as the (Grand-Popo) and the (Petit-Popo).\nLinguistically, the Ajatado area comprises nine main language groups: Aja, Ewe, Fon, Ayizo, Xwla, Gun, Guin, Sahw\u00e9, and Xw\u00e9da. These languages are mutually intelligible to varying degrees and are spoken across modern-day Togo, Benin, and Ghana.\nAge of origins: 12th\u201316th centuries.\nReconstructing the precise migration routes of the Aja ancestors remains challenging. Oral traditions offer divergent details concerning the sequence and locations of migratory halts, though they often preserve a common narrative framework. Each clan adapts this shared story to reflect its specific lineage, indicating distinct founding ancestors, toponyms, or additional migratory stages.\nAccording to traditions recorded in Tado, the Aja trace their origin to the Yoruba region. A prince of Oyo named Togb\u00e9-Anyi is said to have led a group first to K\u00e9tou, and later to Azanm\u00e8, a small settlement near the Mono River where they joined the Alou. This site would evolve into the town of Tado, which became a major political and cultural center for Aja-speaking groups.\nYoruba oral history associates the Aja with the descendants of Oduduwa, a mythical ancestor of Yoruba dynasties. One of Oduduwa's grandsons was reportedly crowned Oupopo, ruler of Popo. While Aja and Ewe traditions sometimes identify K\u00e9tou as a place of origin, K\u00e9tou's own oral accounts do not mention Aja migrations, suggesting the Aja had not yet formed a distinct identity when passing through the area.\nArchaeological findings, especially ceramic remains, and dynastic genealogies indicate that these movements occurred between the 8th and 11th centuries. The dispersal of Oduduwa's descendants is placed in the 9th century, with the establishment of cities like Oyo, Ketou, and Sabe likely completed by the 11th century.\nThe migrants, considered more advanced in political organization and material culture, founded new settlements or assumed control of existing ones. In some instances, such as Benin, they may have replaced earlier dynasties and taken over established leadership structures.\nThe early political formation of Tado marked a foundational moment in southern Togo's history. Oral traditions describe the migration of a group led by the legendary Togb\u00e9-Anyi, possibly of Yoruba origin, who settled near the Mono River. Though his identity remains mythical, his role in founding Tado is central to local narratives.\nUpon arrival, the migrants allied with the Azanou, local political leaders, and the Alou, skilled blacksmiths and presumed autochthons. In return for kingship, Togb\u00e9-Anyi reportedly accepted seven sons of Aza as ministers, forming a dual lineage structure: royal (Anyigbafio) and ministerial (Siko).\nArchaeological remains confirm intense metalworking activity in Tado, dated between the 11th and 12th centuries, consistent with the traditions. Over time, Tado grew into a cluster of semi-autonomous settlements\u2014such as Tado-Alou, Tado-Dom\u00e9, and Tado-Ajatch\u00e8\u2014forming a dispersed yet unified center of Aja identity in the region.\nPre-colonial.\nLittle is known about the history of Togo before the late fifteenth century, when Portuguese explorers arrived, although there are signs of Ewe settlement for several centuries before their arrival. Various tribes moved into the country from all sides \u2013 the Ewe from Benin, and the Mina and the Guin from Ghana. These three groups settled along the coast.\nBefore the colonial period, the various ethnic groups in Togo had little contact with each other. Except for two small kingdoms in the north, the territory consisted of groups of villages which were under military pressure from the two neighbouring West African powers \u2013 the Asante Empire from Ghana and the Kingdom of Dahomey from Benin.\nThe first Europeans to see Togo were Jo\u00e3o de Santar\u00e9m and P\u00earo Escobar, the Portuguese explorers who sailed along its coast between 1471 and 1473. The Portuguese built forts in neighboring Ghana (at Elmina) and Benin (at Ouidah). Although the coast of Togo had no natural harbors, the Portuguese did trade at a small fort at Porto Seguro. For the next 200 years, the coastal region was a major trading center for Europeans in search of slaves, earning Togo and the surrounding region the name \"The Slave Coast\".\nThe Ewe Kingdom of Nots\u00e9 was centered around the city of Nots\u00e9. According to Ewe oral tradition, in the 17th century, King Agokoli, who was cruel, built a wall called the Agbogbo, which surrounded Nots\u00e9. He also ordered them to kill their elders and do impossible tasks. The Ewe people embarked on a mass migration to leave the kingdom, and escape from King Agokoli. While this story is a legend, the old walls of Nots\u00e9 do exist.\nThe Kingdom of Aja-Tado was founded by Aja people who settled in the city of Tado no later than 1000 CE. Around 1575, some people left Tado and founded the Kingdom of Allada.\nIn the 18th century, the Anufo people left the area of what is now the Ivory Coast. They migrated through present-day Burkina Faso and Ghana, before finally settling in northern Togo. There, they established a small kingdom with its capital at Sansanne-Mango. \nTogoville was located in what is today the southern part of Togo, and was ruled by King Mlapa III in the 1880s.\nColonial rule.\nGerman Togoland.\nThe German Empire established the protectorate of Togoland (in what is now the nation of Togo and most of what is now the Volta Region of Ghana) in 1884 during the period generally known as the \"Scramble for Africa\". Gustav Nachtigal, Germany's Commissioner for West Africa who oversaw both the inclusion of Togoland as well as Kamerun into the German colonial empire, had negotiated with King Mlapa III to gain control of the coast of what would eventually become Togoland, particularly the cities of Lom\u00e9, Sebe and An\u00e9ho. France, at the time controller of neighboring Benin, recognized German rule in the region on 24 December 1885.\nThe colony was established in part of what was then the Slave Coast and German control was gradually extended inland. Because it became Germany's only self-supporting colony and because of its extensive rail and road infrastructure\u2014Germany had opened Togo's first rail line between Lom\u00e9 and An\u00e9ho in 1905\u2014Togoland was known as its model possession.\nAt the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 the colony was drawn into the conflict. It was invaded and quickly overrun by British and French forces during the Togoland campaign and placed under military rule. In 1916 the territory was divided into separate British and French administrative zones, and this was formalized in 1922 with the creation of British Togoland and French Togoland.\nLeague of Nations mandates.\nOn August 8, 1914, French and British forces invaded Togoland and the German forces there surrendered on 26 August. In 1916, Togoland was divided into French and British administrative zones. Following the war, Togoland formally became a League of Nations mandate divided for administrative purposes between France and the United Kingdom. After World War I, newly founded Czechoslovakia was also interested in this colony but this idea did not succeed. Lome was initially allocated to the British zone but after negotiations transferred to France 1 October 1920.\nAfter World War II, the mandate became a UN trust territory administered by the United Kingdom and France. During the mandate and trusteeship periods, western Togo was administered as part of the British Gold Coast. In December 1956, the residents of British Togoland voted to join the Gold Coast as part of the new independent nation of Ghana.\nIn the Representative Assembly elections in 1946, there were two parties, the Committee of Togolese Unity (CUT) and the Togolese Party of Progress (PTP). The CUT was overwhelmingly successful, and Sylvanus Olympio, the CUT leader became Council leader. However, the CUT was defeated in the 1951 Representative Assembly elections and the 1952 Territorial Assembly elections, and refused to participate in further French supervised elections because it claimed that the PTP was receiving French support. By statute in 1955, French Togoland became an autonomous republic within the French union, although it retained its UN trusteeship status. Following elections to the Territorial Assembly on 12 June 1955, which were boycotted by CUT, considerable power over internal affairs was granted, with an elected executive body headed by a prime minister responsible to the legislature. These changes were embodied in a constitution approved in a 1956 referendum. On 10 September 1956, Nicolas Grunitzky became Prime Minister of the Republic of Togo. The situation escalated further on 21 June 1957, when the local population of the Pya-Hodo, Kozah, took advantage of the visit of the United Nations mission, to express its frustration with the French colonial administration. Faced with the anger of the demonstrators, protesting against the arrest of the Togolese nationalist, Bouyo Moukp\u00e9, the colonial army fired on the crowd that frequented the Hoda market, killing 20 and injuring many. Due to irregularities in the plebiscite, a UN-supervised parliamentary election was held on 27 April 1958, the first held in Togo with universal suffrage, which was won by the opposition pro-independence CUT and its leader Sylvanus Olympio, who became prime minister. On 13 October 1958 the French government announced that full independence would be granted. On 14 November 1958 the United Nations' General Assembly took note of the French government's declaration according to which Togo which was under French administration would gain independence in 1960, thus marking an end to the trusteeship period. On 5 December 1959 the United Nations' General Assembly resolved that the UN Trusteeship Agreement with France for Cameroon would end when Togo became independent on 27 April 1960.\nOn 27 April 1960, in a smooth transition, Togo severed its constitutional ties with France, shed its UN trusteeship status, and became fully independent under a provisional constitution with Olympio as president.\nIndependence and turmoil.\nA new constitution adopted by referendum in 1961 established an executive president, elected for 7 years by universal suffrage and a weak National Assembly. The president was empowered to appoint ministers and dissolve the assembly, holding a monopoly of executive power. In elections that year, from which Grunitzky's party was disqualified, Olympio's party won 100% of the vote and all 51 National Assembly seats, and he became Togo's first elected president.\nDuring this period, four principal political parties existed in Togo: the leftist Juvento, the Democratic Union of the Togolese People (UDPT), the PTP, founded by Grunitzky but having limited support, and the Party of Togolese Unity, the party of President Olympio. Rivalries between elements of these parties had begun as early as the 1940s, and they came to a head with Olympio dissolving the opposition parties in January 1962 because of alleged plots against the majority party government. The reign of Olympio was marked by the terror of his militia, the Ablode Sodjas. Many opposition members, including Grunitzky and Meatchi, were jailed or fled to avoid arrest.\nOn 13 January 1963 Olympio was overthrown and killed in a coup d'\u00e9tat led by army non-commissioned officers dissatisfied with conditions following their discharge from the French army. Grunitzky returned from exile 2 days later to head a provisional government with the title of prime minister. On 5 May 1963, the Togolese adopted a new constitution by referendum, which reinstated a multi-party system. They also voted in a general election to choose deputies from all political parties for the National Assembly, and elected Grunitzky as president and Antoine Meatchi as vice president. Nine days later, President Grunitzky formed a government in which all parties were represented.\nDuring the next several years, the Grunitzky government's power became insecure. On 21 November 1966, an attempt to overthrow Grunitzky, inspired principally by civilian political opponents in the UT party, was unsuccessful. Grunitzky then tried to lessen his reliance on the army, but on 13 January 1967, a coup led by Lt. Col. \u00c9tienne Eyad\u00e9ma (later Gen. Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma) and Kl\u00e9ber Dadjo ousted President Grunitzky without bloodshed. Following the coup, political parties were banned, and all constitutional processes were suspended. Dadjo became the chairman of the \"committee of national reconciliation\", which ruled the country until 14 April, when Eyad\u00e9ma assumed the presidency. In late 1969, a single national political party, the Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), was created, and President Eyad\u00e9ma was elected party president on 29 November 1969. In 1972, a referendum, in which Eyad\u00e9ma ran unopposed, confirmed his role as the country's president.\nEyad\u00e9ma's rule.\nSecond republic and third republic.\nIn late 1979, Eyad\u00e9ma declared a third republic and a transition to greater civilian rule with a mixed civilian and military cabinet. He garnered 99.97% of the vote in uncontested presidential elections held in late 1979 and early 1980. A new constitution also provided for a national assembly to serve primarily as a consultative body. Eyad\u00e9ma was reelected to a third consecutive 7-year term in December 1986 with 99.5% of the vote in an uncontested election. On 23 September 1986, a group of some 70 armed Togolese dissidents crossed into Lom\u00e9 from Ghana in an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Eyad\u00e9ma government.\nOpposition.\nIn 1989 and 1990, Togo, like many other countries, was affected by the winds of democratic change sweeping Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. On 5 October 1990, the trial of students who handed out antigovernment tracts sparked riots in Lom\u00e9. Anti-government demonstrations and violent clashes with the security forces marked the months that followed. In April 1991, the government began negotiations with newly formed opposition groups and agreed to a general amnesty that permitted exiled political opponents to return to Togo. After a general strike and further demonstrations, the government and opposition signed an agreement to hold a \"national forum\" on 12 June 1991.\nThe national forum, dominated by opponents of President Eyad\u00e9ma, opened in July 1991 and immediately declared itself to be a sovereign \"National Conference.\" Although subjected to severe harassment from the government, the conference drafted an interim constitution calling for a 1-year transitional regime tasked with organizing free elections for a new government. The conference selected Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, a lawyer and human rights group head, as transitional prime minister but kept President Eyad\u00e9ma as chief of state for the transition, although with limited powers.\nA test of wills between the president and his opponents followed over the next 3 years during which President Eyad\u00e9ma gradually gained the upper hand. Frequent political paralysis and intermittent violence marked this period. Following a vote by the transitional legislature (High Council of the Republic) to dissolve the President's political party\u2014the RPT\u2014in November 1991, the army attacked the prime minister's office on 3 December and captured the prime minister. Koffigoh then formed a second transition government in January 1992 with substantial participation by ministers from the President's party. Opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio, son of the slain president Sylvanus Olympio, was ambushed and seriously wounded apparently by soldiers on 5 May 1992.\nIn July and August 1992, a commission composed of presidential and opposition representatives negotiated a new political agreement. On 27 September, the public overwhelmingly approved the text of a new, democratic constitution, formally initiating Togo's fourth republic.\nPowerless legislature and political violence.\nThe democratic process was set back in October 1991, when elements of the army held the interim legislature hostage for 24 hours. This effectively put an end to the interim legislature. In retaliation, on 16 November, opposition political parties and labor unions declared a general strike intended to force President Eyad\u00e9ma to agree to satisfactory conditions for elections. The general strike largely shut down Lom\u00e9 for months and resulted in severe damage to the economy.\nIn January 1993, President Eyad\u00e9ma declared the transition at an end and reappointed Koffigoh as prime minister under Eyad\u00e9ma's authority. This set off public demonstrations, and, on 25 January, members of the security forces fired on peaceful demonstrators, killing at least 19. In the ensuing days, several security force members were waylaid and injured or killed by civilian oppositionists. On 30 January 1993, elements of the military went on an 8-hour rampage throughout Lom\u00e9, firing indiscriminately and killing at least 12 people. This incident provoked more than 300,000 Togolese to flee Lom\u00e9 for Benin, Ghana, or the interior of Togo. Although most had returned by early 1996, some still remain abroad.\nOn 25 March 1993, armed Togolese dissident commandos based in Ghana attacked Lom\u00e9's main military camp and tried unsuccessfully to kill President Eyad\u00e9ma. They inflicted significant casualties, however, which set off lethal reprisals by the military against soldiers thought to be associated with the attackers.\nNegotiating with the opposition.\nUnder substantial domestic and foreign pressure and the burden of the general strike, the presidential faction entered negotiations with the opposition in early 1993. Four rounds of talks led to the 11 July Ouagadougou agreement setting forth conditions for upcoming presidential and legislative elections and ending the general strike as of 3 August 1993. The presidential elections were set for 25 August, but hasty and inadequate technical preparations, concerns about fraud, and the lack of effective campaign organization by the opposition led the chief opposition candidates\u2014former minister and Organization of African Unity Secretary General Edem Kodjo and lawyer Yawovi Agboyibo\u2014to drop out of the race before election day and to call for a boycott. President Eyad\u00e9ma won the elections by a 96.42% vote against token opposition. About 36% of the voters went to the polls; the others boycotted.\nGhana-based armed dissidents launched a new commando attack on military sites in Lom\u00e9 in January 1994. President Eyad\u00e9ma was unhurt, and the attack and subsequent reaction by the Togolese armed forces resulted in hundreds of deaths, mostly civilians. The government went ahead with legislative elections on 6 February and 20 February 1994. In generally free and fair polls as witnessed by international observers, the allied opposition parties UTD and CAR together won a narrow majority in the National Assembly.\nEdem Kodjo named as prime minister.\nOn April 22, President Eyad\u00e9ma named Edem Kodjo, the head of the smaller opposition party, the UTD, as prime minister instead of Yawovi Agboyibo, whose CAR party had far more seats. Kodjo's acceptance of the post of prime minister provoked the CAR to break the opposition alliance and refuse to join the Kodjo government. \nKodjo was then forced to form a governing coalition with the RPT. Kodjo's government emphasized economic recovery, building democratic institutions and the rule of law and the return of Togolese refugees abroad. In early 1995, the government made slow progress toward its goals, aided by the CAR's August 1995 decision to end a 9-month boycott of the National Assembly. However, Kodjo was forced to reshuffle his government in late 1995, strengthening the representation by Eyad\u00e9ma's RPT party, and he resigned in August 1996. Since then, Eyad\u00e9ma has reemerged with a sure grip on power, controlling most aspects of government.\nIn the June 1998 presidential election, the government prevented citizens from effectively exercising the right to vote. The Interior Ministry declared Eyad\u00e9ma the winner with 52% of the vote in the 1998 election; however, serious irregularities in the government's conduct of the election strongly favored the incumbent and appear to have affected the outcome materially. Although the government did not obstruct the functioning of political opponents openly, the President used the strength of the military and his government allies to intimidate and harass citizens and opposition groups. The government and the state remained highly centralized: President Eyad\u00e9ma's national government appointed the officials and controlled the budgets of all subnational government entities, including prefectures and municipalities, and influenced the selection of traditional chiefs.\nNational Assembly elections.\nThe second multi-party legislative elections of Eyad\u00e9ma's 33-year rule were held on 21 March 1999. However, the opposition boycotted the election, in which the ruling party won 79 of the 81 seats in the National Assembly. Those two seats went to candidates from little-known independent parties. Procedural problems and significant fraud, particularly misrepresentation of voter turnout, marred the legislative elections. \nAfter the legislative election, the government announced that it would continue to pursue dialog with the opposition. In June 1999, the RPT and opposition parties met in Paris, in the presence of facilitators representing France, Germany, the European Union, and La Francophonie (an international organization of French-speaking countries), to agree on security measures for formal negotiations in Lom\u00e9. In July 1999, the government and the opposition began discussions, and on 29 July 1999, all sides signed an accord called the \"Lom\u00e9 Framework Agreement\", which included a pledge by President Eyad\u00e9ma that he would respect the constitution and not seek another term as president after his current one expires in 2003. The accord also called for the negotiation of a legal status for opposition leaders, as well as for former heads of state (such as their immunity from prosecution for acts in office). In addition, the accord addressed the rights and duties of political parties and the media, the safe return of refugees, and the security of all citizens. The accord also contained a provision for compensating victims of political violence. The President also agreed to dissolve the National Assembly in March and hold new legislative elections, which would be supervised by an independent national election commission (CENI) and which would use the single-ballot method to protect against some of the abuses of past elections. However, the March 2000 date passed without presidential action, and new legislative elections were ultimately rescheduled for October 2001. Because of funding problems and disagreements between the government and opposition, the elections were again delayed, this time until March 2002.\nIn May 2002 the government scrapped CENI, blaming the opposition for its inability to function. In its stead, the government appointed seven magistrates to oversee preparations for legislative elections. Not surprisingly, the opposition announced it would boycott them. Held in October, as a result of the opposition's boycott the government party won more than two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly. In December 2002, Eyad\u00e9ma's government used this rubber-stamp parliament to amend Togo's constitution, allowing President Eyad\u00e9ma to run for an \u201cunlimited\u201d number of terms. A further amendment stated that candidates must reside in the country for at least 12 months before an election, a provision that barred the participation in the upcoming presidential election of popular Union des Forces du Progr\u00e8s (UFC) candidate, Gilchrist Olympio, who had been in exile since 1992. The presidential election was held 1 June. President Eyad\u00e9ma was re-elected with 57% of the votes, amid allegations of widespread vote rigging.\nDeath of Eyad\u00e9ma and Gnassingb\u00e9's rise.\nPresident Eyad\u00e9ma died on 5 February 2005 while on board an airplane en route to France for treatment for a heart attack. Papa Gnassingb\u00e9 is said to have killed more than fifteen thousand people during his dictatorship. His son Faure Gnassingb\u00e9, the country's former minister of public works, mines, and telecommunications, was named president by Togo's military following the announcement of his father's death. Under international pressure from the African Union and the United Nations however, who both denounced the transfer of power from father to son as a coup, Gnassingb\u00e9 was forced to step down on 25 February 2005, shortly after accepting the nomination to run for elections in April. Deputy Speaker Bonfoh Abbass was appointed interim president until the inauguration of the 24 April election winner. As to official results, the winner of the election was Gnassingb\u00e9 who garnered 60% of the vote. Opposition leader Emmanuel Bob-Akitani however disputed the election and declared himself to be the winner with 70% of the vote. After the announcement of the results, tensions flared up and to date, 100 people have been killed. On 3 May 2005, Gnassingb\u00e9 was sworn in and vowed to concentrate on \"the promotion of development, the common good, peace and national unity\".\nFaure Gnassingb\u00e9 in power (2005\u2013present).\nIn August 2006 President Gnassingbe and members of the opposition signed the Global Political Agreement (GPA), bringing an end to the political crisis triggered by Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma's death in February 2005 and the flawed and violent electoral process that followed. The GPA provided for a transitional unity government whose primary purpose would be to prepare for benchmark legislative elections, originally scheduled for June 24, 2007. CAR opposition party leader and human rights lawyer Yawovi Agboyibo was appointed Prime Minister of the transitional government in September 2006. Leopold Gnininvi, president of the CDPA party, was appointed minister of state for mines and energy. The third opposition party, UFC, headed by Gilchrist Olympio, declined to join the government, but agreed to participate in the national electoral commission and the National Dialogue follow-up committee, chaired by Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaore.\nParliamentary elections took place on October 14, 2007. Olympio, who returned from exile to campaign, took part for the first time in 17 years. The ruling party, Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), won a majority of the parliamentary seats in the election. International observers declared the poll \"largely\" free and fair. Despite these assurances, the secretary-general of the opposition party Union of Forces for Change(UFC) initially stated that his party would not accept the election results.\nMr Olympio stated that the election results did not properly represent the voters' will, pointing out that the UFC received nearly as many votes as the RPT, but that due to the way the electoral system was designed the UFC won far fewer seats.\nIn April 2015, President Faure Gnassingbe was re-elected for a third term. In late 2017, tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered in a series of mass protests to demand the immediate resignation of President Faure Gnassingbe. In February 2020, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 was again re-elected for his fourth presidential term. The opposition had a lot of accusations of fraud and irregularities. The Gnassingb\u00e9 family has ruled Togo since 1967, meaning it is Africa's longest lasting dynasty.\nIn June 2022, Togo joined the Commonwealth of Nations as its 56th member.\n2024 constitutional reform.\nIn March 2024, Gnassingb\u00e9 presented a new constitution. One of the constitutional changes in the new constitution has Togo go from being under a presidential system to being under a parliamentary system, as well as weakening the power of the president, it becoming a mostly ceremonial role; strengthening the power of parliament; and strengthening the power of the prime minister and renaming the office \"President of the Council of Ministers\" (). The term of the new office will be six years, renewable indefinitely, whereas the term of the president is lowered to four from the previous five, renewable once. In April 2024, the Togolese parliament voted in favour of the new constitution and the new constitution was officially adopted on 6 May 2024.\nThe reform officially came into effect on 3 May 2025, where the first indirect election of the country was held. Jean-Lucien Savi de Tov\u00e9 was uninamously elected as the new president, while Gnassingb\u00e9 became the president of the Council of Ministers. Aged nearly 86, Savi de Tov\u00e9 is the oldest ever president in history.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30140", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30140", "title": "Geography of Togo", "text": "Togo is a small Sub-Saharan state, comprising a long strip of land in West Africa. Togo's geographic coordinates are a latitude of 8\u00b0 north and a longitude of 1\u00b010\u2032 east. It is bordered by three countries: Benin to the east, with of border; Burkina Faso to the north, with of border; and Ghana, with of border. To the south Togo has of coastline along the Bight of Benin of the Gulf of Guinea in the North Atlantic Ocean. Togo stretches north from the Gulf and is only wide at the broadest point. In total, Togo has an area of , of which is land and is water.\nTogo is commonly divided into six geographic regions. In the south are low-lying sandy beaches. The coastal region is narrow and followed by tidal flats and shallow lagoons. There are also over 200 lakes, the largest of which is Lake Togo.\n* Total: 56,785 km\u00b2\n**\"country rank in the world:\" 123rd\n* Land: 54,390 km\u00b2\n* Water: 2,400 km\u00b2\n* Australia comparative: approximately the size of Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: approximately equal in size to Nova Scotia\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately four times the size of Northern Ireland\n* United States comparative: approximately smaller than West Virginia\n* EU comparative: approximately equal in size to Croatia\nPhysical geography.\nThe country consists primarily of two savanna plains regions separated by a southwest\u2013northeast range of hills (the \"Cha\u00eene du Togo\"). In the north lies the Ouatchi Plateau. This plateau is about wide and located at an altitude of above sea level. \"Terre de Barre\" is another name for this region, in use because of the reddish leached soil which is rich in iron. This southern area of Togo has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Guinean forest-savanna mosaic ecoregion.\nNortheast of the Ouatchi Plateau lies a tableland. At its highest this region is about above sea level. The area is drained by the Mono River and its tributaries, including the Ogou River.\nTo the west and the southwest of the tableland lie the Togo Mountains. These mountains run across the central region of Togo, ranging from the southwest to the northeast. The mountain range reaches into Benin where it is known as the Atakora Mountains and Ghana where it is known as the Akwapim Hills. The highest mountain in Togo is Mount Agou with a height of .\nNorth of the Togo Mountains lies a sandstone plateau through which the Oti River flows. The vegetation is characterized by savanna. The River Oti which drains the plateau is one of the main tributaries of the River Volta.\nIn the far northwest of Togo lies a higher region which is characterized by its rocks: granite and gneiss. The cliffs of Dapaong (Dapango) are located in this part of Togo.\nClimate.\nAlmost all of Togo has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\"). Average temperatures ranging from on the coast to about in the northernmost regions. There is a dry season between November and March dominated by the desert winds of the Harmattan, which bring less humid and less unpleasant weather. To the south there are two seasons of rain, the first between April and July and the second weaker rainy season between September and November. In this region rainfall is much lower than in the rest of southern West Africa due to divergent coast-parallel winds between mid-July and mid-September creating a short, foggy secondary dry season.\nEnvironment.\nCurrent issues:\nTogo is party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Togo, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30141", "revid": "1316266659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30141", "title": "Demographics of Togo", "text": "The demographics of Togo include ethnicity, population density, age, education level, health, economic status and religious affiliations.\nTogo\u2019s population is estimated to have grown to four times its size between 1960 and 2010. With nearly 60% of its populace under the age of 25 and a high annual growth rate attributed largely to high fertility, Togo\u2019s population is likely to continue to expand for the foreseeable future. Reducing fertility, boosting job creation, and improving education will be essential to reducing the country\u2019s high poverty rate. In 2008, Togo eliminated primary school enrollment fees, leading to higher enrollment but increased pressure on limited classroom space, teachers, and materials. Togo has a good chance of achieving universal primary education, but educational quality, the underrepresentation of girls, and the low rate of enrollment in secondary and tertiary schools remain concerns.\nPopulation.\nPopulation distribution is very uneven due to soil and terrain variations. The population is generally concentrated in the south and along the major north-south highway connecting the coast to the Sahel. Age distribution is also uneven; nearly one-half of Togolese are less than fifteen years old.\nFrench, the official language, is used in administration and documentation. The public primary schools combine French with Ewe or Kabye as languages of instruction, depending on the region. English is spoken in neighboring Ghana and is taught in Togolese secondary schools. As a result, many Togolese, especially in the south and along the Ghana border, speak some English.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 1 395 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 39.6%, 56.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.4% was 65 years or older\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 06.XI.2010):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (Estimates 01.VII.2020) (Post-censal estimates.):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\u2260\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Togo not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population census.\nSource: UN DESA, World Population Prospects, 2022\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2013-2014 and 2017 (DHS Program):\nLanguage and ethnicity.\nTogo's population of million people ( est.) is composed of about 21 ethnic groups, the two biggest being the T\u00e8m in the Centre (Bafilo, Sokod\u00e9, Sotouboua (about 22% of the population); they also live in Ghana and B\u00e9nin in big numbers. T\u00e8ms have a lot ties with 2/3 of the country as they live in the center of Togo. They exercise diversely almost all occupations from farmers, motors mechanic to business people] and Ewe in the South (about 21% of the population).\nDagomba is the first most common language in the north, where other Gur languages such as Mossi and Gourma are also found.\nThe ethnic groups of the coastal region, particularly Ewe and Gen language (or Mina) (the two major African languages in the south), constitute the bulk of the civil servants, professionals, and merchants, due in part to the former colonial administrations which provided greater infrastructure development in the south. Most of the southern peoples use these two closely related languages, which are spoken in commercial sectors throughout Togo.\nThe Kabye live on marginal land and traditionally have emigrated south from their home area in the Kara region to seek employment. Their historical means of social advancement has been through the military and law enforcement forces, and they continue to dominate these services.\nOther groups include the Akposso on the Central Plateau, the Ana people who are related to the Yoruba, and live in the center of the country, in the strip between Atakpame and Tchamba, the Bassar in the Centre-West, the Tchamba in the Centre-East and the Konkombas in the upper region of Bassar, the Lambas in the Kand\u00e9 region, the Hausa, the Tamberma, the Losso and the Ouachi.\nReligion.\nChristian 42.3%, folk religion 36.9%, Muslim 14%, Hindu &lt;1%, Buddhist &lt;1%, Jewish &lt;1%, other &lt;1%, none 6.2% (2020 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30142", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30142", "title": "Politics of Togo", "text": "Politics of Togo takes place in a framework of a parliamentary republic, whereby the president is the head of state and the prime minister is head of government, who is appointed by the president with the parliament's approval. Executive power is exercised by the prime minister while the role of the president is largely ceremonial. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. After independence, the party system was dominated first by the authoritarian Rally for the Togolese People, and later by its successor party, Union for the Republic.\nEyad\u00e9ma presidency.\nIn the early 1990s, the international community began putting pressure on authoritarian president Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma to democratize, a notion he strongly resisted. Pro-democracy activists - mainly southern Mina and Ew\u00e9 - were met with armed troops, killing scores of protesters in several clashes. The people of France and Togo were furious, and under their backlash Eyad\u00e9ma gave in. He was summarily stripped of all powers and made president in name only. An interim prime minister was elected to take over command, but not four months later his residence was shelled with heavy artillery by Eyad\u00e9ma's army.\nTerror strikes against the independent press and political assassination attempts became commonplace, while the promised 'transition' to democracy came to a standstill. The opposition continued to call general strikes, leading to further violence by the army and the exodus of hundreds of thousands of southerners to Ghana and Benin. Using intimidation tactics and clever political machinations that disqualified one opposition party and caused another to refuse to participate, Eyad\u00e9ma won the 1993 presidential elections with more than 96% of the vote. In the years following, opposition parties have lost most of their steam and Eyad\u00e9ma's control has become almost as firm as before the crisis began.\nIn August 1996, Prime Minister Edem Kodjo resigned, and the planning minister, Kwassi Klutse, was appointed prime minister. Eyad\u00e9ma won another five-year term in June 1998 with 52% of the vote, nearly being defeated by Gilchrist Olympio, son of Sylvanus Olympio. Later investigations revealed widespread human rights abuses.\nIn 2002, in what critics called a 'constitutional coup', the national assembly voted unanimously to change the constitution and allow Eyad\u00e9ma to 'sacrifice himself again' and run for a third term during the 2003 presidential elections. The constitutional change eliminated presidential term limits. Meanwhile, Gilchrist Olympio's attempts to beat the man who overthrew his father were scuppered yet again when he was banned from running on a tax-law technicality.\nDespite allegations of electoral fraud, Eyad\u00e9ma won 57% of the votes in the 2003 elections, which international observers from the African Union described as generally free and transparent. For many Togolese, there was little optimism for the future and a prevailing sense of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu as Eyad\u00e9ma extended his record as Africa's longest-serving ruler.\nGnassingb\u00e9 presidency.\nOn 5 February 2005, Eyad\u00e9ma died of a heart attack. Shortly afterwards, his son Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 was named by Togo's military as the country's leader, raising numerous eyebrows. Army Chief of Staff General Zakari Nandja announced the succession, saying the speaker of parliament (who should have taken over under the constitution) was out of the country. African Union leaders described the naming of Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 as a military coup. The constitution of Togo declared that in the case of the president's death, the speaker of Parliament takes his place, and has 60 days to call new elections. However, on February 6, Parliament retroactively changed the Constitution, declaring that Faure would hold office for the rest of his father's term, with elections deferred until 2008.\nThe African Union described the takeover as a military coup d'\u00e9tat. International pressure came also from the United Nations. Within Togo, opposition to the takeover culminated in riots in which four people died. In response, Gnassingb\u00e9 agreed to hold elections in April 2005. On 25 February, Gnassingb\u00e9 resigned as president, soon after accepting nomination to run for the office in April. Parliament designated Deputy Speaker Bonfoh Abbass as interim president until the inauguration of the election winner. On 3 May 2005, Gnassingb\u00e9 was sworn in as the new president garnering 60% of the vote according to official results. Disquiet has continued however with the opposition declaring the voting rigged, claiming the military stole ballot boxes from various polling stations in the South, as well as other election irregularities, such as telecommunication shutdown. The European Union has suspended aid in support of the opposition claims, while the African Union and the United States have declared the vote \"reasonably fair\" and accepted the outcome. The Nigerian president and Chair of the AU, Olus\u1eb9gun \u1eccbasanj\u1ecd, sought to negotiate between the incumbent government and the opposition to establish a coalition government, but surprisingly rejected an AU Commission appointment of former Zambian president, Kenneth Kaunda, as special AU envoy to Togo. Later in June, President Gnassingbe named opposition leader Edem Kodjo as the prime Minister.\nFrom April 2006 onwards, reconciliation talks between the government and the opposition were held, which were suspended after Eyadema's death in 2005. In August the government and the opposition signed an accord providing for the participation of opposition parties in a transitional government.\nIn 2017, protests erupted against Faure Gnassingb\u00e9's continued rule. As the only African country without official presidential term limits, the opposition demands two-term limits for presidents to be applied retroactively in order to prevent Gnassingbe from standing in the 2020 and 2025 elections. Clashes between protesters and police have led to the death of 16 people since the start of the protests in September. International rights groups have called on the government to \"end the bloody repression\" and engage in dialogue with the opposition. Gnassingb\u00e9 promised talks with the opposition, but has yet to act on that promise. However, Ghana's President Nana Akufo-Addo and Alpha Conde of Guinea are involved as mediators to facilitate the organization of a political dialogue to be held \"in a few weeks\".\nIn February 2020, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9 was re-elected to a fourth presidential term. The opposition had a lot of accusations of fraud and irregularities. As of 2020[ [update]], the Gnassingb\u00e9 family had ruled Togo since 1967, making it Africa's longest lasting dynasty.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is indirectly elected by parliament for a four-year term, renewable once. The prime minister is appointed by the president and they can serve a term of six years, renewable indefinitely. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Assembly (\"Assembl\u00e9e Nationale\") has 91 members, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. \nTogo is a one party dominant state with the Union for the Republic in power. Opposition parties are allowed, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Togolese judiciary is modeled on the French system. There is a Court of Appeal () and a Supreme Court ().\nAdministrative divisions.\nTogo is divided in five regions: Kara, Plateaux, Savanes, Centrale, Maritime. For administrative purposes, the regions are subdivided into 35 prefectures, each having an appointed prefect.\nInternational organization participation.\nACCT, ACP, AfDB, Commonwealth of NationsECA, ECOWAS), Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCO, EFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30143", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30143", "title": "Economy of Togo", "text": "The economy of Togo has struggled greatly. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) ranks it as the tenth poorest country in the world, with development undercut by political instability, lowered commodity prices, and external debts. While industry and services play a role, the economy is dependent on subsistence agriculture, with industrialization and regional banking suffering major setbacks.\nIn January 2017, the IMF signed an Extended Credit Facility arrangement, consisting of a three-year $238 million loan package. Progress depends on follow through on privatization, increased transparency in government financial operations, progress toward legislative elections, and continued support from foreign donors.\nAgriculture.\nThe majority of the Togolese population depends on subsistence agriculture. Its agricultural products includes coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava (tapioca), corn, beans, rice, pearl millet, sorghum and livestock such as fish. Food and cash crop production employs the majority of the labor force and contributes about 42% to the gross domestic product (GDP). Coffee and cocoa are traditionally the major cash crops for export, but cotton cultivation increased rapidly in the 1990s, with 173,000 metric tons produced in 1999.\nAfter a disastrous harvest in 2001 (113,000 metric tons), cash crops production rebounded to 168,000 metric tons in 2002. Despite insufficient rainfall in some areas, the Togolese Government has achieved its goal of self-sufficiency in food crops \u2014 maize, cassava, yams, sorghum, pearl millet, and groundnut. Small and medium-sized farms produce most of the food crop; the average farm size is one to three hectares.\nTogo produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nChoco Togo is the country's first bean-to-bar chocolate manufacturer.\nIndustry.\nMining.\nIn the industrial sector, phosphates are Togo's most important commodity, and the country has an estimated 60 million metric tons of phosphate reserves. From a high point of 2.7 million tons in 1997, production dropped to approximately 1.1 million tons in 2002. The fall in production is partly the result of the depletion of easily accessible deposits and the lack of funds for new investment. The formerly state-run company Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nouvelle des Phosphates du Togo (New Phosphate Company of Togo) appears to have benefited from private management, which took over in 2001. Togo also has substantial limestone and marble deposits.\nEncouraged by the commodity boom of the mid-1970s, which resulted in a fourfold increase in phosphate prices and sharply increased government revenues, Togo embarked on an overly ambitious program of large investments in infrastructure while pursuing industrialization and development of state enterprises in manufacturing, textiles, and beverages. However, following declines in world prices for commodities, its economy became burdened with fiscal imbalances, heavy borrowing, and unprofitable state enterprises.\nOther.\nWhile Togo itself produces no crude oil, it is the namesake of an illegal market for stolen oil off the Niger Delta, called the Togo Triangle.\nIMF relationship.\nTogo turned to the IMF for assistance in 1979, while simultaneously implementing a stringent adjustment effort with the help of a series of IMF standby programs, World Bank loans, and Paris Club debt rescheduling. Under these programs, the Togolese Government introduced a series of austerity measures and major restructuring goals for the state enterprise and rural development sectors. These reforms were aimed at eliminating most state monopolies, simplifying taxes and customs duties, curtailing public employment, and privatizing major state enterprises. Togo made good progress under the international financial institutions' programs in the late 1980s, but movement on reforms ended with the onset of political instability in 1990. With a new, elected government in place, Togo negotiated new 3-year programs with the World Bank and IMF in 1994.\nTogo returned to the Paris Club in 1995 and received Naples terms, the club's most concessionary rates. With the economic downturn associated with Togo's political problems, scheduled external debt service obligations for 1994 were greater than 100% of projected government revenues (excluding bilateral and multilateral assistance). By 2001, Togo was embarked on an IMF Staff Monitored Program designed to restore macroeconomic stability and financial discipline but without any new IMF resources pending new legislative elections. New IMF, World Bank and Africa Development Bank (ADB) lending must await the willingness of Togo's traditional donors \u2013 the European Union, principally, but the US also \u2013 to resume aid flows. So far, Togo's problematic legislative and presidential elections and the government's continued unwillingness to transition from an Eyad\u00e9ma-led autocracy to democracy have deterred these donors from providing Togo with more aid. As of the fall 2002, Togo was $15 million in arrears to the World Bank and owed $3 million to the ADB.\nTogo is one of 16 members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The ECOWAS development fund is based in Lom\u00e9. Togo also is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), which groups seven West African countries using the CFA franc. The West African Development Bank (BOAD), which is associated with UEMOA, is based in Lom\u00e9. Togo long served as a regional banking center, but that position has been eroded by the political instability and economic downturn of the early 1990s. Historically, France has been Togo's principal trading partner, although other European Union countries are important to Togo's economy. Total United States trade with Togo amounts to about $16 million annually.\nOpen Market.\nTrade is extremely important to Togo's economy; the combined value of exports and imports equals 105 percent of GDP. The average applied tariff rate is 11.4 percent. Non-tariff barriers impede some trade. Government openness to foreign investment is above average. Capital transactions are subject to some controls or government approval. The evolving banking system continues to expand but lacks liquidity.\nStatistics.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30144", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30144", "title": "Telecommunications in Togo", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Togo include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nRadio stations:\nstate-owned radio network with multiple stations; several dozen private radio stations and a few community radio stations; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007).\nTelevision stations:\ntwo state-owned TV stations with multiple transmission sites; 5 private TV stations broadcast locally; cable TV service is available (2007).\nPrivate media in Togo have proliferated, with dozens of commercial and community radios and a handful of private TV stations in operation. Radio is the most popular medium, particularly in rural areas. The main TV station is the government-owned Television Togolaise.\nThe radio services of the BBC World Service, Gabon's Africa No. 1, and Radio France Internationale (RFI) are all available.\nTelephone.\nCalling code: +228\nInternational call prefix: 00\nMain lines:\nMobile cellular:\nTelephone system: fair system based on network of microwave radio relay routes supplemented by open-wire lines and cellular system; combined fixed-line and mobile-cellular teledensity roughly 50 telephones per 100 persons with mobile-cellular use predominating (2010).\nSatellite earth stations: 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Symphonie (satellite) (2010).\nCommunications cables: West Africa Cable System (WACS), a submarine cable linking countries along the west coast of Africa with each other and with Portugal and the United Kingdom; GLO-1 which links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and to Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom.\nInternet.\nTop-level domain: .tg\nInternet users:\nFixed broadband: 5,560 subscriptions, 158th in the world; 0.1% of the population, 170th in the world (2012).\nWireless broadband: 47,892 subscribers, 125th in the world; 0.7% of the population, 135th in the world (2012).\nInternet hosts:\nIPv4: 13,312 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 1.9 addresses per 1000 people (2012).\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no known government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Although the constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, the government restricts these rights.\nThe constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions. In criminal cases a judge or senior police official may authorize searches of private residences. Citizens believe the government monitors telephones and correspondence, although such surveillance has not been confirmed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30145", "revid": "41721642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30145", "title": "Transport in Togo", "text": "Transportation in the country of Togo is by road, rail, water or air. In 2025, the country launched a study to develop plans to modernize its road network.\nRailways.\n\"total:\"\n568\u00a0km (2008)\n&lt;br&gt;\"narrow gauge:\"\n568\u00a0km of gauge\nRoadways.\n\"total:\"\n7,520\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n2,376\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n5,144\u00a0km (2000)\nThe Trans\u2013West African Coastal Highway crosses Togo, connecting it to Benin and Nigeria to the east, and Ghana and Ivory Coast to the west. When construction in Liberia and Sierra Leone is finished, the highway will continue west to seven other Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations. A paved highway also connects Togo northwards to Burkina Faso and from there north-west to Mali and north-east to Niger.\nIn 2024, the Russian ride-hailing app Yango was shut down in the country by the Ministry of Transport after concerns for passenger safety. The app began operating in the country four months previously, without prior authorization.\nIn 2025, the country announced plans to digitize all SOTRAL bus ticket sales in the country by 2026. \nWaterways.\n50\u00a0km (seasonally navigable by small craft on the Mono River depending on rainfall. (2011))\nMerchant marine.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n62 ships \n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\nbulk carrier 6, cargo 38, carrier 3, chemical tanker 5, container 3, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll on/roll off 1 (2010)\nAirports.\n8 (2012)\nAirports - with paved runways.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n2\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n2 (2012)\nIn 2024, the Togo cooperated with Chinese partners to redevelop and modernize the country's capital airport.\nAirports - with unpaved runways.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n6\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n4\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n2 (2012)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30146", "revid": "47154815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30146", "title": "Togolese Armed Forces", "text": "Armed forces of Togo\nThe Togolese Armed Forces (, FAT) is the national military of the Republic of Togo which consists of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and the National Gendarmerie. The total military expenditure during the fiscal year of 2005 was 1.6% of the country's GDP. Military bases exist in Lom\u00e9, Temedja, Kara, Niamtougou, and Dapaong. The current Chief of the General Staff is Brigadier General Dimini Allahar\u00e9, who took office on May 28, 2024.\nArmy.\nThe current chief of staff of the army is Colonel Blakimw\u00e9 Wiyao Balli. The elite presidential bodyguards of the Republic of Togo Armed Forces are reportedly trained by Benjamin Yeaten, an internationally wanted Liberian military commander and war criminal.\nAir Force.\nThe Republic of Togo Air Force () was established in 1964, and French influence remains in the choice of aircraft used. Since 2020, the air force's chief of staff is Colonel Tassounti Djato.\nThe C-47 Skytrain was the first aircraft used; it was part of the force from 1960 to 1976. Replacing the C-47s were two DHC-5D Buffalo STOL transports in 1976. Also in the same year, Togo acquired five ex-German Air Force Fouga Magister armed jet trainers and seven EMB.326GBs from Brazil to form the Escadrille de Chasse. Togo's armed jet trainer fleet was upgraded in 1981 by the deliveries of five Alpha jets and by three piston engine Aerospatiale TB-30 Epsilons in 1986. The Fouga Magisters were returned to France in 1985.\nDuring its existence the official name changed from \"Section Air der Forces arm\u00e9es\" in 1964 to \"Escadrille Nationale D Togolaise\" (ENT) in 1973, to \"Groupement Aerienne Togolais\" (GAT) in 1980, and finally to \"Arm\u00e9e de l'Air Togolaise\" in 1997.\nAt present its operations are concentrated in the Lom\u00e9 Transport Base at Lom\u00e9 Tokoin Airport, where the transport aircraft are based, and the Niamtougou Fighter Base at Niamtougou International Airport, where the combat units are located.\nIt acquired the Bayraktar TB2 UCAV from Turkish company Baykar in August 2022.\nNavy.\nThe National Navy () was created on May 1, 1976, to guard the roughly of Republic of Togo coast and the seaport of Lom\u00e9. It currently has 2 wooden-hulled patrol boats, the \"Kara\" (P 761), and the \"Mono\" (P 762), which have both been in service since 1976. On 7 July 2014, the Republic of Togo navy received a RPB 33 patrol boat that was named \"Agou\" (P 763). Currently, the navy's chief of staff is ship captain Atiogb\u00e9 Ametsipe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30147", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30147", "title": "Foreign relations of Togo", "text": " \nAlthough Togo's foreign policy is nonaligned, it has strong historical and cultural ties with western Europe, especially France and Germany. Togo is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, exchanging high commissioners with other Commonwealth countries. It recognizes the People's Republic of China, North Korea, and Cuba, and re-established relations with Israel in 1987.\nTogo pursues an active foreign policy and participates in many international organizations. It is particularly active in West African regional affairs and in the African Union. Relations between Togo and neighboring states are generally good.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Togo maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30148", "revid": "10689882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30148", "title": "Tokelau", "text": "Dependent territory of New Zealand in the southern Pacific Ocean\nTokelau (; lit.\u2009'north-northeast' or 'north wind'; known previously as the Union Islands, and, until 1976, known officially as the Tokelau Islands) is a dependent territory of New Zealand in the southern Pacific Ocean. It consists of three tropical coral atolls: Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo. They have a combined land area of . In addition to these three, Swains Island (), which forms part of the same archipelago, is the subject of an ongoing territorial dispute, while being currently administered by the United States as part of American Samoa. Tokelau lies north of the Samoan Islands, east of Tuvalu, south of the Phoenix Islands, southwest of the more distant Line Islands, and northwest of the Cook Islands.\nTokelau has a population of approximately 2,500 people; it has the fourth-smallest population of any sovereign state or dependency in the world. As of the 2016 census, around 45% of its residents had been born overseas, mostly in Samoa or New Zealand. The populace has a life expectancy of 69, which is comparable to that of other Oceanian island nations. Approximately 94% of the population speak Tokelauan as their first language. Tokelau has the smallest economy of any nation. It is a leader in renewable energy, being the first 100% solar-powered nation in the world.\nTokelau is officially referred to as a nation by both the New Zealand government and the Tokelauan government. It is free and democratic, with elections every three years. However, in 2007, the United Nations General Assembly included Tokelau on its list of non-self-governing territories. Its inclusion on this list is controversial, as Tokelauans have twice narrowly failed to reach a two-thirds majority for further self-determination in referendums, and the islands' small population makes the viability of self-government challenging. The basis of Tokelau's legislative, administrative and judicial systems is the Tokelau Islands Act 1948, which has been amended several times. Since 1993, the territory has annually elected its own head of government, the Ulu-o-Tokelau. Before 1993, the administrator of Tokelau was the highest official in the government and the territory was directly administered by a New Zealand government department.\nEtymology.\n is a word meaning \"north wind\" in the native Tokelau language. The Tokelau islands were named the \"Union Islands\" and \"Union Group\" by European explorers at an earlier time. \"Tokelau Islands\" was adopted as the islands\u2019 official name in 1946. The name was officially shortened to \"Tokelau\" on 9 December 1976.\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that the atolls of Tokelau\u00a0\u2013 Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo\u00a0\u2013 were settled about 1,000 years ago from Samoa and may have been a gateway into Eastern Polynesia. The inhabitants embrace Polynesian mythology and the local god, Tui Tokelau. Over time, they developed distinctive musical and art forms. The three atolls have historically functioned separately politically, while maintaining social and linguistic cohesion. Tokelauan society has been governed by chiefly clans, and there have been occasional skirmishes and wars between the atolls, as well as inter-marriage. Fakaofo, the \"chiefly island\", held some dominion over Atafu and Nukunonu after the dispersal of Atafu. Life on the atolls was historically subsistence-based, with a diet that relied mainly on fish and coconut.\nContact with other cultures.\nThe first European to sight Atafu was British Navy officer Commodore John Byron, on 24 June 1765. He called the island \"Duke of York's Island\". Parties from his expedition who landed ashore reported that there were no signs of current or previous inhabitants. Captain Edward Edwards, having learned of Byron's discovery, visited Atafu on 6 June 1791 in search of the \"Bounty\" mutineers. They found no inhabitants, but saw that there were houses containing canoes and fishing gear, which suggested to them that the island was being used as a temporary residence by fishing parties from other, nearby islands. On 12 June 1791, Edwards sailed farther south, and sighted Nukunonu, naming it \"Duke of Clarence's Island\". A landing party that went ashore was unable to make contact with the inhabitants, but saw \"\"morai\"s\", burying places, and canoes with \"stages in their middle\" sailing across the island's lagoons.\nOn 29 October 1825, August R. Strong of the USS \"Dolphin\" and his crew arrived at the atoll Nukunonu. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Upon examination, we found they had removed all the women and children from the settlement, which was quite small, and put them in canoes lying off a rock in the lagoon. They would frequently come near the shore, but when we approached they would pull off with great noise and precipitation.\nOn 14 February 1835, Captain Smith, of the United States whaling ship \"General Jackson\", wrote of having sighted Fakaofo, which he chose to call \"D'Wolf's Island\". On 25 January 1841, the United States Exploring Expedition visited Atafu, and discovered a small population living on the island. The residents appeared to be there only temporarily, because there was no chief among them, and they had the kind of double canoes that were typically used for inter-island travel. They appeared to have interacted with foreigners in the past, because they expressed a desire to engage in barter with the expedition crew, and they possessed items that were apparently of foreign origin: blue beads and a plane-iron. A few days later, French explorer Captain Morvan sighted Fakaofo. The American expedition reached Nukunonu on 28 January 1841, but did not record any information about inhabitants. On 29 January 1841, the expedition sighted Fakaofo and named it \"Bowditch\". The Fakaofo islanders were found to be similar in appearance and behavior to the Atafu islanders.\nMissionaries preached Christianity in Tokelau from 1845 to the 1870s. French Catholic missionaries on Wallis Island (also known as 'Uvea) and missionaries of the Protestant London Missionary Society in Samoa used native teachers to convert the Tokelauans. Atafu was converted to Protestantism by the London Missionary Society, Nukunonu was converted to Catholicism and Fakaofo was converted to both denominations. The Rev. Samuel James Whitmee, of the London Missionary Society, visited Tokelau in 1870.\nHelped by Swains Island-based Eli Jennings Sr, Peruvian \"blackbird\" slave traders arrived in 1863 and kidnapped nearly all (253) of the able-bodied men to work as labourers, depopulating the atolls. The Tokelauan men died of dysentery and smallpox, and very few returned. With that loss, the system of governance became based on the \"Taupulega\", or \"Councils of Elders\", on which individual families on each atoll were represented. During that time, Polynesian immigrants settled, followed by American, Scottish, French, Portuguese and German beachcombers, marrying local women and repopulating the atolls.\nIn 1856 the United States claimed that it held sovereignty over the island and the other Tokelauan atolls under the Guano Islands Act. In 1979, the U.S. conceded that Tokelau was under New Zealand sovereignty, and a maritime boundary between Tokelau and American Samoa was established by the Treaty of Tokehega.\nIn 1889, Tokelau became a protectorate of the United Kingdom. This lasted until 1916, when it was annexed and incorporated into the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony. In 1926, it was incorporated into New Zealand.\nTropical cyclones.\nCyclone Percy struck and severely damaged Tokelau in late February and early March 2005. Forecasters underestimated the cyclone's strength and the length of time it would be in vicinity to Tokelau. It coincided with a spring tide which put most of the area of the two villages on Fakaofo and Nukunonu under of seawater. The cyclone also caused major erosion on several islets of all three atolls, damaging roads and bridges and disrupting electric power and telecommunications systems. The cyclone did significant and widespread damage to food crops including bananas, coconuts and pandanus. It did not seriously injure anyone but villagers lost significant amounts of property.\nNo significant land is more than above high water of ordinary tides. This means Tokelau is particularly vulnerable to future sea level rise.\nTime zone.\nUntil December 2011, Tokelau was 11\u00a0hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). At midnight 29 December 2011 Tokelau shifted to in response to Samoa's decision to switch sides of the International Dateline. This brought Tokelau closer to New Zealand time (and in the process omitted 30 December).\nThe Time&amp;Date website states that \"the international time zone community has apparently been listing the wrong local time for Tokelau since 1901\" and that \"most sources, including the commonly referred to International Atlas by Shanks/Pottenger, claim that the UTC offset is +14 hours, or equivalent (UTC-10:00 before 29 December 2011 and afterwards, UTC-10:00 plus one day).\"\nGovernment.\nIn 1877, the islands were included under the protection of the United Kingdom by an Order in Council that claimed jurisdiction over all unclaimed Pacific Islands. Commander C.\u2009F. Oldham on HMS \"Egeria\" landed at each of the three atolls in June 1889 and officially raised the Union Flag, declaring the group a British protectorate. In conformity with desire expressed by \"the Native government\" they were annexed by the United Kingdom and included in the Gilbert Islands by the Tokelau Islands (Union Islands) Order in Council, 1916. The annexation took place on 29 February 1916. From the point in time that the islands were annexed, their people had the status of British subjects. Tokelau was removed from the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony and placed under the jurisdiction of the Governor-General of New Zealand in 1925, two Orders in Council being made for the purpose on the same day. This step meant that New Zealand took over administration of Tokelau from the United Kingdom on 11 February 1926. At this point, Tokelau was still a territory under the sovereignty of the United Kingdom but administered by New Zealand.\nThe Union Islands (Revocation) Order in Council, 1948 after reciting the agreement by the governments of the United Kingdom and New Zealand that the islands should become part of New Zealand, revoked the Union Islands (No. 2) Order in Council, 1925, with effect from a date fixed by the Governor-General of New Zealand after he was satisfied that the New Zealand Parliament had provided for the incorporation of the islands with New Zealand, as it did by the \"Tokelau Islands Act 1948\". Tokelau formally became part of New Zealand on 1 January 1949.\nThe Dominion of New Zealand, of which Tokelau formerly was a part, has since been superseded by the Realm of New Zealand, of which Tokelau remains a part. When the \"British Nationality and New Zealand Citizenship Act 1948\" came into effect on 1 January 1949, Tokelauans who were British subjects gained New Zealand citizenship; a status they still hold.\nVillages are entitled to enact their own laws regulating their daily lives and New Zealand law only applies where it has been extended by specific enactment. Serious crime is rare and there are no prisons, and offenders are publicly rebuked, fined or made to work.\nPolitics.\nThe head of state is Monarch of New Zealand, King\u00a0Charles III, the King in Right of New Zealand, who also reigns over the other Commonwealth realms. The King is represented in the territory by the Administrator\u00a0\u2013 currently Don Higgins. The current head of government () is Esera Fof\u014d Tuisano, who presides over the Council for the Ongoing Government of Tokelau, which functions as a cabinet. The Council consists of the \"faipule\" (leader) and \"pulenuku\" (village mayor) of each of the three atolls. The administrator is appointed by the minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand, and the role of head of government rotates between the three \"faipule\" for a one-year term.\nThe Tokelau Amendment Act of 1996 confers legislative power on the General Fono, a unicameral body. The number of seats each atoll receives in the Fono is determined by population\u00a0\u2013 at present, Fakaofo and Atafu each have seven and Nukunonu has six. \"Faipule\" and \"pulenuku\" also sit in the Fono.\nOn 11 November 2004, Tokelau and New Zealand took steps to formulate a treaty that would turn Tokelau from a non-self-governing territory to a self-governing state in free association with New Zealand. Besides the treaty, a United Nations-sponsored referendum on self-determination took place, with the three islands voting on successive days starting 13 February 2006. (Tokelauans in Apia, Samoa, voted on 11 February.) Out of 581 votes cast, 349 were for Free Association, being short of the two-thirds majority required for the measure to pass. The referendum was profiled (somewhat light-heartedly) in the 1 May 2006 issue of \"The New Yorker\" magazine. A repeat referendum took place on 20\u201324 October 2007, again narrowly failing to approve self-government. This time the vote was short by just 16 votes or 3%.\nIn May 2008, the United Nations' Secretary General Ban Ki-moon urged colonial powers \"to complete the decolonization process in every one of the remaining 16 non-self-governing territories\", including Tokelau. This led \"The New Zealand Herald\" to comment that the United Nations was \"apparently frustrated by two failed attempts to get Tokelau to vote for independence\". In April 2008, speaking as leader of the National Party, future New Zealand Prime Minister John Key stated that New Zealand had \"imposed two referenda on the people of the Tokelau Islands\", and questioned \"the accepted wisdom that small states should undergo a de-colonisation process\".\nDefence and police.\nConsistent with the principles of partnership with New Zealand, defence is the responsibility of the New Zealand Government. The New Zealand Defence Force has responsibilities for protecting the territory as well as its offshore exclusive economic zone (EEZ). The total offshore EEZ is about . Vessels of the Royal New Zealand Navy are employed for this task including its s. Tokelau has its own customs regulations.\nGiven Tokelau's limited wharf facilities, the Navy's multi-role ship, , has been employed to provide logistics support to the territory.\nLittle crime has been reported in Tokelau and a total of nine police officers were reported as present as of the early 2020s: three each on Fakaofo, Nukunonu and Atafu. According to the Government they are responsible to the village authorities for the enforcement of law and order and to the public service for their various civil duties.\nGeography.\nTokelau includes three atolls in the South Pacific Ocean between longitudes 171\u00b0 W and 173\u00b0 W and between latitudes 8\u00b0 S and 10\u00b0 S, about midway between Hawaii and New Zealand. From Atafu in the north to Fakaofo in the south, Tokelau extends for less than . The atolls lie about north of Samoa. The atolls are Atafu and Nukunonu, both in an island group once called the Duke of Clarence Group, and Fakaofo, once Bowditch Island. Their combined land area is . The atolls each have a number of coral islands, where the villages are situated. The highest point of Tokelau is just above sea level. There are no ports or harbours for large vessels, however, all three atolls have a jetty to and from which supplies and passengers are shipped. Tokelau lies in the Pacific tropical cyclone belt. A fourth island that is culturally, historically, and geographically, but not politically, a part of the Tokelau Islands is Swains Island (Olohega), under United States control since about 1900 and administered as a part of American Samoa since 1925.\nSwains Island was claimed by the United States pursuant to the Guano Islands Act, as were the other three islands of Tokelau; the latter three claims were ceded to Tokelau by treaty in 1979. In the draft constitution of Tokelau subject to the Tokelauan self-determination referendum in 2006, Olohega (Swains Island) was also claimed as a part of Tokelau, though the claim was surrendered in the same 1979 treaty. This established a clearly defined boundary between American Samoa and Tokelau.\nTokelau's claim to Swains is generally comparable to the Marshall Islands' claim to U.S.-administered Wake Island, but the re-emergence of this somewhat dormant issue has been an unintended result of the United Nations' recent efforts to promote decolonisation in Tokelau. Tokelauans have proven somewhat reluctant to push their national identity in the political realm: recent decolonisation moves have mainly been driven from outside for ideological reasons. But at the same time, Tokelauans are reluctant to disown their common cultural identity with Swains Islanders who speak their language.\nEnvironment.\nTokelau is located in the Western Polynesian tropical moist forests ecoregion. Most of the original vegetation has been replaced by coconut plantations, some of which have been abandoned and became scrubby forests. The atolls of Tokelau provide habitat for 38 indigenous plant species, over 150 insect species and 10 land crab species. One of the greatest threats to biodiversity is posed by introduced mammalian predators such as the Polynesian Rat.\nIn 2011 Tokelau declared its entire exclusive economic zone of a shark sanctuary.\nEconomy.\nTokelau's economy is among the smallest globally, primarily characterized by subsistence agriculture and fishing. The residents cultivate crops such as coconuts (for copra), taro, breadfruit, papayas, bananas, and figs, and raise livestock including pigs and poultry. Fishing, particularly for local consumption, plays a vital role in their sustenance.\nEconomic overview.\nThe territory's economic activities are limited, with revenues stemming from the sale of copra, postage stamps, souvenir coins, handicrafts, and remittances from Tokelauans residing in New Zealand. These remittances are significant, given that approximately 80% of Tokelauans live abroad.\nIn recent years, Tokelau has sought to diversify its revenue streams. Notably, the territory has generated income through the registration of domain names under its country code top-level domain (ccTLD), .tk. By 2012, about one-sixth of Tokelau's economy was derived from this source.\nSolar power.\nThe goal of 100% renewable electricity was met on 7 November 2012, according to the Foreign Affairs Minister of New Zealand, Murray McCully. Previously electricity was generated using diesel generators and was only available about 16\u00a0hours/day.\nThree solar power stations with a total generation capacity of 930kWp were installed to provide 100% of current electrical demand from photovoltaics, with lead acid battery backup able to store around 8MWh. The first power station was completed in August 2012. In total, 4,032 solar panels are used and 1,344 batteries weighing \u00a0each. The systems are designed to withstand winds of . By 2011, Tokelau's electricity was 93% generated by photovoltaics, with the remainder generated from coconut oil. As of 2019, increased demand and degradation of batteries had led to increased need for backup power. Plans were made for an additional 210\u00a0kW of PV and close to 2MWh of lithium-ion battery capacity.\nInternet domain name.\nTokelau has increased its GDP by more than 10% through registrations of domain names under its top-level domain, .tk. Registrations can be either free, in which case the user owns only usage rights and not the domain itself, or paid, which grants full rights. Free domains are pointed to Tokelau name servers, which redirects the domain via HTML frames to a specified address or to a specified A or NS record, and the redirection of up to 250 email addresses to an external address (not at a .tk domain).\nIn September 2003, Fakaofo became the first part of Tokelau with a high-speed Internet connection. Foundation Tokelau financed the project. Tokelau gave most domain names under its authority away to anyone for free to gain publicity for the territory. This has allowed the nation to gain enhanced telecommunications technologies, such as more computers and Internet access for Tokelauan residents. By 2012, there were about 120 computers, mostly laptops, and 1/6th of the economy consisted of income from .tk domain names.\nAccording to a 2016 analysis of domain name registration performed by the .uk registrar Nominet using data from ZookNIC, tk domains are the \"world's largest country-code domain ... almost as large as second and third place holders China (.cn) and Germany (.de) combined\".\nOn 3 March 2023, Meta sued Freenom for cybersquatting and trademark infringement, leading to a halt in new domain registrations, and in November 2023, ICANN terminated Freenom's registrar accreditation due to unresolved breaches. By February 2024, Freenom settled the lawsuit with Meta, announced its exit from the domain business, and by March 2024, 99% of Freenom domains became inaccessible, significantly affecting Cloudflare's hosted domains.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2016 Tokelau Census, Tokelau has a \"de jure\" usually resident population of 1,499 people. The census shows a 6.2% increase in the de jure usually resident population between 2011 and 2016.\nThe nationals of Tokelau are called Tokelauans, and the major ethnic group is Polynesian; it has no recorded minority groups. About 84% of inhabitants are of wholly or partly Tokelauan ethnicity; people of Samoan ethnicity make up 6.7% of the population, and Tuvaluans 2.8%. The main language\u00a0\u2013 spoken by over 90% of inhabitants\u00a0\u2013 is Tokelauan, but almost 60% also speak English.\nThe less than 1,500 Polynesian inhabitants live in three villages. Their isolation and lack of resources greatly limits economic development and confines agriculture to the subsistence level. The very limited natural resources and overcrowding are contributing to emigration to New Zealand and Samoa. In the 2013 New Zealand census, more than 7,000 people identified as Tokelauan, almost five times as many as live in Tokelau itself. Depletion of tuna has made fishing for food more difficult.\nA significant proportion (44.9% in 2016) of the population were born overseas, mostly in Samoa (15.3% of total population) and New Zealand (11.5%).\nWhile slightly more females than males live on Atafu and Fakaofo, males make up 57% of Nukunonu residents. Only 9% of Tokelauans aged 40 or more have never been married. One-quarter of the population were born overseas; almost all the rest live on the same atoll they were born on. Most households own five or more pigs.\nDespite its low income, Tokelau has a life expectancy of 69 years, comparable with other Oceania islands.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (Census 18.X.2016): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (12.XII.2019) (Data refers to 2019 Tokelau population count.): \nReligion.\nTokelau is predominantly Christian with majority belonging to either Congregational Christian Church (Ekalehia Fakalapotopotoga Kelihiano Tokelau) or Roman Catholic.\nIn 2016, 50.4% of responents belonged to Congregational Christian Church, 38.7% were Roman Catholic, 5.9% were Presbyterian, 4.2% were other Christian and 0.8% were unspecified. Majority of resident population of Atafu (78.3%) and Fakaofo (62.7%) identified as Congregational Christians. While the majority of residents in Nukunonu (81.8%) identified as Roman Catholic.\nCulture.\nHealthcare and education.\nEach atoll has a school and hospital. The health services have a Director of Health in Apia and a Chief Clinical Advisor who moves from atoll to atoll as required to assist the doctors attached to each hospital. In 2007, there was not always a doctor on each island and locums were appointed to fill the gaps.\nMany Tokelauan youth travel to New Zealand to further their education, with students returning home and then heading off for another year of study.\nSport.\nDue to its small size, Tokelau is unaffiliated to most international sports organisations, and rarely takes part in international events. The only significant international competition Tokelau takes part in is the Pacific Games. Tokelau won its first-ever gold medals at the 2007 Pacific Games in Apia, winning a total of five medals (three gold, a silver and a bronze), all in lawn bowls, and finishing 12th (out of 22) on the overall medal table. This included two gold medals for Violina Linda Pedro (in the women's pairs and the women's singles), making her Tokelau's most successful individual athlete to date.\nIn October 2010, table tennis became \"the first sport in Tokelau to be granted membership at a Continental or World level\", when the Tokelau Table Tennis Association was formally established and became the 23rd member of the Oceania Table Tennis Federation. Tokelau is also a member of United World Wrestling.\nTokelau was due to take part, for the first time, in the 2010 Commonwealth Games, in Delhi, but, for unknown reasons, ultimately did not do so. In 2018, Tokelau was noted to be ineligible for the Commonwealth Games until it became affiliated to at least five international sport federations.\nTokelau has a National Sports Federation, and a significant sporting event is the Tokelau Games, which are held yearly. When they are held, \"all of Tokelau virtually stands still\", as \"[i]n excess of 50% of the population take part and all work and school stops at the time\". The 2010 Games included competitions in rugby sevens, netball and kilikiti, alongside \"a cultural evening [...] where each atoll showcases their traditional songs and dances\".\nNetball is thought to have been introduced to Tokelau by the British, but became more popular when New Zealand's government took over the territory. The sport is often played during inter-island sport competitions, alongside other sports like rugby league and volleyball.\nIn Tokelau, there are two levels to the football league. From Fale, Fakaofo, two of the best clubs are Hakava Club and Matalele Club.\nTelecommunications.\nTokelau has a radio telephone service between the islands and to Samoa. In 1997, a government-regulated telephone service (TeleTok) with three satellite earth stations was established, making Tokelau the last place in the world connected via phone. Each atoll has a radio-broadcast station that broadcasts shipping and weather reports and every household has a radio or access to one. News is disseminated through the government newsletter \"Te Vakai\".\nIn 2019, Tokelau agreed to connect to Southern Cross Cable's 60\u00a0Tbps \"NEXT\" subsea cable stretching between Australia, New Zealand, and the United States In September 2021, the island was connected to the new cable and services were launched in July 2022, granting it access to a network of 400GbE telecommunications service to datacenters around the world.\nTokelau has the international calling code of 690, and has had five-digit telephone numbers from November 2015 (the existing four-digit numbers were prefixed by the digit \"2\").\nTokelau administers the .tk country code top-level domain.\nTransportation.\nTokelau is served by the MV \"Mataliki\", delivered new in 2016 as a replacement of the smaller MV \"Tokelau\" and jointly managed by the Tokelau Transport Department and the company Transport and Marine. The vessel, which has a capacity of 60 passengers on international cruises and 120 for transport between the atolls of Tokelau, operates fortnightly between Tokelau and Apia, with the trip taking a little over a day. A dedicated cargo vessel, the MV \"Kalopaga\", entered service in 2018 and replaced chartered freight vessels.\nShips load and unload cargo by motoring up to the down-wind (leeward) side of the islet where the people live and maintaining station, by intermittent use of engines, close to the reef edge so that a landing barge can be motored out to transfer cargo to or from the shore. On returning to shore, the barge negotiates a narrow channel through the reef to the beach. Usually this landing is subject to ocean swell and beaching requires considerable skill and, often, coral abrasions to bodies. When bad weather prevents the barge making the trip, the ship stands off to wait for suitable weather or goes off to one of the other atolls to attempt to load or unload its passengers or cargo, or both.\nThere is no airport in Tokelau, so boats are the main means of travel and transport. Some seaplanes and amphibious aircraft are able to land in the island's lagoons. An airstrip was considered by the New Zealand Government in 2010. In 2016, plans to link the atolls with Samoa by helicopter had to be abandoned because of high costs, leading in the following years to renewed calls to the New Zealand government for help with establishing air services. As of 2022, it was reported that the airport project \u2013 funded by the New Zealand government \u2013 was moving forward.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30149", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30149", "title": "Tokelau/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "30150", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30150", "title": "Geography of Tokelau", "text": ""}
{"id": "30151", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30151", "title": "Demographics of Tokelau", "text": ""}
{"id": "30152", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30152", "title": "Tokelau/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "30153", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30153", "title": "Tokelau/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "30154", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30154", "title": "Tokelau/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "30155", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30155", "title": "Tokelau/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "30156", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30156", "title": "Tokelau/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "30158", "revid": "11774442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30158", "title": "Tonga", "text": "Country in the South Pacific\nTonga, officially the Kingdom of Tonga, is an island country in Polynesia, part of Oceania. The country has 171 islands, of which 45 are inhabited. Its total surface area is about , scattered over in the southern Pacific Ocean. As of 2021,[ [update]] according to Johnson's Tribune, Tonga has a population of 104,494, 70% of whom reside on the main island, Tongatapu. The country stretches approximately north-south. It is surrounded by Fiji and Wallis and Futuna (France) to the northwest, Samoa to the northeast, New Caledonia (France) and Vanuatu to the west, Niue (the nearest foreign territory) to the east and Kermadec (New Zealand) to the southwest. Tonga is about from New Zealand's North Island.\nTonga was first inhabited roughly 2,500 years ago by people who were a part of the Lapita culture, Polynesian settlers who gradually evolved a distinct and strong ethnic identity, language, and culture as the Tongan people. They quickly established a powerful footing across the South Pacific, and this period of Tongan expansionism and colonization is known as the Tu\u02bbi Tonga Empire. From the rule of the first Tongan king, \u02bbAho\u02bbeitu, Tonga grew into a regional power. It was a thalassocracy that conquered and controlled unprecedented swathes of the Pacific, from parts of the Solomon Islands and the whole of New Caledonia and Fiji in the west to Samoa and Niue and even as far as parts of modern-day French Polynesia in the east. Tu\u02bbi Tonga became renowned for its economic, ethnic, and cultural influence over the Pacific, which remained strong even after the Samoan revolution of the 13th century and Europeans' discovery of the islands in 1616.\nFrom 1900 to 1970, Tonga had British protected-state status. The United Kingdom looked after Tonga's foreign affairs under a Treaty of Friendship, but Tonga never relinquished its sovereignty to any foreign power. In 2010, Tonga took a decisive step away from its traditional absolute monarchy and became a semi-constitutional monarchy, after legislative reforms paved the way for its first partial representative elections.\nTonga is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the United Nations, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Alliance of Small Island States.\nEtymology.\nIn many Polynesian languages, including Tongan, the word (), comes from , which means 'southwards', and the archipelago is so named because it is the southernmost group among the island groups of western Polynesia. The word is cognate to the Hawaiian word meaning 'leeward', which is the origin of the name for the Kona District in Hawai\u02bbi.\nTonga became known in the West as the \"Friendly Islands\" because of the congenial reception accorded to Captain James Cook on his first visit in 1773. He arrived at the time of the annual festival, which centres on the donation of the First Fruits to the Tu\u02bbi Tonga (the islands' monarch), so he received an invitation to the festivities. Ironically, according to the writer William Mariner, the political leaders actually wanted to kill Cook during the gathering, but did not go through with it because they could not agree on a plan of action for accomplishing it.\nHistory.\nAccording to Tongan mythology, the demigod Maui drew up a group of islands from the ocean, first appearing Tongatapu, the Ha'apai Islands and Vava'u, integrating into what became modern-day Tonga.\nAn Austronesian-speaking group linked to what archaeologists call the Lapita culture covered from Island Melanesia to Samoa, and then on to inhabit Tonga sometime between 1500 and 1000\u00a0BC. Scholars still debate exactly when Tonga was first settled, but thorium dating confirms that settlers had arrived in the earliest known inhabited town, Nukuleka, by 888 BC, \u00b1 8 years. Tonga's precontact history was shared via oral history, which was passed down from generation to generation.\nBy the 12th century, Tongans and the Tongan monarch, the Tu\u02bbi Tonga, had acquired a reputation across the central Pacific\u00a0\u2013 from Niue, Samoa, Rotuma, Wallis and Futuna, New Caledonia to Tikopia, leading some historians to speak of a Tu\u02bbi Tonga Empire having existed during that period. Civil wars are known to have occurred in Tonga in the 15th and 17th centuries.\nThe Tongan people first encountered Europeans in 1616, when the Dutch vessel \"Eendracht\", captained by Willem Schouten, made a short visit to the islands for the purpose of engaging in trade. Later, other Dutch explorers arrived, including Jacob Le Maire (who visited the northern island of Niuatoputapu); and Abel Tasman (who visited Tongatapu and Ha\u02bbapai) in 1643. Later noteworthy European visitors included James Cook, of the British Royal Navy, in 1773, 1774, and 1777; Spanish Navy explorers Francisco Mourelle de la R\u00faa in 1781; Alessandro Malaspina in 1793; the first Protestant missionaries in 1797; and a Wesleyan Methodist minister, Reverend Walter Lawry, in 1822.\nWhaling vessels were among the earliest regular Western visitors. The first of these on record is the \"Ann and Hope\", which was reported to have been seen among the islands of Tonga in June 1799. The last known whaling visitor was the \"Albatross\" in 1899. That ship arrived in Tonga seeking a resupply of water, food, and wood. The islands most regularly visited by Westerners were Ata, 'Eua, Ha'apai, Tongatapu, and Vava'u. Sometimes, Tongan men were recruited to serve as crewmen on these vessels.\nThe United States Exploring Expedition visited Tonga in 1840.\nIn 1845, an ambitious young Tongan warrior, strategist, and orator named T\u0101ufa\u02bb\u0101hau united Tonga into a kingdom. He held the chiefly title of Tu\u02bbi Kanokupolu, but had been baptised by Methodist missionaries with the name \"Siaosi\" (\"George\") in 1831. In 1875, with the help of missionary Shirley Waldemar Baker, he declared Tonga a constitutional monarchy, formally adopted the Western royal style, emancipated the \"serfs\", enshrined a code of law, land tenure, and freedom of the press, and limited the power of the chiefs.\nTonga became a protected state under a Treaty of Friendship with Britain on 18 May 1900, when European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs unsuccessfully tried to oust the man who had succeeded T\u0101ufa\u02bb\u0101hau as king. The treaty posted no higher permanent representative on Tonga than a British consul (1901\u20131970). Under the protection of Britain, Tonga maintained its sovereignty and remained the only Pacific nation to retain its monarchical government. The Tongan monarchy follows an uninterrupted succession of hereditary rulers from one family.\nThe 1918 flu pandemic, brought to Tonga by a ship from New Zealand, killed 1,800 Tongans, a mortality rate of about 8%.\nThe Treaty of Friendship and Tonga's protection status ended in 1970 under arrangements that had been established by Tonga's Queen Salote Tupou III before her death in 1965. Owing to its British ties, Tonga joined the Commonwealth in 1970 (atypically as a country that had its own monarch, rather than having the United Kingdom's monarch, along with Malaysia, Brunei, Lesotho, and Eswatini). Tonga became a member of the United Nations in September 1999. While exposed to colonial pressures, Tonga has always governed itself, which makes it unique in the Pacific.\nIn January 2022, the Hunga Tonga\u2013Hunga Ha\u02bbapai volcano, north of the main island of Tongatapu, erupted, causing a tsunami which inundated parts of the archipelago, including the capital Nuku\u02bbalofa. The eruption affected the kingdom heavily, cutting off most communications and killing four people in Tonga. In Peru, two women drowned due to abnormal tsunami waves. It took around five weeks to repair a submarine fiber optic cable used in the Tonga Cable System for internet and telephone connectivity.\nPolitics.\nTonga is a constitutional monarchy. It is the only extant indigenous monarchy in the Pacific islands (see also Hawai\u02bbi). Reverence for the monarch replaces that held in earlier centuries for the sacred paramount chief, the Tu\u02bbi Tonga. Criticism of the monarch is held to be contrary to Tongan culture and etiquette. Tonga provides for its citizens a free and mandatory education for all, secondary education with only nominal fees, and foreign-funded scholarships for postsecondary education.\nThe pro-democracy movement in Tonga promotes reforms, including better representation in the Parliament for the majority of commoners, and better accountability in matters of state. An overthrow of the monarchy is not part of the movement, and the institution of monarchy continues to hold popular support, even while reforms are advocated. Until recently, the governance issue was generally ignored by the leaders of other countries, but major aid donors and neighbours New Zealand and Australia are now expressing concerns about some Tongan government actions.\nFollowing the precedents of Queen S\u0101lote and the counsel of numerous international advisors, the government of Tonga under King T\u0101ufa\u02bb\u0101hau Tupou IV (reigned 1965\u20132006) monetised the economy, internationalised the medical and education systems, and enabled access by commoners to increasing forms of material wealth (houses, cars, and other commodities), education, and overseas travel.\nMale homosexuality is illegal in Tonga, with a maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment, but the law is not enforced. Tongans have universal access to a national health care system. The Constitution of Tonga protects land ownership; land cannot be sold to foreigners (although it may be leased).\nPolitical culture.\nKing T\u0101ufa\u02bb\u0101hau Tupou IV and his government made some problematic economic decisions and were accused by democracy activists, including former prime minister \u02bbAkilisi P\u014dhiva, of wasting millions of dollars on unwise investments. The problems have mostly been driven by attempts to increase national revenue through a variety of schemes \u2013 considering making Tonga a nuclear waste disposal site (an idea floated in the mid 1990s by the current crown prince), and selling Tongan Protected Persons Passports (which eventually forced Tonga to naturalise the purchasers, sparking ethnicity-based concerns within Tonga).\nSchemes also included the registering of foreign ships (which proved to be engaged in illegal activities, including shipments for al-Qaeda), claiming geo-orbital satellite slots (the revenue from which seems to belong to the Princess Royal, not the state), holding a long-term charter on an unusable Boeing 757 that was sidelined in Auckland Airport, leading to the collapse of Royal Tongan Airlines, and approving a factory for exporting cigarettes to China (against the advice of Tongan medical officials and decades of health-promotion messaging).\nThe king proved vulnerable to speculators with big promises and lost reportedly US$26\u00a0million to Jesse Bogdonoff, a financial adviser who called himself the king's court jester. The police imprisoned pro-democracy leaders, and the government repeatedly confiscated the newspaper \"The Tongan Times\" (printed in New Zealand and sold in Tonga) because the editor had been vocally critical of the king's mistakes. Notably, the \"Kele\u02bba\", produced specifically to critique the government and printed in Tonga by pro-democracy leader \u02bbAkilisi P\u014dhiva, was not banned during that time. P\u014dhiva, however, had been subjected to harassment in the form of barratry (frequent lawsuits).\nIn mid-2003, the government passed a radical constitutional amendment to \"Tonganize\" the press, by licensing and limiting freedom of the press, so as to protect the image of the monarchy. The amendment was defended by the government and by royalists on the basis of traditional cultural values. Licensure criteria include 80% ownership by Tongans living in the country. As of \u00a02004[ [update]], those papers denied licenses under the new act included the \"Taimi \u02bbo Tonga\" (\"Tongan Times\"), the \"Kele\u02bba,\" and the \"Matangi Tonga\"\u00a0\u2013 while those permitted licenses were uniformly church-based or pro-government.\nThe bill was opposed in a several-thousand-strong protest march in the capital, a call by the Tu\u02bbi Pelehake (a prince, nephew of the king and elected member of parliament) for Australia and other nations to pressure the Tongan government to democratise the electoral system, and a legal writ calling for a judicial investigation of the bill. The latter was supported by some 160 signatures, including seven of the nine elected \"People's Representatives\".\nThe then-Crown Prince Tupouto\u02bba and Pilolevu, the Princess Royal, remained generally silent on the issue. In total, the changes threatened to destabilise the polity, fragment support for the status quo, and place further pressure on the monarchy.\nIn 2005, the government spent several weeks negotiating with striking civil-service workers before reaching a settlement. The civil unrest that ensued was not limited to Tonga; protests outside the King's New Zealand residence made headlines.\nPrime Minister Prince \u02bbAho\u02bbeitu \u02bbUnuaki\u02bbotonga Tuku\u02bbaho (Lavaka Ata \u02bbUluk\u0101lala) (now King Tupou VI) resigned suddenly on 11 February 2006 and also gave up his other cabinet portfolios. The elected minister of labour, Feleti Sevele, replaced him in the interim.\nOn 5 July 2006, a driver in Menlo Park, California, caused the deaths of Prince Tu\u02bbipelehake \u02bbUluvalu, his wife, and their driver. Tu\u02bbipelehake, 55, was the cochairman of the constitutional reform commission and a nephew of the king.\nThe public expected some changes when George Tupou V succeeded his father in September 2006. On 16 November 2006, rioting broke out in the capital city of Nuku\u02bbalofa when it seemed that the parliament would adjourn for the year without having made any advances in increasing democracy in government. Pro-democracy activists burned and looted shops, offices, and government buildings. As a result, more than 60% of the downtown area was destroyed and as many as six\u00a0people died. The disturbances were ended by action from Tongan Security Forces and troops from New Zealand-led Joint Task Force.\nOn 29 July 2008, the Palace announced that King George Tupou V would relinquish much of his power and would surrender his role in day-to-day governmental affairs to the Prime Minister. The royal chamberlain said that this was being done to prepare the monarchy for 2010, when most of the first parliament would be elected, and added: \"The Sovereign of the only Polynesian kingdom ... is voluntarily surrendering his powers to meet the democratic aspirations of many of his people.\" The previous week, the government said the king had sold state assets that had contributed to much of the royal family's wealth.\nOn 15 March 2012, King George Tupou V contracted pneumonia and was brought to Queen Mary Hospital in Hong Kong. He was later diagnosed with leukaemia. His health deteriorated significantly shortly thereafter, and he died at 3:15\u00a0pm on 18 March 2012. He was succeeded by his brother Tupou VI, who was crowned on 4 July 2015.\nForeign relations.\nTonga's foreign policy as of January 2009[ [update]] was described by Matangi Tonga as \"Look East\"\u00a0\u2013 specifically, as establishing closer diplomatic and economic relations with Asia (which actually lies to the north-west of the Pacific kingdom). As of 2021, China has attained great influence in Tonga, financing infrastructure projects, including a new royal palace and holding two thirds of the country's foreign debt.\nTonga retains cordial relations with the United States. Although it remains on good terms with the United Kingdom, the two countries do not maintain particularly close relations. The United Kingdom closed its High Commission in Tonga in 2006, although it was re-established in January 2020 after a 14-year absence. Tonga's relations with Oceania's regional powers, Australia and New Zealand, are good.\nTonga maintains strong regional ties in the Pacific. It is a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, the South Pacific Tourism Organisation, the Pacific Regional Environment Programme, and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.\nIn 2023, the governments of Tonga and other islands vulnerable to climate change (Fiji, Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) launched the \"Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific\", calling for the phase out fossil fuels and the \"rapid and just transition\" to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law, including introducing the crime of ecocide.\nMilitary.\nThe Tongan government supported the American \"coalition of the willing\" action in Iraq and deployed more than 40 soldiers (as part of an American force) in late 2004. The contingent returned home on 17 December 2004. In 2007, a second contingent went to Iraq, and two more were sent during 2008 as part of continued support for the coalition. Tongan involvement concluded at the end of 2008 with no reported loss of life.\nIn 2010, Brigadier General Tau\u02bbaika \u02bbUta\u02bbatu, commander of the His Majesty's Armed Forces, signed an agreement in London committing a minimum of 200 troops to co-operate with Britain's International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. The task was completed in April 2014, and the UK presented Operational Service Medals to each of the soldiers involved during a parade held in Tonga.\nTonga has contributed troops and police to the Bougainville conflict in Papua-New Guinea and to the Australian-led RAMSI force in the Solomon Islands.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTonga is subdivided into five administrative divisions: \u02bbEua, Ha\u02bbapai, Niuas, Tongatapu, and Vava\u02bbu.\nGeography.\nLocated in Oceania, Tonga is an archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, directly south of Samoa and about two-thirds of the way from Hawai\u02bbi to New Zealand. Its 171 islands, 45 of them inhabited, are divided into three main groups \u2013 Vava'u, Ha'apai, and Tongatapu \u2013 and cover an -long north\u2013south line.\nThe largest island, Tongatapu, on which the capital city of Nuku\u02bbalofa is located, covers . Geologically, the Tongan islands are of two types: most have a limestone base formed from uplifted coral formations; others consist of limestone overlaying a volcanic base.\nClimate.\nTonga has a tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\") with a distinct warm period (December\u2013April), during which the temperatures rise above , and a cooler period (May\u2013November), with temperatures rarely rising above . The temperature and rainfall range from and on Tongatapu in the south to and on the more northerly islands closer to the Equator.\nThe average wettest period is around March, with on average . The average daily humidity is 80%. The highest temperature recorded in Tonga was on 11 February 1979 in Vava'u. The coldest temperature recorded in Tonga was on 8 September 1994 in Fua'amotu. Temperatures of or lower are usually measured in the dry season and are more frequent in southern Tonga than in the northern islands. The tropical cyclone season currently runs from 1 November to 30 April, though tropical cyclones can form and affect Tonga outside of the season. According to the WorldRiskReport 2021, Tonga ranks third among the countries with the highest disaster risk worldwide \u2013 mainly due to the country's exposure to multiple natural hazards.\nEcology.\nTonga contains the Tongan tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nIn Tonga, dating back to Tongan legend, flying bats are considered sacred and are the property of the monarchy. Thus, they are protected and cannot be harmed or hunted. As a result, flying fox bats have thrived in many of the islands of Tonga.\nThe bird life of Tonga includes a total of 73 species, of which two are endemic, the Tongan whistler and the Tongan megapode. Five species have been introduced by humans, and eight are rare or accidental. Seven species are globally threatened.\nEconomy.\nTonga's economy is characterised by a large nonmonetary sector and a heavy dependence on remittances from the half of the country's population who live abroad (chiefly in Australia, New Zealand, and the United States). The royal family and the nobles dominate and largely own the monetary sector of the economy \u2013 particularly the telecommunications and satellite services. Tonga was named the sixth-most corrupt country in the world by \"Forbes\" magazine in 2008.\nTonga was ranked the 165th-safest investment destination in the world in the March 2011 \"Euromoney\" Country Risk rankings.\nThe manufacturing sector consists of handicrafts and a few other very small-scale industries, which contribute only about 5% of GDP. Commercial business activities also are inconspicuous, and to a large extent, are dominated by the same large trading companies found throughout the South Pacific. In September 1974, the country's first commercial trading bank, the Bank of Tonga, opened.\nTonga's development plans emphasise a growing private sector, upgrading agricultural productivity, revitalising the squash and vanilla-bean industries, developing tourism, and improving communications and transport. Substantial progress has been made, but much work remains to be done. A small, growing construction sector is developing in response to the inflow of aid money and remittances from Tongans abroad. In recognition of such a crucial contribution, the government has created a new department in the Prime Minister's Office with the purpose of catering for the needs of Tongans living abroad. In 2007, the Tongan Parliament amended citizenship laws to allow Tongans to hold dual citizenship.\nTonga's postage stamps, featuring colourful and often unusual designs (including heart-shaped and banana-shaped stamps), are popular with philatelists.\nIn 2005, the country became eligible to become a member of the World Trade Organization. After an initial voluntary delay, Tonga became a full member of the WTO on 27 July 2007.\nThe Tonga Chamber of Commerce and Industry, incorporated in 1996, endeavours to represent the interests of its members, private sector businesses, and to promote economic growth in the Kingdom.\nTonga is home to some 106,000 people. More than double that number live overseas, mainly in the US, New Zealand, and Australia. Remittances from the overseas population have been declining since the onset of the 2008 global economic crisis. The tourism industry is improving, but remains modest at under 90,000 tourists per year.\nTourism.\nThe tourist industry is relatively undeveloped. The government recognises that tourism can play a major role in economic development, and efforts are being made to increase this source of revenue. Cruise ships often stop in Vava\u02bbu, with a reputation for its whale watching, game fishing, surfing, beaches, and is increasingly becoming a major player in the South Pacific tourism market.\nAgriculture.\nIn Tonga, agriculture and forestry (together with fisheries) provide the majority of employment, foreign exchange earnings, and food. Rural Tongans rely on both plantation and subsistence agriculture. Plants grown for both market cash crops and home use include bananas, coconuts, coffee beans, vanilla beans, and root crops such as cassava, sweet potato, and taro. As of 2001[ [update]], two-thirds of agricultural land was in root crops.\nThe processing of coconuts into copra and desiccated (dried) coconut was once the only significant industry, and only commercial export. Deteriorating prices on the world market and lack of replanting brought this once vibrant industry, as in most island nations of the South Pacific, to a complete standstill.\nSwine and poultry are the major types of livestock. Horses are kept for draft purposes, primarily by farmers working their\" \u02bbapi \u02bbuta\" (a plot of bushland); though the meat is also coveted. More cattle are being raised, and beef imports are declining.\nThe traditional feudal land ownership system meant that farmers had no incentive to invest in planting long-term tree crops on land they did not own. In the late 20th century, kava and vanilla from larger plantations became the main agricultural exports, together with squash. The export of squash to Japan, beginning in 1987, once brought relief to Tonga's struggling economy, but local farmers became increasingly wary of the Japanese market due to price fluctuations, and the huge financial risks involved.\nEnergy.\nEnergy in Tonga mostly comes from imported diesel. Energy consumption in Tonga was projected to reach around 66 gigawatt hours by 2020. The country aimed to reach 50% of renewable energy by 2020. In 2019, Tonga announced the construction of a 6-megawatt solar farm on Tongatapu. The plant will be the second-largest solar plant in the Pacific upon completion.\nIn view of the decreasing reliability of fossil-fuel electricity generation, its increasing costs, and negative environmental side effects, renewable energy solutions have attracted the government's attention. Together with IRENA, Tonga has planned a renewable energy based strategy to power the main and outer islands. The strategy focuses on solar home systems that turn individual households into small power plants. It calls for the involvement of local operators, finance institutions, and technicians to provide sustainable business models and strategies to ensure the effective operation, management, and maintenance once the systems are installed.\nThe Pacific Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency was established in Tonga in 2016 to advise the private sector on related policy matters, provide capacity development and promote business investment. The centre facilitates a financial mechanism offering competitive grants for start-ups to spur the adoption of renewable energy by the business sector. The centre is part of the Global Network of Regional Sustainable Energy Centres and SIDS DOCK framework designed to attract international investment in the renewable energy sector.\nWith the assistance of IRENA, Tonga has developed the 2010\u20132020 Tonga Energy Road Map, which aims for a 50% reduction of diesel importation. This was to be accomplished through a range of appropriate renewable technologies, including wind and solar, as well as innovative efficiencies. As of 2018, Tonga was generating 10% of its electricity from renewable sources.\nDemographics.\nOver 70% of the inhabitants live on its main island, Tongatapu. Although an increasing number of Tongans have moved into the only urban and commercial centre, Nuku\u02bbalofa, where European and indigenous cultural and living patterns have blended, village life and kinship ties remain influential throughout the country. Despite emigration, Tonga grew in population from about 32,000 in the 1930s to more than 90,000 by 1976.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the government portal, Tongans, Polynesian by ethnicity with a mixture of Melanesian, represent more than 98% of the inhabitants. About 1.5% are mixed Tongans and the rest are European (the majority are British), mixed European, and other Pacific Islanders. In 2001, about 3,000 to 4,000 Chinese lived there, comprising 3 to 4% of the total Tongan population. The 2006 Nuku\u02bbalofa riots mainly targeted Chinese-owned businesses, leading to the emigration of several hundred Chinese so that only about 300 remain.\nLanguages.\nTongan is the official language, along with English. Tongan is a Polynesian language of the Tongic branch so is closely related to other languages of the Tongic branch, those being: Niuean and Niuafo\u02bbouan. Tongan is more distantly related to other Polynesian languages such as Hawaiian, Samoan, M\u0101ori, and Tahitian, among others.\nReligion.\nTonga does not have an official state religion. The Constitution of Tonga (Revised 1998) provides for freedom of religion.\nIn 1928, Queen Salote Tupou III, who was a member of the Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga, established the Free Wesleyan Church as the state religion of Tonga. The chief pastor of the Free Wesleyan Church serves as the representative of the people of Tonga and of the church at the coronation of a king or queen of Tonga, where he anoints and crowns the monarch. In opposition to the establishment of the Free Wesleyan Church as a state religion, the Church of Tonga separated from the Free Wesleyan Church in 1928.\nIslam in Tonga is a small minority religion in the country. Muslims in Tonga belong to Sunni denomination. Al-Khadeejah Mosque is a prominent mosque in Tonga.\nEveryday life is heavily influenced by Polynesian traditions and by the Christian faith; for example, all commerce and entertainment activities cease on Sunday, from the beginning of the day at midnight, to the end of the day at midnight. The constitution declares the Sabbath sacred forever. The official figures from the latest government census as of 2011[ [update]] show that 90% of the population are affiliated with a Christian church or sect, with the four major church affiliations in the kingdom:\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sent missionaries in 1891 to visit King Siaosi (George) Tupo, where they obtained permission to preach.\nHealth.\nBy some published surveys, Tonga has one of the highest obesity rates in the world. World Health Organization data published in 2014 indicate that Tonga stands fourth overall in terms of countries listed by mean body mass index data. In 2011, 90% of the adult population were considered overweight using NIH interpretation of body mass index (BMI) data, with more than 60% of those obese. 70% of Tongan females aged 15\u201385 are obese. Tonga and Nauru have the world's highest overweight and obese populations.\nIn late October 2021, Tonga reported its first case of COVID-19 based on a New Zealand air passenger's positive test.\nEducation.\nPrimary education between ages 6 and 14 is compulsory and free in state schools. Mission schools provide about 8% of the primary and 90% of the secondary level of education. State schools make up for the rest. Higher education includes teacher training, nursing, and medical training, a small private university, a woman's business college, and a number of private agricultural schools. Most levels of higher education are pursued overseas.\nTongans enjoy a relatively high level of education, with a 98.9% literacy rate, and higher education up to and including medical and graduate degrees (pursued mostly overseas). They hold the body of academic knowledge created by their scholars in high esteem and the Kuk\u016b Kaunaka Collection, which comprises every doctoral and master's dissertation written by any Tongan in any country is archived by Seu'ula Johansson-Fua at the Institute for Education in Tonga.\nEmigration.\nContemporary Tongans often have strong ties to overseas lands. Many Tongans have emigrated to Australia, New Zealand, or the United States to seek employment and a higher standard of living.\nIn 2018, 82,389 Tongans lived in New Zealand. As of 2000, 36,840 Tongans were living in the US. More than 8,000 Tongans live in Australia. The Tongan diaspora retains close ties to relatives at home, and a significant portion of Tonga's income derives from remittances to family members (often aged) who prefer to remain in Tonga.\nCulture.\nHumans have lived in Tonga for nearly 3,000 years since settlement in late Lapita times. Before the arrival of European explorers in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Tongans had frequent contacts with their nearest Oceanic neighbours, Fiji and Niue. In the 19th century, with the arrival of Western traders and missionaries, Tongan culture changed, especially in religion. As of 2013[ [update]], almost 98% of residents profess Christianity. The people discarded some old beliefs and habits and adopted others.\nFahu.\nFahu is a form of social organization practiced by the people of Tonga, built upon a relationship between a person and their father's sister and paternal cousins. There are a few key superiorities in the social structure of fahu:\nPrior to Western contact, the inner dynamics between the chiefly kinship groups were governed by this social convention. Although fahu rights do not hold the same political strength and implications they historically did, they remain, to a notable degree, a part of the contemporary social practices in Tonga.\nSocio-environmental impact of fahu.\nSimilar social structures to fahu have been cited as significantly beneficial for human adaptation to environmental threats, especially those situated in hurricane-prone regions such as Tonga. The benefit stems from the fahu's ability to provide a network and capacity to allow for relocation of people and resources during environmental events, such as hurricanes or droughts.\nHowever, there have been environmental consequences of note due to the fahu structure, or rather, a disturbance of the structure. In the 1980s, Tonga saw a severe depletion of its sandalwood tree due a disruption of the fahu social hierarchy, which was incited by market demand for the resource. This led to heightened local competition and eventually an overharvest of the tree. Nearly all of the sandalwood resources were depleted over the span of two years.\nSport.\nRugby union.\nRugby union is the national sport, and the national team (\u02bbIkale Tahi, or Sea Eagles) has succeeded internationally. Tonga has competed in six Rugby World Cups since 1987. The 2007 and 2011 Rugby World Cups were Tonga's most successful to date, both winning two out of four matches and in a running chance for the quarterfinals. In the 2007 Rugby World Cup, Tonga won its first two matches, against the USA 25\u201315, and Samoa 19\u201315. They came very close to upsetting the eventual winners of the 2007 tournament, the South African Springboks, losing 30\u201325. A defeat by England, 36\u201320 in their last pool game ended their hopes of making the knockout stages. Nevertheless, by picking up third place in their pool games behind South Africa and England, Tonga earned automatic qualification for the 2011 Rugby World Cup in New Zealand. In Pool A of the 2011 Rugby World Cup, Tonga beat both Japan 31\u201318 and 5th ranked eventual finalist France 19\u201314 in the latter pool stages. However, a previous heavy defeat by the All Blacks at the tournament's opener (41\u201310) and a subsequent tight defeat by Canada (25\u201320) meant that Tonga lost out to France (who also lost to NZ) for the quarter finals due to 2 bonus points and a points difference of 46.\nTonga's best result before 2007 came in 1995, when they beat C\u00f4te d'Ivoire 29\u201311, and 1999 when they beat Italy 28\u201325 (although with only 14 men they lost heavily to England, 101\u201310). Tonga perform the Ikale Tahi war dance or Sipi Tau (a form of Kailao) before all their matches. Tonga used to compete in the Pacific Tri-Nations against Samoa and Fiji, which has now been replaced by the World Rugby Pacific Nations Cup, which now involves Japan, Canada, and the United States. At club level, there are the Datec Cup Provincial Championship and the Pacific Rugby Cup. Rugby union is governed by the Tonga Rugby Football Union, which was a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance and contributed to the Pacific Islanders rugby union team, before they were disbanded in 2009.\nMany players of Tongan descent \u2013 e.g., Jonah Lomu, Israel Folau, Viliami \"William\" \u02bbOfahengaue, Malakai Fekitoa, Ben Afeaki, Charles Piutau, Frank Halai, Sekope Kepu, George Smith, Wycliff Palu, Sitaleki Timani, Salesi Ma'afu, Anthony and Saia Fainga'a, Mark Gerrard, Cooper Vuna, Doug Howlett, Toutai Kefu and Tatafu Polota-Nau \u2013 have played for either the All Blacks or the Wallabies. British and Irish Lion and Welsh international player Taulupe \"Toby\" Faletau is Tongan born and the son of Tongan international Kuli Faletau. Taulupe's cousins and England international players Billy and Mako Vunipola (who is also a British and Irish Lion), are sons of former Tonga rugby captain Fe'ao Vunipola. Rugby is popular among the nation's schools, and students from schools such as Tonga College and Tupou College are regularly offered scholarships in New Zealand, Australia and Japan.\nRugby league.\nRugby league has gained some success. Tonga made their first appearance at a Rugby League World Cup in the 1995 edition where they went out in the first stage but narrowly lost to New Zealand. They have since appeared in each subsequent Rugby League World Cup tournament. In the 2008 Rugby League World Cup Tonga recorded wins against Ireland and Scotland. Just before the 2017 World Cup, various high-profile players, led by Jason Taumalolo and Andrew Fifita, defected from their tier one nations to represent their nation of heritage. This led to them defeating New Zealand in Hamilton at Waikato Stadium on 11 November at that tournament. The national team has since also recorded victories against Great Britain and the world number one Australia. In addition to the success of the national team, many players of Tongan descent make it big in the Australian National Rugby League competition. These include Jason Taumalolo, Israel Folau, Tyson Frizell, Tevita Pangai Junior, Konrad Hurrell, David Fusitua, Tuimoala Lolohea, Sio Siua Taukeiaho, Jorge Taufua, William Hopoate, Andrew Fifita, Ben Murdoch-Masila, Felise Kaufusi, Willie Mason, Manu Vatuvei, Brent Kite, Fuifui Moimoi, Willie Tonga, Anthony Tupou, Antonio Kaufusi, Michael Jennings, Tony Williams, Feleti Mateo. Subsequently, some Tongan rugby league players have established successful careers in the Super League such as Antonio Kaufusi.\nOlympics.\nAside from rugby, Tonga has also produced athletes who have competed at both the Summer and Winter Olympics. Tonga's only Olympic medal came from the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, where Paea Wolfgramm won silver in super heavyweight boxing. One athlete, Pita Taufatofua, attended the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.\nAmerican football.\nSeveral Tongans have been football players in the National Football League, including Naufahu Tahi, Tuineau Alipate, Sione Takitaki, Spencer Folau, Lakei Heimuli, Steve Kaufusi, Ma'ake Kemoeatu, Deuce Lutui, Siupeli Malamala, Tim Manoa, Stan Mataele, Vili Maumau, Alfred Pupunu, Vai Sikahema, Star Lotulelei, Kalani Sitake, Vita Vea, Talanoa Hufanga, Peter Tuipulotu, Marlon Tuipulotu, and Tuli Tuipulotu.\nContemporary Tongan art.\nThere has been a huge surge of contemporary Tongan artists in the past decade, the majority based in New Zealand. Tanya Edwards works with ngatu (bark cloths), Benjamin Work, Telly Tuita, and Sione Mon\u016b are widely exhibited internationally, S\u0113misi Fetokai Potauaine built a five-storey Tongan sculpture in central Christchurch. In 2023, Bergman Gallery hosted \"Tukufakaholo, Tongan Contemporary\" in Auckland, New Zealand, featuring eight Tongan artists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30159", "revid": "1300358921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30159", "title": "History of Tonga", "text": "The history of Tonga is recorded since the ninth century BC,Tonga is the first island to be settled in Polynesia dating back to lapita people settling Tonga 800 bc. Lapita pottery was found in Tonga dating back 3000 years when seafarers associated with the Lapita diaspora first settled the islands which now make up the Kingdom of Tonga. Along with Samoa, the area served as a gateway into the rest of the Pacific region known as Polynesia. Ancient Tongan mythologies recorded by early European explorers report the islands of 'Ata and Tongatapu as the first islands having been hauled to the surface from the deep ocean by Maui.\nPre-contact.\nThe dates of the initial settlement of Tonga are still subject to debate; nonetheless, one of the oldest occupied sites is found in the village of Pea on Tongatapu. Radiocarbon dating of a shell found at the site reportedly dates the occupation at 3180 \u00b1 100 BP (Before Present). Some of the oldest sites pertaining to the first occupants of the Tongan Islands are found on Tongatapu which is also where the first Lapita ceramics were found by WC McKern in 1921. Nonetheless, reaching the Tongan islands (without Western navigational tools and techniques) was a remarkable feat accomplished by the Lapita peoples. Not much is known about Tonga before European contact because of the lack of a writing system during prehistoric times other than the oral history told to the early European explorers. The first time the Tongan people encountered Europeans was in April 1616 when Jacob Le Maire and Willem Schouten made a short visit to the islands to trade with them.\nEarly culture.\nCenturies before Westerners arrived, Tongans created megalithic stoneworks. Most notably, these are the Ha\u02bbamonga \u02bba Maui and the Langi terraced tombs. The Ha\u02bbamonga is 5 meters high and made of three coral-lime stones that weigh more than 40 tons each. The Langi are low, very flat, two or three tier pyramids that mark the graves of former kings.\nWhat is known about Tonga before European contact comes from myths, stories, songs, poems (as there was no writing system), as well as from archaeological excavations. Many ancient sites, kitchens and refuse heaps, have been found in Tongatapu and Ha\u02bbapai, and a few in Vava\u02bbu and the Niuas that provide insights into old Tongan settlement patterns, diet, economy, and culture.\nThe Old Tonga.\nThe Ha\u02bbapai of three thousand years ago was a bit different from the Ha\u02bbapai of today. Large flightless birds called megapodes bounded through the tropical rain forest while giant iguanas and various other lizards rested on tree limbs. The skies hosted three different species of fruit bats, three different species of pigeon, and more than two dozen other types of birds. There were no pigs, horses, dogs, cows, or rats.\nThe South Pacific, meanwhile, was almost completely uninhabited. Any present humans existed on the western fringes of the Solomon Islands. Then, around that time, these islanders were suddenly replaced by a new branch of humanity that originated from the Bismarck Archipelago off Papua New Guinea. They intrepidly stormed through the region, rapidly colonizing and pushing east. They brought with them new plant and animal species, as well as a distinct pottery design. Today these people are named the Lapita, after the location in New Caledonia where they were first noticed archaeologically.\nThe Lapita Period.\nAround 3000 B.P., the Lapita people reached Tonga, and carbon dating places their landfall first in Tongatapu and then in Ha\u02bbapai soon after. The newcomers were already well adapted to the resource-scarce island life and settled in small communities of a few households on beaches just above high tide line that faced open lagoons or reefs. Through continued interaction with Lapita relatives of the west, the Ha\u02bbapaians obtained domesticated animals and cultivatable plants, but it seems that both of these possible food sources contributed minimally towards their diet for at least the first two hundred years. Instead, they feasted mainly on life in the sea: parrotfish, wrasses, turtles, surgeonfish, jacks, eels, emperors, bottom-dwellers, shellfish, and the occasional deep water tuna. Just as their Polynesian descendants do today.\nSea food was inexhaustible, so reefs then were not very different from reefs today, except for the marked decline in sea turtle populations. Fauna didn't fare as well, however, and soon the giant iguanas, the megapodes, twenty four bird species, almost all pigeons, and all but one species of fruit bat were all extinct.\nThey hunted and cooked these animals with the most basic of technologies. When shell pieces were too brittle for tools, they utilized volcanic soils for \u201candesite/basalt used for adze manufacture and other artifacts such as oils as hammerstones, weaving weights, cooking stones, and decorative pebbles for grave decoration.\u201d If they were lucky, they obtained harder obsidian shards from the far northern fringe volcano of Tafahi in the Niuas.\nAnother useful technology was their eponymous pottery with \u201cdentate\u201d impressions and simple designs that were characteristic of all Lapita settlements in the South Pacific. Tongan Lapita designs were simpler than western Lapita designs, evolving from ornate curvilinear and rectilinear patterns into simple rectilinear forms. The pottery was \u201cslab-built earthenware of andesitic-tephra clay mixed with calcareous or mineral sand tempers and fired at a low temperature.\u201d \nDecades of archaeological excavations of ancient Lapita kitchens and middens (refuse piles) both in Tongatapu and Ha\u02bbapai have taught us much about early Tongan settlement. We know what they ate, what tools they used, where they settled (one colony each on \u2018Uiha, Kauvai, and Foa, and two on Lifuka), and how large the settlements were. Despite a wealth of archaeological evidence, however, the Lapita people still stifle us with two main mysteries: How did they spread through the South Pacific so quickly, and why did the Lapita settlers in Tonga quickly abandon their ornate pottery tradition?\nThe Lapitan diaspora began from Papua New Guinea in 1500 BC. By 2850 BP (900 BC) they were already in Tonga, meaning they virtually sprinted east for three hundred years. They travelled in small wooden boats over open ocean to invisible destinations faster than the Europeans colonizers walked across their continent. Archaeologists wonder what would compel people to embark on statistically suicidal missions. It doesn't appear that population pressure was a problem, because most Lapitan islands were sparsely inhabited and could have supported much higher populations, especially if they had turned more towards available root crops.\nA hypothesis from Kirch is that Lapitan culture encouraged emigration by younger sons. Not just in Tonga, but throughout the South Pacific is a tradition of passing down land to eldest sons. To obtain their own land, younger sons needed to explore. Tangaloa, the chief Tongan god before the arrival of Christianity, was a younger sibling who created Tonga while searching for land from a canoe. His fish hook accidentally caught on a rock on the ocean floor and he was able to pull Tonga to the surface.\nThe other great mystery is why the ornate pottery tradition disappeared, and with such speed. Only two hundred years after arriving, the Lapitan settlers ceased to decorate their earthenware pots at all, and the only thing the leading contemporary Tongan archaeologist can say about the disappearance is that, \u201cUnfortunately most explanations are based on inferential speculation, and they are difficult to validate with any degree of certainty. What we can say with confidence is that, for whatever reason pottery decoration ceased in Tonga, it did so rather suddenly.\u201d\nThe Polynesian Plain Ware Period: 2650\u20131550 BP (700 BC \u2013 400 AD).\nLife began to change drastically for Ha\u02bbapaians at the same time that ornate pottery was replaced by a strictly utilitarian plain ware kit, and it is at this time that the people may be called Polynesian. Of all the linguistically and traditionally similar people who came to inhabit the triangle created by New Zealand, Hawai\u2019i, and Easter Island, they can all trace ancestry to a few original settlers in Tonga.\nThese original Polynesians in Tonga shifted somewhat away from maritime subsistence towards an increased reliance on agriculture and animal husbandry. Taro, yam, breadfruit, and banana became principal carbohydrate sources, and domesticated animals came to represent much more of the diet. At original Lapita sites, 24% of bird bones came from chickens, which increased after the Polynesian transformation into 81%, marking probably the demise of other bird species as well as an increased reliance on domesticated species.\nMore energy supportive food sources allowed a population explosion. A 25x40 m Lapitan \u201chamlet\u201d grew into a village over one kilometer in length. Settlement grew around most of the lagoon in Tongatapu and villages finally reached the interior of the main island. Similar expansions have been identified in the Niuas and in Vava\u2019u.\nTo archaeologists, these early Polynesians provide a mystery just as perplexing as the Lapitans. By 1550 BP (400 AD), they ceased to produce any pottery at all. They seem to have turned towards more natural materials instead, and therefore the archaeological record enters into a \u201cdark age\u201d of relatively little information until the emergence of chiefly states hundreds of years later. Speculations as to disappearance of the pottery tradition ranges from the use of coconut cups and bowls that are easier to use, a shift away from steaming shellfish in large bowls to baking in underground ovens, and the unsuitability of Tongan clays for pottery. Nothing can be said with certainty except that the same disappearance also occurred in Fiji and Samoa.\nThe Formative Dark Age: 1550\u2013750 BP (400\u20131200 AD).\nLittle is known about the period because of the absence of much archaeological evidence. What is clear is that population continued to increase, reaching between 17,000 and 25,000 on Tongatapu, and that chiefdoms arose to protect against the increased competition for resources. Tongatapu may have been politically consolidated by a single individual of the future Tu\u02bbi Tonga familial line, as oral tradition traces the king's lineage back through 39 individuals that could have started as early as 1000 bp (950 AD). The maritime empire made famous by oral tradition, however did not begin until after 750 BP (1200 AD).\nTongan Maritime Empire.\nBy the 12th century, Tongans, and the Tongan kings named the Tu'i Tonga, were known across the Pacific, from Niue, Samoa to Tikopia. They ruled these nations for more than 400 years, sparking some historians to refer to a \"Tongan Empire\", although it was more of a network of interacting navigators, chiefs, and adventurers. It is unclear whether chiefs of the other islands actually came to Tonga regularly to acknowledge their sovereign. Distinctive pottery and Tapa cloth designs also show that the Tongans have travelled to Fiji and Hawaii.\nIn 950 AD Tu'i Tonga 'Aho'eitu started to expand his rule outside of Tonga. According to leading Tongan scholars, including Okusitino Mahina, the Tongan and Samoan oral traditions indicate that the first Tu'i Tonga was the son of their god Tangaloa. As the ancestral homeland of the Tu'i Tonga dynasty and the abode of deities such as Tagaloa 'Eitumatupu'a, Tonga Fusifonua, and Tavatavaimanuka. By the time it comes to the 10th Tu\u2019i Tonga Momo, and his successor, \u2018Tu\u2019itatui, the empire had already stretched from Tikopia in the west to Niue in the east. Their realm contained Wallis and Futuna, Tokelau, Tuvalu, Rotuma, Nauru, parts of Fiji, parts of the Solomon Islands, Kiribati, Niue, and parts of Samoa. However, some islands in Polynesia were left alone by the Tu'i Tonga such as, parts of Tahiti Nui, The Cook Islands, and the Marquesas. To better govern the large territory, the Tu\u2019i Tongas had their throne moved by the lagoon at Lapaha, Tongatapu. The influence of the Tu\u2019i Tonga was renowned throughout the Pacific, and many of the neighboring islands participated in the widespread trade of resources and new ideas.\nUnder the 10th Tu\u02bbi Tonga, Momo and his son Tu\u02bbit\u0101tui (11th Tu\u02bbi Tonga) the empire was at its height of expansion, tributes for the Tu'i Tonga were said to be exacted from all tributary chiefdoms of the empire. This tribute was known as the \" 'Inasi \" and was conducted annually at Mu'a following the harvest season when all countries that were subject to the Tu'i Tonga must bring a gift for the gods, who was recognized as the Tu'i Tonga. Captain Cook witness an Inasi ceremony in 1777, in which he noticed a lot of foreigners in Tonga, especially the darker people that resembles African descend from Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. The finest mats of Samoa ('ie toga) are incorrectly translated as \"Tongan mats;\" the correct meaning is \"treasured cloth\" (\"ie\" = cloth, \"toga\" = female goods, in opposition to \"oloa\" = male goods). Many fine mats came into the possession of the Tongan royal families through chiefly marriages with Samoan noblewomen, such as Tohu'ia the mother of Tu'i Kanokupolu Ngata who came from Safata, 'Upolu, Samoa. These mats, including the Maneafaingaa and Tasiaeafe, are considered the crown jewels of the current Tupou line (which is derived matrilineally from Samoa). The success of the Empire was largely based upon the Imperial Navy. The most common vessels were long-distance double-canoes fitted with triangular sails. The largest canoes of the Tongan kalia type could carry up to 100 men. The most notable of these were the \"Tongafuesia\", \"\u02bb\u0100kiheuho\", the \"Lomipeau\", and the \"Taka\u02bbip\u014dmana\". It should be mentioned that the Taka\u02bbip\u014dmana was actually a Samoan kalia; according to Queen Salote and the Palace Records this was the Samoan double-canoe that brought Tohu'ia Limap\u014d from Samoa to wed the Tu'i Ha'atakalaua. The large navy allowed for Tonga to become wealthy with large amounts of trade and tribute flowing into the Royal Treasury.\nThe Tu\u02bbi Tonga decline began due to numerous wars and internal pressure. In the 13th or 14th century Samoa defeated Tu'i Tonga Talakaifaiki under the lead of the Malietoa family. In response the falef\u0101 was created as political advisors to the Empire. The falef\u0101 officials were initially successful in maintaining some hegemony over other subjected islands but increased dissatisfaction led to the assassination of several rulers in succession. The most notable were, Havea I (19th TT), Havea II (22nd TT), and Takalaua (23rd TT), who were all known for their tyrannical rule. In AD 1535, Takalaua was assassinated by two foreigners while swimming in the lagoon of Mu'a. His successor, Kau\u02bbulufonua I pursued the killers all the way to \u02bbUvea, where he killed them.\nBecause of so many assassination attempts on the Tu'i Tonga, Kau\u02bbulufonua established a new dynasty called Tu'i Ha'atakalaua in honor of his father and he gave his brother Mo\u2019ungamotu\u2019a, the title of Tu\u2019i Ha\u2019a Takalaua. This new dynasty was to deal with the everyday decisions of the empire, while the position of Tu\u2019i Tonga was to be the nation's spiritual leader, though he still controlled the final say in the life or death of his people. The Tu'i Tonga \"empire\" at this period becomes Samoan in orientation as the Tu'i Tonga kings themselves became ethnic Samoans who married Samoan women and resided in Samoa. Kau'ulufonua's mother was a Samoan from Manu'a, Tu'i Tonga Kau'ulufonua II and Tu'i Tonga Puipuifatu had Samoan mothers and as they married Samoan women the succeeding Tu'i Tongas - Vakafuhu, Tapu'osi, and 'Uluakimata - were allegedly more \"Samoan\" than \"Tongan.\"\nIn 1610, the 6th Tu\u2019i Ha\u2019a Takalaua, Mo'ungatonga, created the position of Tu\u2019i Kanokupolu for his half-Samoan son, Ngata, which divided regional rule between them, though as time went on the Tu\u2019i Kanokupolu's power became more and more dominant over Tonga. The Tu'i Kanokupolu dynasty oversaw the importation and institution of many Samoan policies and titles and according to Tongan scholars this Samoanized form of government and custom continues today in the modern Kingdom of Tonga Things continued this way for a long time afterward. The first Europeans arrived in 1616, when the Dutch explorers Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire spotted Tongans in a canoe off the coast of Niuatoputapu, followed by Abel Tasman who passed by the islands on 20 January 1643. These visits were brief, however, and did not significantly change the island. Captain James Cook observed and recorded his accounts of the Tu\u02bbi Tonga kings during his visits to Tonga.\nThe dividing line between the two moieties was the old coastal road named \"Hala Fonua moa\" (dry land road). Still today the chiefs who derive their authority from the Tu\u02bbi Tonga are named the Kau hala \u02bbuta (inland road people) while those from the Tu\u02bbi Kanokupolu are known as the Kau hala lalo (low road people). Concerning the Tu\u02bbi Ha\u02bbatakalaua supporters: when this division arose, in the 15th century, they were of course the Kauhalalalo. But when the Tu\u02bbi Kanokupolu had overtaken them they shifted their allegiance to the Kauhala\u02bbuta.\nModern archeology, anthropology and linguistic studies confirm widespread Tongan cultural influence ranging widely through East 'Uvea, Rotuma, Futuna, Samoa and Niue, parts of Micronesia (Kiribati, Pohnpei), Vanuatu, and New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands, and while some academics prefer the term \"maritime chiefdom\", others argue that, while very different from examples elsewhere, \"...\"empire\" is probably the most convenient term.\"\nEuropean arrival and Christianization.\nIn the 15th century and again in the 17th, civil war erupted. It was in this context that the first Europeans arrived, beginning with Dutch explorers Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire. Between April 21 to 23, 1616 they moored at the Northern Tongan islands \"Cocos Island\" (Tafahi) and \"Traitors Island\" (Niuatoputapu), respectively. The kings of both of these islands boarded the ships and Le Maire drew up a list of Niuatoputapu words, a language now extinct. On April 24, 1616, they tried to moor at the \"Island of Good Hope\" (Niuafo'ou), but a less welcoming reception there made them decide to sail on.\nOn January 21, 1643, the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first European to visit the main island (Tongatapu) and Ha\u02bbapai after rounding Australia and New Zealand while looking for a faster route to Chile. He mapped several islands. Tasman named the island of Tongatapu \"t\u2019 Eijlandt Amsterdam\" (Amsterdam Island), because of its abundance of supplies. This name is no longer used except by historians.\nThe most significant impact had the visits of Captain Cook in 1773, 1774, and 1777, followed by the first London missionaries in 1797, and the Wesleyan Methodist Walter Lawry in 1822. Around that time, most Tongans converted en masse to the Wesleyan (Methodist) or Catholic faiths. Other denominations followed, including Pentecostals, Mormons, Seventh-day Adventists, and most recently the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed faith.\nThe islands were also visited by the Spanish under Francisco Antonio Mourelle in 1781 and Alessandro Malaspina (who unsuccessfully claimed Vavau for Spain) in 1793 and by the French under Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne in 1772, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse in 1787 and Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux in 1793. Fletcher Christian also led the mutiny on the Bounty while crossing Tongan waters, in 1789.\nUnification.\nIn 1799, the 14th Tu\u02bbi Kanokupolu, Tuku\u02bbaho was murdered, which sent Tonga into a civil war for fifty years. Finally, the islands were united into a Polynesian kingdom in 1845 by the ambitious young warrior, strategist, and orator T\u0101ufa\u02bb\u0101hau. He held the chiefly title of Tu'i Kanokupolu, but was baptised with the name King George Tupou I.\nIn 1875, with the help of missionary Shirley Baker, he declared Tonga a constitutional monarchy, at which time he emancipated the serfs, enshrined a code of law, land tenure, and freedom of the press, and limited the power of the chiefs. The islands were not fully surveyed until 1898, when the British warships and completed the task.\n20th century.\nKingdom of Tonga (1900\u20131970).\nTonga became a British protected state under a Treaty of Friendship on May 18, 1900, when European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs tried to oust the second king. The Treaty of Friendship and protected state status ended in 1970 under arrangements established prior to her death by the third monarch, Queen S\u0101lote.\nOn 18 May 1900, to discourage German advances, the Kingdom of Tonga became a Protected State with the United Kingdom under a Treaty of Friendship signed by George Tupou II after European settlers and rival Tongan chiefs attempted to overthrow him. \nForeign affairs of the Kingdom of Tonga were conducted through the British Consul. The United Kingdom had veto power over foreign policies and finances of the Kingdom of Tonga.\nTonga was affected by the 1918 flu pandemic, with 1,800 Tongans killed, around eight percent of the residents.\nFor most of the 20th century Tonga was quiet, inward-looking, and somewhat isolated from developments elsewhere in the world. Tonga's complex social structure is essentially broken into three tiers: the king, the nobles, and the commoners. Between the nobles and commoners are Matapule, sometimes called \"talking chiefs,\" who are associated with the king or a noble and who may or may not hold estates. Obligations and responsibilities are reciprocal, and although the nobility are able to extract favors from people living on their estates, they likewise must extend favors to their people. Status and rank play a powerful role in personal relationships, even within families.\nWorld War II.\nUpon the British declaration of war against Germany in 1939, the government of Tonga issued a declaration \"placing all of its resources at the disposal of the British\" and formally declared war against Germany in its own right (since the British controlled Tonga's external affairs, it coerced Tonga to declare war on Germany). Queen S\u0101lote directed the re-establishment of the national militia and donated to the British for the construction of an airfield. The people of Tonga subsequently raised enough funds to buy three Spitfires for the Royal Air Force. In August 1941, S\u0101lote proclaimed a national day of prayer for the British war effort.\nIn mid-1941, the New Zealand Army despatched 70 military advisors to Nuku'alofa to train the Tongan Defence Force. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Tonga also declared war on Japan. In anticipation of a Japanese invasion, citizens were evacuated from Nuku'alofa and barbed wire and trenches were erected on the beaches of Tongatapu.\nIndependence (1970).\nOn 4 June 1970, protected state status ended under arrangements established prior to her death in 1965 by the third monarch, Queen S\u0101lote.\nTonga joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1970, and the United Nations in 1999. While exposed to colonial forces, Tonga has never lost indigenous governance, a fact that makes Tonga unique in the Pacific and boosts confidence in the monarchical system. The British High Commission in Tonga closed in March 2006.\nTonga's current king, Tupou VI, traces his line directly back through six generations of monarchs. The previous king, George Tupou V, born in 1946, continued to have ultimate control of the government until August 2008. At that point, concerns over financial irregularities and calls for democracy led to his relinquishing most of his day-to-day powers over the government.\nTongans are beginning to confront the problem of how to preserve their cultural identity and traditions in the wake of the increasing impact of Western technology and culture. Migration and the gradual monetization of the economy have led to the breakdown of the traditional extended family. Some of the poor, once supported by the extended family, are now being left without visible means of support.\nEducational opportunities for young commoners have advanced, and their increasing political awareness has stimulated some dissent against the nobility system. In addition, the rapidly increasing population is already too great to provide the constitutionally mandated 8.25 acre (33,000\u00a0m2) API for each male at age 16. In mid-1982, the population density was 134 persons per square kilometer. Because of these factors, there is considerable pressure to move to the Kingdom's only urban center.\n21st century.\n2002 election.\nIn the March 2002 election, supporters of the Human Rights and Democracy Movement (HRDM) won seven of the nine popularly-elected seats for people's representatives, with the remaining two representing \"traditionalist\" values. Voter turnout was 48.9%. The nine nobles and all the cabinet ministers that sit in the Legislative Assembly generally support the government. \nFollowing the election, HRDM leader 'Akilisi Pohiva was arrested and charged with sedition over an article published in his newspaper \"Kele\u2019a\" alleging the king had a secret fortune, but was later acquitted by a jury.\nIn 2003, the \"Taimi 'o Tonga\" (Tongan Times), a newspaper published in New Zealand in the Tongan language that had been critical of the government was prohibited from distribution in Tonga due to government objections to its political content. After the newspaper obtained two court orders, it was again distributed freely. A Media Operators Bill and constitutional amendment, intended to restrict media freedom in Tonga, was hotly debated in 2003. The legislation allowed the government to exert control over coverage of \"cultural\" and \"moral\" issues, ban publications it deemed offensive, and ban foreign ownership of the media. In October 2003, thousands of Tongans marched peacefully through the streets of the capital city Nuku\u02bbalofa in an unprecedented demonstration against the government's plans to limit media freedom. Despite the protests, the Media Operators Bill and constitutional amendment passed the Legislature and as of December 2003 needed only the King's signature to become law.\nBy February 2004, the amendment was passed and licensure of news media was required. Those papers denied licenses under the new act included the Taimi 'o Tonga (Tongan Times), the Kele'a and the Matangi Tonga, while those permitted licenses were uniformly church based or pro-government. Further opposition to government action included calls by the Tu'i Pelehake (a prince, nephew of the King and elected member of parliament) for Australia and other nations to pressure the Tongan government to democratize the electoral system, and a legal writ calling for a judicial investigation of the bill. The latter was supported by some 160 people, including 7 of the 9 elected \"People's Representatives\".\n2005 election.\nAt the 2005 Tongan general election, the Human Rights and Democracy Movement won seven of the nine popularly-elected seats (the rest of the 30 MPs are appointed by the King or are members of the Tongan aristocracy). 'Aho'eitu 'Unuaki'otonga Tuku'aho, son of the King, initially retained his position as Prime Minister, but he resigned in 2006, after the Tongan Speaker of the House was found guilty of bribery. The position passed to Feleti Sevele, Minister of Labour and one of the two independent candidates elected, as well as the first non-noble Prime Minister of the country.\nIn 2005 the government spent several weeks negotiating with striking civil service workers before reaching a settlement. A constitutional commission met in 2005\u20132006 to study proposals to update the constitution. A copy of the commission's report was presented to King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV, shortly before his death in September 2006.\n2006 riots.\nTonga did not rate as an \"electoral democracy\" under the criteria of Freedom House's Freedom in the World 2006 report. This is likely because while elections exist, they could only elect nine of 30 Legislative Assembly seats, the remainder being selected either by the nobility or the government; as such the people have a voice in but no control over the government.\nThe public expected democratic changes from the new monarch. On November 16, 2006, rioting broke out in the capital city of Nuku\u02bbalofa when it seemed that the parliament would adjourn for the year without having made any advances in increasing democracy in government. Government buildings, offices, and shops were looted and burned Eight people died in the riots. The government agreed that elections would be held in 2008 in which a majority of the parliament would be elected by popular vote. A state of emergency was declared on November 17, with emergency laws giving security forces the right to stop and search people without a warrant.\nOn 18 January 2007 P\u014dhiva was arrested and charged with sedition over his role in the 2006 Nuku'alofa riots.\n2008 election.\nThe April 2008 elections saw a 48% turnout to elect the nobles' representatives and the 9 people's representatives. Most of the pro-democracy MPs were reconfirmed, despite several facing charges of sedition over the 2006 Nuku'alofa riots All nine elected MPs were pro-democracy activists.\nAbout two weeks before the election, it was announced that the Tonga Broadcasting Commission would henceforth censor candidates' political broadcasts, and that TBC reporters would be banned from reporting on political matters. \nTonga Review criticised the decision as an undue restriction on freedom of speech. \nOn 29 May 2008, in the speech from the throne at the opening of Parliament, Princess Regent, Salote Mafile'o Pilolevu Tuita announced that the government would introduce a political reform bill by June 2008, and that the current term of Parliament would be the last one under the current constitution\nIn July 2008, three days before his coronation, King George Tupou V announced that he would relinquish most of his power and be guided by his Prime Minister's recommendations on most matters, following upcoming elections.\nIn November 2009, a constitutional review panel recommended a ceremonial monarchy stripped of real political power and to invest political power in a completely elected Legislative Assembly of Tonga (the \"Fale Alea\") which, up to this point was largely hereditary due to the fact that most of the seats where designated for the nobles. and were preceded by a programme of constitutional reform.\nDemocratisation and 2010 elections.\nIn April 2010 the Legislative Assembly enacted a package of political reforms towards a fully representative democracy, increasing the number of directly elected people's representatives from 9 to 17, with ten seats for Tongatapu, three for Vava\u02bbu, two for Ha\u02bbapai and one each for Niuas and \u02bbEua. All of the seats are single-seat constituencies, as opposed to the multi-member constituencies used before. These changes mean that 17 out of 26 representatives (65.4%) would be directly elected, up from 9 out of 30 (30.0%). The aristocracy would still select its nine representatives, while all remaining seats, which were previously appointed by the monarch, would be abolished.\nEarly general elections under the new electoral law were held on 25 November 2010.\nThe Taimi Media Network described the 2010 Tongan Legislative Assembly as \"Tonga\u2019s first democratically elected Parliament\".\nThe Democratic Party of the Friendly Islands (DPFI), founded in September 2010 specifically to fight the election and led by veteran pro-democracy campaigner 'Akilisi Pohiva, secured the largest number of seats, with 12 out of the seventeen \"people's representative\" seats.\n\u02bbAkilisi Pohiva, the MP for Tongatapu 1, had sought to become Prime Minister, but the nobles and independent MP entrusted Lord Tu\u02bbivakan\u014d with the task of forming a government, relegating the DPFI to the status of a \"de facto\" parliamentary opposition. \nThe DPFI put forward bills for further democratisation, including the proposal of direct election of the Prime Minister from among the 26 elected MPs, as well as of universal suffrage for all 26 MPs. These proposals were not taken forward by the conservative majority.\nAt the death of King George Tupou V on 18 March 2012, his brother \u02bbAho\u02bbeitu \u02bbUnuaki\u02bbotonga Tuku\u02bbaho became King of Tonga, with the regnal name \u02bbAho\u02bbeitu Tupou VI.\nNew elections in 2014 saw the DPFI lose three seats to independent candidates. Its leader Pohiva was nevertheless appointed as new Prime Minister of Tonga.\nOn August 25, 2017 Pohiva was dismissed by the King along with the rest of parliament with fresh elections to be held on November 16. The Elections resulted in the DPFI winning 14 seats - enough for Pohivia to form government without relying on nobles' or independent MPs.\n2022 tsunami.\nOn 15 January 2022 a tsunami caused by an eruption of the Hunga Tonga\u2013Hunga Ha\u02bbapai volcano swept through many parts of Tonga. It killed four people in Tonga and two others in Peru. Many places in Australia and other countries were also put on high alert.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30160", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30160", "title": "Geography of Tonga", "text": " \nLocated in Oceania, Tonga is a small archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, directly south of Samoa and about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand. It has 169 islands, 36 of them inhabited, which are in three main groups \u2013 Vava\u02bbu, Ha\u02bbapai, and Tongatapu \u2013 and cover an north\u2013south line. The total size is just . Due to the spread-out islands it has the 40th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nThe largest island, Tongatapu, on which the capital city of Nuku\u02bbalofa is located, covers . Geologically the Tongan islands are of two types: most have a limestone base formed from uplifted coral formations; others consist of limestone overlaying a volcanic base.\nClimate.\nThe climate is tropical with a distinct warm period (December\u2013April), during which the temperatures rise above , and a cooler period (May\u2013November), with temperatures rarely rising above . The temperature increases from , and the annual rainfall is from as one moves from Tongatapu in the south to the more northerly islands closer to the Equator. The average wettest period is around March with on average . The average daily humidity is 80%. Cyclones can occur from October to April.\nGeology.\nThough administratively divided into the three main island groups of Tongatapu, Ha'apai, and Vava'u (excluding the outlying islands), the Tonga archipelago is actually made of two geologically different parallel chains of islands.\nThe western islands, such as \u02bbAta (also known as Pylstaart island), Fonuafo'ou, Tofua, Kao, Lata'iki, Late, Fonualei, Toku, Niuatoputapu, and Tafahi, make up the Tongan Volcanic Arc and are all of volcanic origin. They were created from the subduction of the westwards-moving Pacific plate under the Australia-India plate at the Tonga Trench. The Tongan Islands sit on the Australia-India plate just west of the Tonga Trench. These volcanoes are formed when materials in the descending Pacific plate heat and rise to the surface. There is only limited coral reef development on these islands, except for Niuatoputapu.\nThe eastern islands are not volcanic and sit above the mostly submerged Tonga ridge that runs parallel to the Tongan Volcanic Arc and the Tongan Trench. Of these islands, only 'Eua has risen high enough to expose its underlying Eocene volcanic bedrock, the rest are either low coral limestone islands (Tongatapu, Vava'u, Lifuka) or sand cay islands ('Uoleva, 'Uiha). These islands are surrounded by \"a protective and resource-rich labyrinth of fringing, apron and off-shore barrier reefs\" that have supported most of the human settlement in Tonga ever since the first Lapita People arrived circa 900 BCE.\nThe Tongan Volcanic Arc has been important in supplying the islands on the Tonga ridge with an andesite tephra soil that has resulted in \"an extremely rich soil capable of supporting a high-yield, short-fallow agricultural system.\" Also, the andesite/basalt from the volcanoes were initially used as \"hammerstones, weaving weights, cooking stones, and decorative pebbles for grave decoration.\" Tafahi island in the far north provided volcanic glass to initial human settlers.\nIn December 2014 and January 2015, a volcanic island 1\u00a0km wide by 2\u00a0km long was created adjacent to the island of Hunga Tonga\u2013Hunga Ha'apai 65 kilometers northwest of Nuku'alofa. The volcanic eruption has built the new island to a height of 100 m composed of ash and large rock fragments. In regards to volcanism, Tonga has moderate volcanic activity. Fonualei (elev. 180 m) has shown frequent activity in recent years, while Niuafo'ou (elev. 260 m), which last erupted in 1985, has forced evacuations; other historically active volcanoes include Late and Tofua. Natural hazards include earthquakes and volcanic activity at Fonuafo'ou (Falcon Shoal/Island) and Late'iki (Metis Shoal/Island).\nFacts.\nGeographic coordinates: \nArea:\n\"total:\" \n\"land:\" \n\"water:\" \nCoastline:\nMaritime claims:\n\"continental shelf:\"\n depth or to the depth of exploitation\n\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n and \n\"territorial sea:\"\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nPacific Ocean \n\"highest point:\"\nunnamed location on Kao \nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n21.33%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n14.67%\n\"other:\"\n64.00% (2011)\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change Kyoto-Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, and Ship Pollution.\nNatural resources are fish and fertile soil. Current environmental issues are deforestation as more and more land is being cleared for agriculture and settlement; some damage to coral reefs from starfish and indiscriminate coral and shell collectors; and overhunting threatens native sea turtle populations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30161", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30161", "title": "Demographics of Tonga", "text": " \nTongans, a Polynesian group, represent more than 98% of the inhabitants of Tonga. The rest are European (the majority are British), mixed European, and other Pacific Islanders. There also are several hundred Chinese. Almost two-thirds of the population live on its main island, Tongatapu. Although an increasing number of Tongans have moved into the only urban and commercial center, Nuku\u02bbalofa, where European and Indigenous cultural and living patterns have blended, village life and kinship ties continue to be important throughout the country. Everyday life is heavily influenced by Polynesian traditions and especially by the Christian faith; for example, all commerce and entertainment activities cease from midnight Saturday until midnight Sunday, and the constitution declares the Sabbath to be sacred, forever. Other important Christian denominations include Methodists (Free Wesleyan) and Roman Catholics, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nPrimary education between ages 6 and 14 is compulsory and free in state schools. Mission schools provide about 83% of the primary and 90% of the secondary level education. Higher education includes teacher training, nursing and medical training, a small private university, a women's business college, and a number of private agricultural schools. Most higher education is pursued overseas.\nBased on 2021 estimates, the religious breakdown of the population was Protestant 63.9% (includes Free Wesleyan Church 34.2%, Free Church of Tonga 11.3%, Church of Tonga 6.8%, Tokaikolo Christian Church 1.5%, Assembly of God 2.5%, Seventh Day Adventist 2.5%, Constitutional Church of Tonga 1.2%, and other Protestant 4%), Latter-day Saints 19.7%, Roman Catholic 13.7%, other 2.1%, none 0.6%, unspecified 0.1%.\nAs the 1960s ended the population growth rate fell rapidly in the country.\nPopulation.\nIn the 1930s, Tonga had a population of about 32,000. Starting in the 1970s large scale migration began to Australia and New Zealand. By the 1970s the emigration rate from Tonga to Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom, Canada, France and the United States was over 2% annually. The country has over 100,000 residents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 30.XI.2016): \nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nMigration.\nEmigration.\nThere are over 150,000 people of Tongan descent living outside of Tonga, mostly in New Zealand, the United States, and Australia.\nOceania.\n82,389 New Zealanders identified themselves as being of Tongan ethnicity with 22,413 stating that they were born in Tonga. As of 2016, Tongan New Zealanders make up 1.2% of New Zealand's population of approximately 5 million people. There is a Tongan Australian population of 32,691 people, which is over 0.1% of Australia's population. 60% of Tongan people live in New South Wales.\nUnited States.\nIn the U.S., Tongan Americans constitute a small 0.02% of the U.S. population, with over 67,000 people recorded having Tongan ancestry in the country as of 2020.\nMuch of the U.S. Tongan community resides in California. In San Mateo County (0.7% of the county's population) in the San Francisco Bay Area, there are over 5,000 Tongan Americans, mainly concentrated in Daly City, East Palo Alto, San Mateo, and San Bruno. There is a Tongan community in Oakland, of about 1,500 people (0.3% of Oakland's population). There is a Tongan population in Los Angeles County, mainly in Inglewood (0.7% of the city's population), Hawthorne, and Long Beach. There are also around 1,000 Tongans in Sacramento and more throughout the Sacramento Valley.https://\nThere is a sizable Tongan community in Utah, mainly in the Salt Lake Valley. Salt Lake County has over 8,000 residents of Tongan ancestry. The Glendale neighborhood of Salt Lake City has one of the highest concentrations of Tongans in the area.\nEuless, Texas, in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, has a significant Tongan community, with more than 1,000 residents.\nPortland, Oregon has 500 Tongan individuals, with its metropolitan area having several hundred more in addition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30162", "revid": "45697095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30162", "title": "Politics of Tonga", "text": " \nThe politics of Tonga take place in a framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the King is the Head of State and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Tonga's Prime Minister is currently appointed by the King from among the members of Parliament after having won the support of a majority of its members. Executive power is vested in the Cabinet of Ministers. Legislative power is vested in the King in Parliament, and judicial power is vested in the supreme court.\nTonga joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1970, and the United Nations in 1999. While exposed to colonial forces, Tonga has never lost indigenous governance, a fact that makes Tonga unique in the Pacific and boosts confidence in the monarchical system. The British High Commission in Tonga closed in March 2006.\nTonga's current king, Tupou VI, traces his line directly back through six generations of monarchs. The previous king, George Tupou V, born in 1946, continued to have ultimate control of the government until July 2008. At that point, concerns over financial irregularities and calls for democracy led to his relinquishing most of his day-to-day powers over the government.\nExecutive.\nIts executive includes the prime minister and the cabinet, which becomes the Privy Council when presided over by the monarch. In intervals between legislative sessions, the Privy Council makes ordinances, which become law if confirmed by the legislature. The monarch is hereditary and appoints all members of the cabinet, including the prime minister and the deputy prime minister.\nLegislature.\nThe Legislative Assembly is composed of representatives elected by both the Nobles and the people. Currently, there are 17 peoples\u2019 representatives and 9 nobles\u2019 representatives. The composition is established by Article 59 of the Constitution as amended by the \" Constitution of Tonga amendment Act 2010 \", which increased the number of representatives directly elected. Article 51 of the same Act allows the PM to nominate and the King to appoint up to 4 extra cabinet members from outside the Assembly. \nThe current composition is:\nThe Legislative Assembly elects a Prime Minister, who has the power to appoint up to 12 Ministers to the Executive Government.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nTonga does not have a political party system. MPs not appointed as ministers form an informal opposition and hold an oversight role.\nBy-elections.\nBelow is a list of recent or upcoming by-elections:\nCourts.\nTonga's court system consists of the Court of Appeal (Privy Council), the Supreme Court, the Magistrates' Court, and the Land Court. Judges are appointed by the monarch.\nThe judiciary is headed by a Chief Justice. The current Chief Justice is Michael Hargreaves Whitten.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTonga is divided in three island groups; Ha'apai, Tongatapu, Vava'u. The only form of local government is through town and district officials who have been popularly elected since 1965. The town official represents the central government in the villages, the district official has authority over a group of villages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30164", "revid": "16888511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30164", "title": "Telecommunications in Tonga", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Tonga include radio, television, telephones, and the Internet.\nTelephone.\nMain lines in use:\n11,000 (2021)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n64,000 (2021)\nTelephone system:\nFixed PSTN, GSM 900\nMain Island has 4G mobile. \n\"domestic:\"\nNA\n\"international:\"\nsatellite earth station - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean))\nRadio.\nBroadcast stations:\nAM 1 (2005), FM 5 (2005), shortwave 1 (1998)\nRadios:\n61,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nBroadcast stations:\n4 (2005)\nTelevisions:\n2,000 (1997)\nIn April 2002 the Tongasat company started its own satellite telecommunication service when it obtained the Esiafi 1 (former private American Comstar D4) satellite (launched in 1981) that was moved to Tonga's own geostationary point.\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n2 (2005)\nCountry code (Top level domain): .to\nBroadband internet communication is provided by the Tonga Cable System that went online in April 2018.\nOn 15 January 2022, following a volcanic eruption on the island of Hunga Tonga\u2013Hunga Ha\u02bbapai, the Tonga Cable System was severed, leaving the country without Internet access. Using a satellite dish at the University of the South Pacific, the telecommunications company Digicel provided limited 2G coverage to the island of Tongatapu, as well as giving residents free SIM cards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30165", "revid": "26830857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30165", "title": "Transport in Tonga", "text": "Transport in Tonga includes road, air and water-based infrastructure. There are 680\u00a0km of highways in Tonga, of which 184\u00a0km are paved, and there are a number of air and seaports.\nThere are three harbours in Tonga: Neiafu, Nuku\u02bbalofa and Pangai, and in terms of merchant marine, the country possesses seven ships that exceed 1,000 GT, whose masses combined total 17,760 GT. By type, there is one bulk ship, two cargo ships, two liquefied gas ships, one petroleum tanker and roll-on/roll-off ship, the MV \u2018Otuanga\u2019ofa.\nBy 1999 estimates, there are six airports in Tonga. Of these, only Fua\u02bbamotu International Airport on Tongatapu has paved runways. Of the remaining airports, one has runways exceeding length 1,524 m, two have runways longer than 914 m, with the remaining two having runways shorter than 914 m.\nThere was formerly a railway in Nuku'alofa, but it no longer exists.\nCurrently, Bajaj RE and Bajaj Qute are used in Nuku'alofa as taxi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30166", "revid": "39377531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30166", "title": "His Majesty's Armed Forces (Tonga)", "text": "Military of Tonga\nHis Majesty's Armed Forces (HMAF) is the military of Tonga. It is composed of three operational components and two support elements (logistics and training ).\nThe mission of HMAF is to: \"Defend the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Tonga\".\nThe HMAF is partially supported by defence co-operation agreements with Australia, the United States, China, India, New Zealand and Fiji. The co-operation aims at capacity development through training of HMAF personnel in leadership, academic and trades while support for infrastructure development is another part of the security co-operation.\nSince 2001, members of HMAF have supported the coalition of the willing in Operation Iraqi Freedom, the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.\nHistory.\nThe military history of Tonga extends from World War I to the present day, with Tonga participating in World War I, World War II, and the Afghan war, among other conflicts.\nComponents.\nThe main elements of *His Majesty's Armed Forces are:\nTongan Royal Guards.\nThe Tongan Royal Guards are a company size infantry unit that are responsible for the security of His Majesty. and was established in 1860 under the Reign of King George Tupou I, The Royal Guard provides Royal Security for the monarch, Royal Palaces and members of the Royal Family of Tonga, Royal Guard participates in Ceremonial duties along with the Tonga Royal Corps of Musicians that serves as a military band for different occasions.\nRoyal Tongan Marines.\nThe Royal Tongan Marine Infantry is organized as a Company size group with a HQ and three Infantry Platoons, based at Fua'amotu.\nTongan Maritime Force.\nThe Maritime Force is equipped with two Guardian-class patrol boats, provided by Australia under the Pacific Maritime Security Program, a Landing Craft and a motor boat, that is the royal yacht. Tongan Maritime Force performs patrol missions, occasionally dealing with border violations, at the Minerva Reef and Tonga's restricted fishing zones.\nTongan Air Wing.\nOn 4 May 1996 the Air Wing was created. A Beech 18 was taken into service. In 1999 a Citabria was obtained to help with training of the Beech 18.\nTerritorial Force.\nTerritorial Force is a component of HMAF alongside the Regular Force and active reserve, its duties are outlined in the HMAF act 1992 and HMAF regulations 1994, The Prime mission of the Territorial Force is to maintain internal order, and provide support to civil authorities including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief\nInternational Defence Organisations.\nThe HMAF is a member of the following international defence organisations:\nTonga has an agreement to share \"disaster response knowledge\" with the United States Nevada National Guard.\nRanks.\nThe ranks used by His Majesty's Armed Forces are similar to those used in other Commonwealth armed forces.\nCommanders.\nUntil 2013, commanders were called Commander of the Tongan Defence Services. After 2013, they are now called Chief of the Defence\u00a0Staff of the HMAF.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30169", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30169", "title": "History of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "%5B%5BWP%3ACSD%23G6%7CG6%5D%5D%3A%20%5B%5BWikipedia%3ATemplates%20for%20discussion/Log/none%20%7D%7D%23Template%3AHistory%20of%20Trinidad%20and%20Tobago%5D%5D\nThe history of Trinidad and Tobago begins with the settlements of the islands by Indigenous First Peoples. Trinidad was visited by Christopher Columbus on his third voyage in 1498, (he never landed in Tobago), and claimed in the name of Spain. Trinidad was administered by Spanish hands until 1797, but it was largely settled by French colonists. Tobago changed hands between the British, French, Dutch, and Courlanders, but eventually ended up in British hands following the second Treaty of Paris (1814). In 1889, the two islands were incorporated into a single political entity. Trinidad and Tobago obtained its independence from the British Empire in 1962 and became a republic in 1976.\nPre-Columbian period.\nHuman settlement in Trinidad dates back at least 7,000 years. The earliest settlers, termed Archaic or Ortoiroid, are believed to have settled Trinidad and Tobago from modern-day Venezuela from northeastern South America around 4000 BC. Twenty-nine Archaic sites have been identified, mostly in south Trinidad and Tobago; this includes the 7,000-year-old Banwari Trace site which is the oldest discovered human settlement in the eastern Caribbean. Archaic populations were pre-ceramic, and dominated the area until about 200 BC.\nAround 250 BC the first ceramic-using people in the Caribbean, the Saladoid people, entered Trinidad and Tobago. The earliest evidence of these people come from around 2100 BC along the banks of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. From Trinidad and Tobago, they are believed to have moved north into the remaining islands of the Caribbean. Thirty-seven Saladoid sites have been identified in Trinidad and Tobago, and are located all over the island.\nAfter 250 AC a third group, called the Barrancoid people settled in southern Trinidad and Tobago after migrating up the Orinoco River toward the sea. The oldest Barrancoid settlement appears to have been at Erin, on the south coast.\nFollowing the collapse of Barrancoid communities along the Orinoco around 650 AC, a new group, called the Arauquinoid expanded up the river to the coast. The cultural artefacts of this group were only partly adopted in Trinidad and Tobago and adjacent areas of northeast Venezuela, and as a result, this culture is called Guayabitoid in these areas.\nAround 1300 AC a new group appears to have settled in Trinidad and Tobago and introduced new cultural attributes which largely replaced the Guayabitoid culture. Termed the Mayoid cultural tradition, this represents the native tribes which were present in Trinidad and Tobago at the time of European arrival. Their distinct pottery and artifacts survive until 1800, but after this time they were largely assimilated into mainstream Trinidad and Tobago society. These included the Nepoya (Napuyos) and Shebaya (Sapoyos) (who were probably Arawak-speaking) and the Yao (Iao) (who were probably Carib-speaking). They have generally been called Arawaks and Caribs. These were largely wiped out by the Spanish colonisers under the encomienda system. Under this system which was basically a form of slavery, Spanish encomederos forced the Amerindians to work for them in exchange for Spanish \"protection\" and conversion to Christianity. The survivors were first organised into Missions by the Capuchin friars, and then gradually assimilated. The Yao disappear from historical records after 1598.\nSpanish administration.\nArrival of Columbus.\nThe first-ever contact with Europeans occurred when Christopher Columbus, who was on his third voyage of exploration, arrived at noon on 31 July 1498. He landed at a harbor he called Point Galera, while naming the island Trinidad, before proceeding into the Gulf of Paria via the Serpent's Mouth and the Caribbean Sea via Dragon's Mouth. Tobago was seen by Columbus on 14 August 1498. He did not land, but named the island \"Belaforme\", \"because from a distance it seemed beautiful\".\nColonial settlement of Trinidad.\nTrinidad is reported to have been densely populated at the beginning of the colonial period. Although in 1510, Trinidad was said to have the only \"peaceful Indians\" along the whole South American coast, demand for slaves to supply the pearl-fisheries in nearby Isla Margarita led to them being declared \"Caribs\" (and thus, fair game for slavers) in 1511. As a consequence of this, Trinidad and Tobago became the focus of Spanish slaving raids, primarily to supply Margarita's pearl fisheries.\nIn 1530, Antonio Sede\u00f1o was appointed governor. Granted a contract to settle Trinidad, with an eye toward discovering long-rumored El Dorado and controlling the trade in slaves, in 1532 he attempted to establish a settlement, but was driven off the island following the Battle of Cumucurapo, (or The Place of the Silk Cotton Tree). He withdrew to Margarita, but he returned a year later and built a stockade at Cumucurapo (modern Mucurapo in what is now Port of Spain).On 13 September 1533, the second battle of Cumucurapo began, and Sede\u00f1o prevailed and rebuilt the fortifications. Sede\u00f1o was forced to withdraw a few months later in 1534, as his men left him to follow Francisco Pizarro in Peru.\nIn 1569, Juan Troche Ponce de Le\u00f3n built the \"town of the Circumcision\", probably around modern Laventille. In 1570, this settlement was abandoned. In 1592, Antonio de Berrio established the first lasting settlement, the town of San Jos\u00e9 de Oru\u00f1a (the modern St. Joseph). Sir Walter Raleigh, who was searching for \"El Dorado\", arrived in Trinidad on 22 March 1595 and soon attacked San Jos\u00e9 and captured and interrogated de Berr\u00edo, obtaining much information from him and from the cacique Topiawari.\nLack of Spanish ships arriving on a regular basis forced the settlers to trade with the English, French and Dutch, in violation of the Spanish Exclusive. The Spanish also lacked the means to defend the colony, which consisted of only 24 Spanish settlers in 1625. Thus, the Dutch attacked St. Joseph with impunity in 1637. By 1671, the island included 80 settlers and 80 \"domesticated\" Amerindians.\nBy 1772, the Spanish capital of St. Joseph had a population of 326 Spaniards and 417 Amerindians. Yet the houses consisted of mud huts with thatch roofs. In general, lacking gold, the island was poor and undeveloped, inducing many to leave.\nThe Captaincy General of Venezuela was created on 8 September 1777, through the Royal Decree of Graces of Charles III of Bourbon, to provide more autonomy for the provinces of Venezuela (include Trinidad), previously under the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalty of New Granada and the Audiencia of Santo Domingo. The crown established a unified government in political (governorship), military (captaincy general), fiscal (intendancy) and judicial (\"audiencia\") affairs. Its creation was part of the Bourbon Reforms and laid the groundwork for the future nation of Venezuela, in particular by orienting the province of Maracaibo towards the province of Caracas.\nColonial settlement of Tobago.\nIn Tobago, the first Dutch colony of Nieuw-Walcheren (\"New Walcheren\") was short-lived. 68 colonists established Fort Vlissingen (\"Fort Flushing\") near modern Plymouth in 1628. They were reinforced by a few hundred more settlers from Zeeland in 1629 and 1632. Attempted colonies by Courland in 1637, 1639, and 1642 and England in 1639, 1642, and 1647 all failed.\nIn May and September 1654, Courish and Dutch colonies were reestablished successfully. The Courish colony of \"Neu-Kurland\" (\"New Courland\") was centered at Fort Jacob on Great Courland Bay. The Dutch colony on the other side of the island had three forts: Lampsinsberg, Beveren, and Bellavista. In 1658, 500 Frenchmen joined the Dutch colony but formed their own settlement called Three Rivers (\"Le Quartier des trois Rivi\u00e8res\"). On 11 December 1659, the Courlanders peaceably surrendered their colony to the Dutch. At the time, the island held about 1,500 Europeans and around 7,000 African slaves working on 120 plantations, supporting six or seven sugar mills and two rum distilleries.\nBritish Jamaican pirates captured the island in January 1666; the official English garrison surrendered to a French attack in August the same year. The Dutch admiral Abraham Crijnssen reclaimed a deserted colony in April 1667 and reestablished a fort. An attempt to restore the Courish Fort Jacob was suppressed in December 1668. In December, 1672, the British attacked and destroyed the Dutch colony as part of the Third Anglo-Dutch War. Dutch control was regained under the \"status quo ante\" provisions of the Second Treaty of Westminster in 1674; in September 1676, Fort Sterreschans was constructed near the ruins of Fort Vlissingen. This star fort was reinforced in February 1677, but French attacks in February, March, and December of that year finally succeeded in killing the Dutch governor and capturing the island.\nThe Treaty of Aix-la-Chappelle in 1748 designated Tobago neutral territory. Amerindians from Venezuela who sought to avoid being forced to settle in Capuchin mission villages, and Island Caribs from St. Vincent who sought to escape conflict with the Black Caribs, were among the groups who settled there in this period.\nSpanish missions in Trinidad.\nSpanish missions were established as part of the Spanish colonization here as in its other new New World conquests. In 1687, the Catalan Capuchin friars were given responsibility for the conversion of the indigenous population of Trinidad and the Guianas. Tensions between priests and Amerindians led to the \"Arena Massacre\" of 1699, wherein the Amerindians murdered the priests. After being hunted by the Spanish, the survivors are reported to have committed suicide by jumping off cliffs into the sea. In 1713, the missions were handed over to the \"secular clergy\". Due to shortages of missionaries, although the missions were established they often went without Christian instruction for long periods of time.\nBetween 1687 and 1700, several missions were founded in Trinidad, but only four survived as Amerindian villages throughout the 18th century \u2013 \"La Anunc\u00edata de Nazaret de Savana Grande\" (modern Princes Town), \"Pur\u00edsima Concepci\u00f3n de Mar\u00eda Sant\u00edsima de Guayri\" (modern San Fernando), \"Santa Ana de Savaneta\" (modern Savonetta), \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de Montserrate\" (probably modern Mayo). The mission of \"Santa Rosa de Arima\" was established in 1789 when Amerindians from the former \"encomiendas\" of Tacarigua and \"Arauca\" (Arouca) were relocated further east and settled in Santa Rosa close to today's town of Arima).\nFrench settlement in Trinidad.\nAlthough Spanish settlement began in the 16th century, the census of 1777 recorded only 2,763 people as living on the island, including some 2,000+ Arawaks.\nIn 1777, Roume de St Laurent proposed French planters from the islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe, Dominica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenada, and their African slaves, immigrate to Trinidad. He estimated 1,532 whites, with 33,322 of their slaves, would be interested in such a proposal.\nThe Spanish gave many incentives to lure settlers to the island, including exemption from taxes for ten years and land grants in accordance to the terms set out in the Cedula. In 1783, the proclamation of a Cedula of Population by the Spanish Crown granted 32 acres (129,000\u00a0m2) of land to each Roman Catholic who settled in Trinidad and half as much for each slave that they brought. Uniquely, 16 acres (65,000\u00a0m2) was offered to each \"Free Coloured\" or \"Free Person of Colour\" (\"gens de couleur libre\", as they were later known), and half as much for each slave they brought. French planters with their slaves, free coloureds and mulattos from neighboring islands of Grenada, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Dominica migrated to the Trinidad during the French Revolution. These new immigrants establishing local communities of Blanchisseuse, Champs Fleurs, Paramin, Cascade, Carenage and Laventille. This resulted in Trinidad having the unique feature of a large French-speaking \"Free Coloured\" slave-owning class.\nBy the time the island was surrendered to the British in 1797, the population had increased to 17,643: 2,086 whites, 4,466 free people of colour, 1,082 Amerindians, and 10,009 African slaves. In addition, there were 159 sugar estates, 130 coffee estates, 60 cocoa estates, and 103 cotton estates. Yet, the island remained unfortified.\nBritish administration.\nTobago.\nThe Treaty of Paris in 1763 ended Tobago's status as a neutral territory and brought it under British control. A plantation economy was quickly established on the island. Under the direction of the Board of Trade, the island was surveyed and sold to planters. In 1781, as part of the Anglo-French War, France captured Tobago. The island was ceded to France in 1783 under the terms of the Treaty of Paris.\nThe British recapture the island during the War of the First Coalition. British forces from Barbados under the command of Cornelius Cuyler captured the island 1781. Tobago was returned to France in 1802 under the Treaty of Amiens, but recaptured by the British when war broke out again in 1803. France formally surrendered Tobago to Britain under the terms of the 1814 Treaty of Paris.\nSlavery.\nThe Tobagonian economy in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century was completely dependent on slavery, both for plantation and domestic labour. Sugar production dominated the island's economy, and more than 90% of the enslaved population was employed on the sugar estates. The enslaved population grew from 14,170 in 1790 to 16,190 and reached 18,153 in 1807, the year the slave trade was abolished, and declined to 16,080 by 1813. Slavery was regulated by the Slave Act (formally \"An Act for the Good Order and Government of Slaves\") of 1775. Slaves were considered property, with no intrinsic rights.\nEmancipation and metayage.\nDeclining sugar prices led to a downturn in the economy of the West Indian islands, including Tobago. After Emancipation in 1838, economic conditions did not improve. The 1846 Sugar Duties Act removed protections for British West Indian sugar, forcing it to compete with foreign-grown sugar, which was cheaper to produce, and beet sugar, which was subsidised. \nGiven a lack of money to pay labourers, planters in Tobago resorted to metayage, a form of sharecropping. In this system, planters provided the land, planting stocks, transport and machinery to manufacture sugar while the workers (metayers) provided the labour to cultivate and harvest the canes and operate the sugar mill. \nFirst introduced in Tobago in 1843, it became the general form of production by 1845 and remained the dominant mode of production in Tobago until the end of the nineteenth century, when sugar production was finally abandoned.\nTrinidad.\nIn 1797, a British force led by General Sir Ralph Abercromby launched the invasion of Trinidad. His squadron sailed through the Bocas and anchored off the coast of Chaguaramas. The Spanish Governor Chac\u00f3n decided to capitulate without fighting. Trinidad thus became a British crown colony, with a French-speaking population and Spanish laws. British rule was formalized under the Treaty of Amiens (1802).\nIn 1808, Port-of-Spain was destroyed by fire. At that time, it was a sprawling town of wood and shingle that had grown tremendously during the previous twenty-five years. As a result of this disaster, the Government brought in legislation regarding building regulations, and for this reason the government building were built of brick to replace the previous ones, all of which had been destroyed by the fire.\nBritish rule led to an influx of settlers from the United Kingdom and the British colonies of the Eastern Caribbean. English, Scots, Irish, German and Italian families arrived. Under British rule, new estates were created and the import of slaves did increase, but this was the period of abolitionism in England and the slave trade was under attack. Slavery was abolished in 1833, after which former slaves served an \"apprenticeship\" period which ended on 1 August 1838 with full emancipation. An overview of the populations statistics in 1838, however, clearly reveals the contrast between Trinidad and its neighbouring islands: upon emancipation of the slaves in 1838, Trinidad had only 17,439 slaves, with 80% of slave owners having fewer than 10 slaves each. In contrast, at twice the size of Trinidad, Jamaica had roughly 360,000 slaves.\nEnd of slavery.\nIn August 1816, seven hundred former slaves from the Americas arrived, having served for fourteen months in the (second British) Corps of Colonial Marines at the Royal Naval Dockyard, Bermuda. After rejecting British government orders for transfer to the West India Regiments, and on the Admiralty refusing to continue responsibility for them, they finally accepted, but only with reluctance, a government offer of settlement in Trinidad. These ex-Colonial Marines (aka \"Merikens\") were organised by the authorities in villages according to their military companies (so-called \"company towns\").\nAn attempt was made to delay the full abolition of slavery in 1833. The first announcement from Whitehall in England that slaves would be totally freed by 1840 was made in 1833. In the meantime, slaves on plantations were expected to remain where they were and work as \"apprentices\" for the next six years.\nTrinidad and Tobago demonstrated a successful use of non-violent protest and passive resistance. On 1 August 1834, an unarmed group of mainly elderly ex-slaves being addressed by the governor at Government House about the new laws, began chanting: \"Pas de six ans. Point de six ans\" (\"Not six years. No six years\"), drowning out the voice of the governor.\nPeaceful protests continued until a resolution to abolish apprenticeship was passed and \"de facto\" freedom was achieved. This may have been partially due to the influence of Dr. Jean Baptiste Phillipe's book \"A Free Mulatto\" (1824). At the request of Governor Sir George Fitzgerald Hill, on 25 July, \"Dr. Jean Baptiste Phillipe the first coloured member of the Council, proposed a resolution to end apprenticeship and this was passed. [...] Full emancipation for all was finally legally granted ahead of schedule on 1 August 1838.\"\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nIn 1887, the British Parliament passed the Trinidad and Tobago Act, which authorised the union of Trinidad and Tobago. The goal of the union was to pass the cost of administering Tobago from the British crown to the more prosperous colony of Trinidad. On 17 November 1888, the Act was proclaimed, and the union took effect on 1 January 1889. The islands were united under a single administrative structure, which was based in Port of Spain, and a single governor, who had formerly been the governor of Trinidad. The Supreme Court in Trinidad gained authority over Tobago and had the power to appoint magistrates. Tobago's status was downgraded to that of a ward in 1899, with the warden of Tobago as the chief government official on the island.\nAgricultural development and indentured labour.\nThe sugarcane plantations which dominated the economy of Trinidad and Tobago in the 19th century gradually gave ground to the cultivation of cacao. Trinidad and Tobago chocolate became a high-priced, much sought-after commodity. The Colonial government opened land to settlers interested in establishing cacao estates. French Creoles (white Trinidadian elites descended from the original French settlers) were being marginalised economically by large English business concerns who were buying up sugar plantations, and this gave them a fresh avenue of economic development.\nVenezuelan farmers with experience in cacao cultivation were also encouraged to settle in Trinidad and Tobago, where they provided much of the early labour in these estates. Many of the former cocoa-producing areas of Trinidad retain a distinctly Spanish flavour and many of the descendants of the Cocoa panyols (from 'espagnol') remain in these areas including Trinidad.\nIn 1844, the British Government allowed the immigration of 2,500 Indian workers as indentured servants, from Calcutta and Madras. According to Williams, this was an effort to provide \"an adequate and dependable supply of labour.\" One third of the cost of passage, including return, was to borne as a public expense. Additional funds were provided for the Office of Protector of Immigrants, medical and police services. Wages were set at $2.40 per month for males, and $1.45 per month for females. In 1899, the working day was fixed at 9 hours. They could buy a plot of land in exchange for return passage. Between 1838 and 1917, 145,000 Indians immigrated to Trinidad. There were also workers brought from China at about the same time:\nIn Trinidad there were, about twenty years ago [i.e. ca.-1886], 4,000 or 5,000 Chinese, but they have decreased to probably about 2,000 or 3,000, [2,200 in 1900]. They used to work in sugar plantations, but are now principally shopkeepers, as well as general merchants, miners and railway builders, etc.Many Indian immigrants who had completed their indentureship also established cocoa estates, most notable of them being Haji Gokool Meah, a Kashmiri-born immigrant who went on to become one of the wealthiest men in Trinidad and Tobago. The Indian community has steadily prospered and grown until now it makes up about 35% of the population of the nation (the largest ethnic group by about 1%).\nThe arrival of \"witches' broom\" and \"black pod\" diseases in the 1930s, coupled with the Great Depression, destroyed the cacao industry in Trinidad and Tobago. Although prices for Trinidad and Tobago cocoa beans remains high on the world markets, cocoa is no more than a marginal crop.\nRelations between the Indian immigrants, and both the British, and the black population were generally strained, and occasionally erupted into violence such as the 1884 Hosay massacre.\nDiscovery of oil.\nThe American Merrimac Oil Company drilled an early oil well at La Brea at Trinidad and Tobago in 1857, where oil was struck at . Also mentioned is the pioneering work of Capt. Darwent with his Paria Petroleum Company Limited, and Conrad F. Stollmeyer (who was great-grandfather of Republic Bank's then chairman, former West Indies cricket captain, Jeffrey Stollmeyer), an entrepreneur of that period who felt that a combustible fuel could not be distilled out of the asphalt from the pitch lake. The other point of view from Capt. Darwent was that a combustible fuel, refined from oil drilled from the earth would be the ideal fuel for the future.\"\nIn either 1865, 1866, or 1867, according to different accounts, the American civil engineer, Walter Darwent, discovered and produced oil at Aripero. Efforts in 1867 to begin production by the Trinidad and Tobago Petroleum Company at La Brea and the Pariah Petroleum Company at Aripero were poorly financed and abandoned after Walter Darwent died of yellow fever.\nIn 1893 Mr Randolph Rust, along with his neighbour, Mr Lee Lum, drilled a successful well near Darwent's original one. By early 1907 major drilling operations began, roads and other infrastructure were built. Annual production of oil in Trinidad and Tobago reached by 1910 and kept rapidly increasing year by year.\nEstimated oil production in Trinidad and Tobago in 2005 was about .\n20th-century political development.\nTrinidad was ruled as a Crown colony with no elected representation until 1925. Although Tobago had an elected Assembly, this was dissolved prior to the union of the two islands. In 1925 the first elections to the Legislative Council were held. Seven of the thirteen members were elected, the others were nominated by the governor. The franchise was determined by income, property and residence qualifications, and was limited to men over the age of 21 and women over the age of 30. The 1946 elections were the first with universal adult suffrage.\nLabour movement.\nLabour riots in 1937 led by T.U.B. Butler (an immigrant from the neighbouring island of Grenada) shook the country and led to the formation of the modern Trade Union movement. Butler was jailed from 1937 to 1939, but was re-arrested when the United Kingdom entered World War II and jailed for the duration of the war. After his release in 1945 Butler reorganised his political party, the British Empire Citizens' and Workers' Home Rule Party. This party won a plurality in the 1950 general elections. However, the establishment feared Butler as a radical and instead Albert Gomes became the first Chief Minister of Trinidad and Tobago.\nRepresentative government.\nThe 1956 general elections saw the emergence of the People's National Movement under the leadership of Eric Williams. The PNM, opposed by Dr. Rudranath Capildeo of the Democratic Labor Party and Ashford Sinanan, who later founded the West Indian National Party (WINP), continued to dominate politics in Trinidad and Tobago until 1986. The party won every general election between 1956 and 1981. Williams became prime minister at independence, and remained in that position until his death in 1981.\nFederation.\nIn 1958, the United Kingdom tried to establish an independent West Indies Federation comprising most of the former British West Indies. However, disagreement over the structure of the federation led to Jamaica's withdrawal. Eric Williams responded to this with his now famous calculation \"One from ten leaves nought.\" Trinidad and Tobago chose not to bear the financial burden without Jamaica's assistance, and the Federation collapsed.\nIndependence.\nTrinidad and Tobago achieved full independence via the Trinidad and Tobago Independence Act 1962 on 31 August 1962 within the Commonwealth with Queen Elizabeth II as its titular head of state. On 1 August 1976, the country became a republic, and the last Governor-General, Sir Ellis Clarke, became the first President.\nBlack Power and labour unrest.\nIn 1968 the National Joint Action Committee was formed by members of the Guild of Undergraduates at the St Augustine campus of the University of the West Indies, under the leadership of Geddes Granger. In 1969 it was formally launched to protest the arrest of West Indian students at Sir George Williams University in Montreal. Together with Trade Unions and other groups, this led to the birth of the Black Power movement. In 1970 a series of marches and strikes led to the declaration of a State of Emergency and the arrest of 15 Black Power leaders. In sympathy with the arrested leaders, a portion of the Trinidad and Tobago Regiment, led by Raffique Shah and Rex Lassalle mutinied and took hostages at the Teteron Barracks (located on the Chaguaramas Peninsula). However, the Coast Guard remained loyal and was able to isolate the mutineers at Teteron (as the only way out was along a narrow coastal road). After 5 days the mutineers surrendered.\nPolitical difficulties in the post-Black Power era culminated in the \"No Vote\" campaign of 1971 (which resulted in the PNM winning all the seats in Parliament). In 1973, in the face of a collapsing economy Eric Williams was prepared to resign as prime minister. However, the outbreak of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War led to the recovery of oil prices and Williams remained in office.\nNational Union of Freedom Fighters.\nThe National Union of Freedom Fighters (NUFF) emerged in Trinidad and Tobago in the early 1970s, a period of social and political tension following the Black Power Revolution. Formed in December 1971, the group's emergence was influenced by a sense of dissatisfaction with the existing socio-political climate. Inspired by guerrilla warfare strategies, NUFF members engaged in activities such as attacks on banks, police stations, and infrastructure. These actions were part of their stated objective to challenge the government of Prime Minister Eric Williams. NUFF\u2019s activities led to confrontations with state authorities. Security forces undertook operations to counter NUFF, resulting in casualties on both sides. Events such as the attack on a camp in Caura and the death of Beverley Jones marked key moments in the conflict. The government took measures to address the challenges posed by NUFF, and by 1974, the organization's activities had largely been suppressed.\nOil boom and bust.\nThe high oil prices of the 1970s and early 1980s led to an \"oil boom\" which resulted in a large increase in salaries, standards of living, and corruption.\nIn 1979, construction on the Eric Williams Plaza began. It would eventually be completed in 1986. It remained the tallest building in Trinidad and Tobago until the construction of the Nicholas Tower in 2003.\n Williams died in office in 1981. The PNM remained in power following the death of Dr. Williams, but its 30-year rule ended in 1986 when the National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR), a multi-ethnic coalition aimed at uniting Trinidadians of Afro-Trinidadian and Indo-Trinidadian descent, won a landslide victory by capturing 33 of 36 seats. Tobago's A. N. R. Robinson, the political leader of the NAR, was named prime minister. The NAR also won 11 of the 12 seats in the Tobago House of Assembly. The NAR began to break down when the Indian component withdrew in 1988. Basdeo Panday, leader of the old United Labour Front (ULF), formed the new opposition with the United National Congress (UNC). The NAR's margin was immediately reduced to 27 seats, with six for the UNC and three for the PNM.\n1990 Jamaat-al-Muslimeen coup attempt.\nIn July 1990, the Jamaat al Muslimeen, an extremist Black Muslim group with an unresolved grievance against the government over land claims, tried to overthrow the NAR government. The group held the prime minister and members of parliament hostage for five days while rioting shook Port of Spain. After a long standoff with the police and military, the Jamaat al Muslimeen leader, Yasin Abu Bakr, and his followers surrendered to Trinidadian authorities. Having had the matter referred back to the local courts by the Privy Council with a clear indication of a view that the amnesty was valid, in July 1992, the High Court upheld the validity of a government amnesty given to the Jamaat members during the hostage crisis. Abu Bakr and 113 other Jamaat members were jailed for two years while the courts debated the amnesty's validity. All 114 members were eventually released. Subsequent to this, the UK Privy Council deemed the amnesty invalid but expressed the view that it would be improper to re-arrest the 114 accused.\nLater developments.\nIn December 1991, the NAR captured only the two districts in Tobago. The PNM, led by Patrick Manning, carried a majority of 21 seats, and the UNC came in second. Manning became the new prime minister and Basdeo Panday continued to lead the opposition. In November 1995, Manning called early elections, in which the PNM and UNC both won 17 seats and the NAR won two seats. The UNC allied with the NAR and formed the new government, with Panday becoming prime minister \u2013 the first prime minister of Indo-Trinidadian descent.\nBasdeo Panday was Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago from 1995 to 2001. He led United National Congress (UNC) until 2010.\nElections held in December 2000 returned the UNC to power when they won 19 seats, while the opposition PNM won 16, and the NAR 1. The UNC government fell in October 2001 with the defection of three of its parliamentarians amidst allegations of corruption in the then UNC government, and the December 2001 elections resulted in an even 18 to 18 split between the UNC and the PNM. President Robinson appointed Patrick Manning Prime Minister despite the fact that the UNC won the popular vote and that Panday was the sitting prime minister. Despite the fact that Manning was unable to attract a majority (and Parliament was thus unable to sit), he delayed calling elections until October 2002. The PNM formed the next government after winning 20 seats, while the UNC won 16. Both parties are committed to free market economic policies and increased foreign investment. Trinidad and Tobago has remained cooperative with the United States in the regional fight against narcotics trafficking and on other issues.\nPatrick Manning was Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago from 1991 to 1995 and again from 2001 to 2010. He also led People's National Movement (PNM) from 1987 to 2010.\nThe serious crime situation in the country has led to a severe deterioration in security conditions in the country.\nOn 26 May 2010, Kamla Persad-Bissessar, leader of the People's Partnership, was sworn in as the country's first female prime minister. On 21 August 2011, she asked President George Maxwell Richards to declare a limited state of emergency. On 9 September 2015, Dr. Keith Rowley was sworn in as new prime minister, following the election victory of his People's National Movement (PNM).\n On 19 March 2018 Trinidad's first female president, Ms. Paula-Mae Weekes, was sworn in the mainly ceremonial post. In August 2020, the governing People's National Movement won general election, meaning the incumbent prime minister Keith Rowley was going to serve a second term. In April 2025,\nthe opposition, centrist United National Congress (UNC), won the election, meaning Kamla Persad-Bissessar became the next prime minister.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30170", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30170", "title": "Geography of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "Trinidad and Tobago is an archipelagic republic in the southern Caribbean between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela. They are southeasterly islands of the Lesser Antilles, Monos, Huevos, Gaspar Grande (or Gasparee), Little Tobago, and St. Giles Island. Trinidad is off the northeast coast of Venezuela and south of the Grenadines. The island measures in area (comprising 93.0% of the country's total area) with an average length of and an average width of . The island appears rectangular in shape with three projecting peninsular corners. Tobago is northeast of Trinidad and measures about in area, or 5.8% of the country's area, in length and at its greatest width. The island is cigar-shaped in appearance, with a northeast\u2013southwest alignment.\nPhysical geography.\nTrinidad is traversed by three distinct mountain ranges that are a continuation of the Venezuelan coastal cordillera. The Northern Range, an outlier of the Andes Mountains of Venezuela, consists of rugged hills that parallel the coast. This range rises into two peaks. The highest, El Cerro del Aripo, is high; the other, El Tucuche, reaches . The Central Range extends diagonally across the island and is a low-lying range with swampy areas rising to rolling hills; its maximum elevation is . The Caroni Plain, composed of alluvial sediment, extends southward, separating the Northern Range and Central Range. The Southern Range consists of a broken line of hills with a maximum elevation of .\nThere are numerous rivers and streams on the island of Trinidad; the most significant are the Ortoire River, long, which extends eastward into the Atlantic, and the -long Caroni River, reaching westward into the Gulf of Paria. Most of the soils of Trinidad are fertile, with the exception of the sandy and unstable terrain found in the southern part of the island.\nTobago is mountainous and dominated by the Main Ridge, which is long with elevations up to 550 meters. There are deep, fertile valleys running north and south of the Main Ridge. The southwestern tip of the island has a coral platform. Although Tobago is volcanic in origin, there are no active volcanoes. Forestation covers 43% of the island. There are numerous rivers and streams, but flooding and erosion are less severe than in Trinidad. The coastline is indented with numerous bays, beaches, and narrow coastal plains.\nTobago has several small satellite islands. The largest of these, Little Tobago, is starfish-shaped, hilly, and .\nBecause it was once part of continental South America, Trinidad has an assortment of tropical vegetation and wildlife considerably more varied than that of most Caribbean islands. Tobago has a generally similar but less varied assortment.\nGeology.\nGeologically, the islands are not part of the Lesser Antilles Volcanic Arc. Rather, Trinidad was once part of the South American mainland and is situated on its continental shelf, and Tobago is part of a sunken island arc chain related to the Pacific-derived Caribbean Plate. The islands are separated from the continent of South America by the Gulf of Paria; Bocas del Drag\u00f3n, a -wide northern passage; and Serpent's Mouth, a -wide southern passage.\nThe Northern Range consists mainly of Upper Jurassic and Cretaceous metamorphic rocks. The Northern Lowlands (East\u2013West Corridor and Caroni Plains) consist of younger shallow marine clastic sediments. South of this, the Central Range fold and thrust belt consists of Cretaceous and Eocene sedimentary rocks, with Miocene formations along the southern and eastern flanks. The Naparima Plains and the Nariva Swamp form the southern shoulder of this uplift.\nThe Southern Lowlands consist of Miocene and Pliocene sands, clays, and gravels. These overlie oil and natural gas deposits, especially north of the Los Bajos Fault. The Southern Range forms the third anticlinal uplift. It consists of several chains of hills, most famous being the Trinity Hills. The rocks consist of sandstones, shales, siltstones and clays formed in the Miocene and uplifted in the Pleistocene. Oil sands and mud volcanoes are especially common in this area.\nPolitical geography.\nTrinidad is split into 14 regional corporations and municipalities, consisting of 9 regions and 5 municipalities, which have a limited level of autonomy. The various councils are made up of a mixture of elected and appointed members. Elections are due to be held every three years with the last elections held in 2019. The island of Tobago is administered by the Tobago House of Assembly.\nClimate.\nThe country lies in the tropics, enjoying a generally pleasant maritime tropical climate influenced by the northeast trade winds. In Trinidad the annual mean temperature is , and the average maximum temperature is . The highest temperature ever was 37.8 degrees Celsius. The lowest (coldest felt) temperature recorded in Trinidad was in January 1964. The humidity is high, particularly during the rainy season, when it averages 85 to 87%. The island receives an average of of rainfall per year, usually concentrated in the months of June through December, when brief, intense showers frequently occur. Precipitation is highest in the Northern Range, which may receive as much as . During the dry season, drought plagues the island's central interior. Tobago's climate is similar to Trinidad's but slightly cooler. Its rainy season extends from June to December; the annual rainfall is . The islands lie outside the hurricane belt; despite this, Hurricane Flora damaged Tobago in 1963. The hurricane killed 18 people on Tobago and caused $30:million in crop and property damages (1963 USD). Tropical Storm Alma hit Trinidad in 1974, causing damage before reaching full strength. Wind gusts reached 91\u00a0mph (147\u00a0km/h) at the Savonette gas field during the storm.\nStatistics.\nArea:&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 5,128\u00a0km2&lt;br&gt;\"land:\" 5,128\u00a0km2&lt;br&gt;\"water:\" negligible\nCoastline: 362\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"contiguous zone:\" &lt;br&gt;\"continental shelf:\" or to the outer edge of the continental margin&lt;br&gt;\"exclusive economic zone:\" &lt;br&gt;\"territorial sea:\" \nTerrain: mostly plains with some hills and low mountains\nExtreme points:\nNorthernmost point: Marble Island, Tobago\nSouthernmost point: Icacos, Siparia region, Trinidad Island\nWesternmost point: Icacos, Siparia region, Trinidad Island\nEasternmost point: Easternmost tip of Little Tobago, Tobago\nLowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m\nHighest point: El Cerro del Aripo, Trinidad 940 m\nNatural resources:\npetroleum, natural gas, asphalt\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n4.9%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n4.3%\n\"permanent pasture:\" 1.4%\n\"forest:\" 44%&lt;br&gt;\"other:\" 45.4% (2018 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n70\u00a0km2 (2012)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n3.84 billion m\u00b3 (2017)"}
{"id": "30171", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30171", "title": "Demographics of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "This article is about the demography of the population of Trinidad and Tobago including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nThe total population of Trinidad and Tobago was 1,328,018 according to the 2011 census, an increase of 5.2% since the 2000 census. According to the total population was estimated at in , compared to only 646,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 20.7%, 71% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 8.3% was 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 09.I.2011):\nDue to decreasing fertility, the proportion of children below the age of 15 is decreasing, while the proportion of elderly is increasing. The median age has increased from 21.6 in 1980, 24.1 in 1990, 28.1 in 2000 to 32.6 in 2011. The estimated mid-year population of 2014 is 1,344,000 (medium fertility scenario of The 2012 Revision of the World Population Prospects). As of January 2019, the estimated population is 1,383,368.\nEmigration.\nEmigration from Trinidad and Tobago, as with other Caribbean nations, has historically been high; most emigrants go to the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Emigration has continued, albeit at a lower rate, even as the birth-rate sharply dropped to levels typical of industrialised countries. Largely because of this phenomenon, as of 2011, Trinidad and Tobago has been experiencing a low population growth rate (0.48%). More recently, there has been some return migration, chiefly from the United States after the recession of 2008, which caused a population jump in the last census in 2011.\nVital statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nIndo-Trinidadian and Tobagonians.\nIndo-Trinidadians make up the country's largest ethnic group (approximately 35.43%). Indo-Trinidadians are primarily the descendants of indentured workers from British India.\nAfro-Trinidadian and Tobagonians.\nAfro-Trinidadian and Tobagonian make up the country's second largest ethnic group (approximately 34.22%). Although enslaved Africans were first imported in 1517, they constituted only 11 percent of the population (310) in 1783. Many Afro-Trinbagonians have ancestors hailing from West and West-central Africa, akin to numerous other Caribbean islands and in some cases a result of later migration between the islands. This would have been from many kingdoms, states, and peoples from a range of modern-day Senegal in the north to Angola in the south. The majority of the enslaved Africans were brought in the last few years of Trinidad's Spanish colonial era, and the beginning of the British colonial period. The Cedula of Population transformed a small colony of 1,000 in 1773 to 18,627 by 1797. In the census of 1777 there were only 2,763 people recorded as living on the island, including some 2,000 Arawaks. In 1807, the UK Parliament passed the Slave Trade Act 1807 that abolished the trading of enslaved persons, and the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 abolished the practice of slavery itself. Numerous staples of Trinbagonian culture have Afro-Trinbagonian roots, such as Calypso, Carnival, and traditional dishes such as callaloo.\nEuropean Trinidadian and Tobagonians.\nThe European Trinidadian (or White Trinidadian) population is primarily descended from early settlers and immigrants. The recent census counted 8,669 people of European descent including those of Portuguese descent. These numbers do not include people who have at least some European ancestry or self-identify as African or Indian.\nThe French arrived mostly during the Spanish period to take advantage of free agricultural lands. Some Portuguese arrived in the mid-nineteenth century and more came at the turn of the century. The Europeans who remained in Trinidad live in areas in and around Port of Spain. Furthermore, British rule led to an influx of settlers from the United Kingdom and the British colonies of the Eastern Caribbean and descendants of English indentured workers brought in as overseers following the end of the Second World War.\nThe Portuguese came to Tobago and Trinidad as early as the 17th century, including groups of Jews, Catholics and Protestants. For over 140 years, from 1834 up to 1975, the ancestors of the modern Portuguese community in Trinidad and Tobago hailed mostly from the archipelago of Madeira, starting from 1846, with the earliest registers being from the Azores in 1834.\nMost Portuguese came directly from Madeira, and also via Guyana, St Vincent, Antigua and St Kitts.\nImportant communities settled in Port of Spain, Arima, Arouca, Chaguanas, San Fernando and Scarborough.\nIn 2011, the Madeiran Portuguese Community of Trinidad and Tobago celebrated their 165th Anniversary of arrival of the first Madeirans in Trinidad back in 1846.\nRecalling the presence of the Portuguese in the nation today are over 100 Portuguese surname, some of which have become street nomenclature. As an independent nation, the country has recognised several members of the Portuguese community, through official awards.\nIn Tobago, many white residents are retirees who have recently arrived there.\nMixed ethnicity.\nGiven the large number of ethnic identities in Trinidad and Tobago, many citizens have a mixed ethnic heritage due to influences from European, West African, Indian or Han Chinese ancestry. Common ethnic mixtures include people of African and European descent (Mulatto-Creoles) 15-20% and African and Indian descent (often colloquially known as Dougla) 7-10%. This mixed population is estimated at 30%.\nChinese-Trinidadians and Tobagonians.\nThere are groups of Chinese who, like the Indians, are descended from indentured labourers. They account for about 4,000 people and live mostly in Port-of-Spain and San Fernando.\nIn Trinidad there were, about twenty years ago [i.e. about 1886], 4,000 or 5,000 Chinese, but they have decreased to probably about 2,000 or 3,000, [2,200 in 1900]. They used to work in sugar plantations, but are now principally shopkeepers, as well as general merchants, miners and railway builders, etc.\nArab-Trinidadians and Tobagonians.\nThere are also more than 1,000 Arabs, originating from Syria and Lebanon who live mostly in Port-of-Spain. The Syrian and Lebanese communities of Trinidad are predominantly Christian, migrating from the Middle East in the 19th century from the Ottoman Empire later landing in the Caribbean and Latin America. Other Lebanese and Syrians came in the early to middle 20th century to escape the war and turmoil in the region.\nIndigenous (Caribs).\nFinally, there are the mixed raced Caribs who are descended from the native, precolonial people of the islands. They are organized around the Santa Rosa Carib Community and live mostly in and around Arima.\nReligion.\nIn 2011, according to census data, Roman Catholicism was again the largest religious denomination with 285,671 followers (21.6% of the total population), having declined from a membership of 289,711 in 2000 (26% of the population). Other religious denominations that experienced decreases in their membership in 2011 were Hinduism (from 22.5% in 2000 to 18.2% in 2011), Anglican (from 7.8% to 5.7%), Presbyterian/Congregational (from 3.3% to 2.5%) and Methodist (from 0.9% to 0.7%). The number of persons claiming affiliation to Pentecostal/Evangelical/Full Gospel more than doubled from 76,327 in 2000 (6.8%) to 159,033 in 2011 (12.0%). The number of Muslims slightly increased but as proportion of the total population there was a decrease from 5.8% in 2000 to 5.0% in 2011. The category \u2018None\u2019 witnessed a small increase from 1.9% to 2.2%, while those who did not state a religion increased significantly, from 1.4% to 11.1%. Approximately 1.2% of the population are adherents of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. The African religions and specifically Orisha have become institutions in Trinidad and Tobago's society. They serve not only the obvious religious needs but also as a source of inspiration for personal identity. Many people, motivated by the need to re-claim their African heritage can now openly support these religions because they see in them a source of understanding and a coming to terms with their enslavement and the colonial past.\nLanguage.\nEnglish and creoles.\nEnglish is the country's official language (the local variety of standard English is Trinidadian and Tobagonian English or more properly, Trinidad and Tobago Standard English, abbreviated as \"TTSE\"), but the main spoken language is either of two English-based creole languages (Trinidadian Creole or Tobagonian Creole), which reflects the Amerindian, European, African, and Asian heritage of the nation. Both creoles contain elements from a variety of African and South Asian languages; Trinidadian English Creole, however, is also influenced by French and French Creole (Patois).\nHindustani.\nThe variant that is spoken in Trinidad and Tobago is known as \"Trinidadian Hindustani\", \"Trinidadian Bhojpuri\", \"Trinidadian Hindi\", \"Indian\", \"Plantation Hindustani\", or \"Gaon ke Bolee (Village Speech)\". A majority of the early Indian indentured immigrants spoke the Bhojpuri and Awadhi dialects, which later formed into Trinidadian Hindustani. In 1935, Indian movies began showing to audiences in Trinidad. Most of the Indian movies were in the Standard Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu) dialect and this modified Trinidadian Hindustani slightly by adding Standard Hindi and Urdu phrases and vocabulary to Trinidadian Hindustani. Indian movies also revitalized Hindustani among Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonians. The British colonial government and estate owners had disdain and contempt for Hindustani and Indian languages in Trinidad. Due to this, many Indians saw it as a broken language keeping them in poverty and bound to the cane fields, and did not pass it on as a first language, but rather as a heritage language, as they favored English as a way out. Around the mid to late 1960s the \"lingua franca\" of Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonians switched from Trinidadian Hindustani to a sort of \"Hindinized\" version of English. Today Hindustani survives on through Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonian musical forms such as, Bhajan, Indian classical music, Indian folk music, Filmi, Pichakaree, Chutney, Chutney soca, and Chutney parang. As of 2003, there are about 15,633 Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonians who speak Trinidadian Hindustani and as of 2011, there are about 10,000 who speak Standard Hindi. Many Indo-Trinidadians and Tobagonians today speak a type of Hinglish that consists of Trinidadian and Tobagonian English that is heavily laced with Trinidadian Hindustani vocabulary and phrases and many Indo-Trinidadians and Tobagonians can recite phrases or prayers in Hindustani today. There are many places in Trinidad and Tobago that have names of Hindustani origin. Some phrases and vocabulary have even made their way into the mainstream English and English Creole dialect of the country. World Hindi Day is celebrated each year on 10 January with events organized by the National Council of Indian Culture, Hindi Nidhi Foundation, Indian High Commission, Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Cultural Co-operation, and the Sanatan Dharma Maha Sabha.\nSpanish.\nIn 2014, Spanish was the native language of 4,000 (0.3% of the total population) people in Trinidad and Tobago, being mostly made up of Venezuelan immigrants. Due to Trinidad and Tobago's proximity to Venezuela, current government regulations require that Spanish be taught in secondary education. Spanish is estimated to be spoken by around 5% of the population and has been promoted by recent governments as a \"first foreign language\" since March 2005 due to the country's proximity to Venezuela.\nTamil.\nThe Tamil language is spoken by some of the older Tamil Indo-Trinidadian and Tobagonian population. It is mostly spoken by the few remaining children of indentured Indian laborers from the present-day state of Tamil Nadu in India. Other speakers of the language are recent immigrants from Tamil Nadu.\nChinese.\nThe Chinese language first came to Trinidad and Tobago in 1806, when the British had brought Chinese laborers in order to determine if they were fit to use as laborers after the abolition of slavery. About 2,645 Chinese immigrants arrived in Trinidad as indentured labour between 1853 and 1866. A majority of the people who immigrated in the 19th century were from southern China and spoke the Hakka and Yue dialects of Chinese. In the 20th century after the years of indentureship up to the present-day more Chinese people have immigrated to Trinidad and Tobago for business and they speak the dialects of the indenturees along with other Chinese dialects, such as Mandarin and Min.\nIndigenous languages.\nThe indigenous languages were Yao on Trinidad and Karina on Tobago, both Cariban, and Shebaya on Trinidad, which was Arawakan. These languages have been extinct for over a century, but there are attempts to revive the Carib language by the Santa Rosa First Peoples Community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30172", "revid": "49285407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30172", "title": "Politics of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "The politics of Trinidad and Tobago function within the framework of a unitary state regulated by a parliamentary democracy modelled on that of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, from which the country gained its independence in 1962. Under the 1976 republican Constitution, the monarch was replaced as head of state by a President chosen by an electoral college composed of the members of the bicameral Parliament, consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives.\nThe country has remained a member of the Commonwealth, and has retained the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London as its highest court of appeal. The general direction and control of the government rests with the Cabinet, led by a Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and Cabinet are answerable to the House of Representatives. The 41 members of the House are elected to terms of at least five years. Elections may be called earlier by the president at the request of the prime minister or after a vote of no confidence in the House of Representatives. In 1976, the voting age was reduced from 21 to 18. The Senate's 31 members are appointed by the President: 16 on the advice of the prime minister, six on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and nine independents selected by the President from among outstanding members of the community. Local government is through nine Regional Corporations and five municipalities. Tobago was given a measure of self-government in 1980 and is governed by the Tobago House of Assembly. In 1996, Parliament passed legislation which gave Tobago greater self-government. In 2005 Parliament approved a proposal by the independent Elections and Boundaries Commission to increase the number of seats in the House of Representatives from 36 to 41.\nParty politics has generally run along ethnic lines, with most Afro-Trinidadians supporting the People's National Movement (PNM) and most Indo-Trinidadians supporting various Indian-majority parties, such as the current United National Congress (UNC) or its predecessors. Most political parties, however, have sought to broaden their purview. In the run-up to the 2007 general election, a new political presence emerged called Congress of The People (COP). Led by Winston Dookeran, the majority of this membership was formed from former UNC members. Despite gaining a significant but minority share of the vote in various constituencies, the COP failed to capture a single seat.\nAn early general election was called on 16 April 2010, and was held on 24 May 2010. Two major entities contested the election: the incumbent PNM, and a coalition called the People's Partnership, led by UNC leader Kamla Persad-Bissessar, comprising the UNC, COP, Tobago Organisation of the People (TOP), and two labour and non-governmental organisations: the National Joint Action Committee and the Movement for Social Justice. The People's Partnership won 29 seats and the majority, with Kamla Persad-Bissessar being sworn in as the country's first female prime minister on 26 May 2010. The PNM won the remaining 12 seats and comprised the opposition in parliament.\nAfter the period a new party also emerged from an ex-member of the United National Congress, known as the Independent Liberal Party which was founded by FIFA ex-vice president Jack Warner.\nIn the 2015 general election resulted in a victory for the People's National Movement, which won 23 of the 41 seats led by Keith Rowley. In August 2020, Prime Minister Keith Rowley\u2019s ruling party PNM won the general election again. On March 17, 2025 Stuart Young was sworn in as Prime Minister after Dr Keith Rowley's resignation on March 16, 2025.\nThe 2025 Trinidad and Tobago general election resulted in a victory for the United National Congress with 26 seats won and 13 won by the PNM. A new party, the Tobago People's Party won the 2 seats in Tobago. Kamla Persad-Bissessar was sworn in as Prime Minister on May 1, 2025.\nExecutive branch.\n\"See also: List of prime ministers of Trinidad and Tobago\"\nThe president is elected by an electoral college, which consists of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives, for a five-year term. The prime minister is appointed by the president from among the members of Parliament; following legislative elections, the person with the most support among the elected members of the House of Representatives is appointed prime minister, usually the leader of the winning party. The cabinet membership consists of the prime minister, its head, the attorney general and any other minister chosen at the discretion of the prime minister from persons among the Members of Parliament, which constitutes elected Members of the House of Representatives and appointed Members of the Senate.\nCabinet since 2025.\nFollowing the 2025 Trinidad and Tobago general election, the following cabinet was sworn in:\nCabinet until 2025.\nCabinet ministers of Trinidad and Tobago\nFollowing the 2015 general elections, a number of ministries were removed, while others were consolidated or reintroduced. \nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 41 members, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. The Senate has 31 members: 16 Government Senators appointed on the advice of the Prime Minister, six Opposition Senators appointed on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition and nine Independent Senators appointed by the President to represent other sectors of civil society. The 15 member Tobago House of Assembly has limited autonomy with respect to Tobago.\nParty division by Parliamentary session.\nThe following tables lists the party divisions for the House of Representatives and Tobago House of Assembly. Note that numbers in boldface denote the majority party at that particular time while italicized numbers signify a House in which the majority party changed intra-term.\nPartisan control of Parliament.\nThis table shows the number of Parliaments in which a party controlled the House of Representatives and Tobago House of Assembly. \nJudicial branch.\nThe country's highest court is the Court of Appeal of Trinidad and Tobago, whose chief justice is appointed by the president after consultation with the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition. The current Chief Justice of Trinidad and Tobago is Ivor Archie. Final appeal on some matters is decided by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. Trinidad and Tobago was chosen by its Caribbean neighbours (Caricom) to be the headquarters site of the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ) which was supposed to replace the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the fall of 2003. However, the government has been unable to pass legislation to effect this change.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTrinidad is divided in five Municipalities Arima, Chaguanas, Port of Spain, Point Fortin, San Fernando and nine Regional Corporations Couva\u2013Tabaquite\u2013Talparo, Diego Martin, Penal\u2013Debe, Princes Town, Mayaro\u2013Rio Claro, San Juan\u2013Laventille, Sangre Grande, Siparia, and Tunapuna\u2013Piarco.\nLocal government in Tobago is handled by the Tobago House of Assembly.\nInternational organization participation.\nACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, ITUC, LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30173", "revid": "36852536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30173", "title": "Economy of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "Trinidad and Tobago is a high-income economy, with a GDP per capita (at 2024$ PPP) of about $36000, which is slightly less than the Bahamas and Panama (both at about $41000) and significantly less than Canada (about $65000), Guyana (about $80000), and the US (about $86000). Unlike most of the English-speaking Caribbean, the country's economy is primarily industrial, with an emphasis on petroleum and petrochemicals. The country's wealth is attributed to its large reserves and exploitation of oil and natural gas.\nTrinidad and Tobago was ranked as having one of the poorest investment climates in the Caribbean (15th of 17 countries) in 2024. Its per capita GDP experienced rapid growth through the mid-2000s (grew by 7.1% per annum in the 10 years through 2006), but has since stagnated and then declined (shrank by 1.8% per annum in the 10 years through 2023). Growth through the mid-2000s was fueled by investments in liquefied natural gas (LNG) and petrochemicals. Additional petrochemical, aluminium, and plastics projects are in various stages of planning.\nIn 2023, Trinidad and Tobago was the 42nd largest producer of natural gas in the world (and the largest in the Caribbean); it was the 55th largest producer of oil in the world (and the 2nd largest in the Caribbean after Guyana). Its economy is heavily dependent on these resources. It also supplies manufactured goods, notably food and beverages, as well as cement to the Caribbean region. Oil and gas account for about 40% of GDP and 80% of exports, but only 5% of employment.\nRegional financial center.\nThe country is also a regional financial center, and tourism is a growing sector, although it is not proportionately as important as in many other Caribbean islands. The economy benefits from a growing trade surplus. Economic growth reached 12.6% in 2006 and 5.5% in 2007 as prices for oil, petrochemicals, and LNG remained high, and as foreign direct investment continued to grow to support expanded capacity in the energy sector.\nTrinidad and Tobago's infrastructure is adequate by regional standards. A major expansion of the Piarco International Airport in Trinidad, the country's main airport, was completed in 2001. There are reliable, extensive networks of paved roads, sewage pipes, and power utilities in the urban centers. Some rural areas still suffer from water shortages. The government is addressing this problem with the construction of additional desalinization plants. Improvements in transport, telephone service, drainage, and sewerage, especially in rural areas, are among the government's budget priorities.\nCommunications and mobile.\nTrinidad and Tobago has relatively modern, robust and reliable Information and Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure. Mobile phone service is widespread and has been a growing sector for several years. Digicel and Laqtel were granted cellular licenses in 2005, breaking the monopoly of TSTT. However, as of 2015 TSTT and Digicel remain the only mobile providers. There are five broadband service providers/ISPs.\nEnergy sector.\nTrinidad and Tobago has been involved in the petroleum sector for over one hundred years. There has been considerable oil and gas production on land and in shallow water, with cumulative production totaling over three billion barrels of oil. Trinidad and Tobago is the largest oil and natural gas producer in the Caribbean. In the 1990s, the hydrocarbon sector moved from producing mainly oil to producing mostly natural gas. According to the EIA, in 2013, proven crude oil reserves were estimated at 728 million barrels, while 3P natural gas reserves were 25.24\u00a0trillion cubic feet (Tcf) (Ryder Scott Audit 2012).\nTrinidad and Tobago houses one of the largest natural gas processing facilities in the Western Hemisphere. The Phoenix Park Gas Processors Limited (PPGPL) natural gas liquids (NGL) complex is located in the Port of Savonetta. It has a processing capacity of almost 2\u00a0billion cubic feet (Bcf) per day and an output capacity of 70,000 barrels per day (bbl/d) of NGL. After processing the gas is then transferred to the various power generators (POWERGEN, TGU, or Trinity Power) for generation of electricity and to the petrochemical plants for use as a feedstock.\nThe electricity sector is fueled entirely by natural gas. Trinidad Generation Unlimited power plant, the second combined cycle plant in the country, with a generating capacity of 720MW, was opened on 31 October 2013.\nWith 11 ammonia plants and seven methanol plants, Trinidad and Tobago was the world's largest exporter of ammonia and the second largest exporter of methanol in 2013, according to IHS Global Insight. Overall production and export for ammonia, methanol, urea, and UAN decreased to 428,240 metric tonnes (MT) in 2013 from 564,892 MT in 2012.\nThe Ministry of Energy and Energy Affairs (MEEA) has encouraged investment in projects for \"downstream\" processing of petrochemicals, such as the manufacture of calcium chloride and dimethyl ether (DME). Such projects are expected to generate more local employment and more growth in local manufacturing than traditional petrochemical processing.\nThe energy sector accounts for around 45.0% of the country's GDP. The Central Bank predicted real GDP growth in Trinidad and Tobago of 2.6% in 2014, up from 1.6% in 2013, as the country's energy sector recovered from maintenance delays that reduced activity in the third quarter of 2013.\nMEEA predicted that production of liquefied natural gas (LNG) would rise by 2.0% to 40.0bcm in 2014, following an estimated 1.5% drop in production in 2013. Production of petrochemicals was also expected to rebound, following an 8.0% drop in output in the third quarter of 2013, as several companies aligned their production schedules with the natural gas shortfall.\nJob market.\nIn addition the thriving energy sector, the nation controls 0.25% of the world's natural gas with a GDP of twenty billion US dollars (US$20.5b). These factors are quintessential in driving the demand for quality labor, especially in specialized area as it pertains to the energy sector. Such area of specialisation are for the first time in history being sought after in this little nation, but requires the expertise of expats to fill. According to former Prime Minister Patrick Manning, the nation is the financial capital of the Caribbean, and being so heavily reliant on the oil and energy sectors, fosters and facilitates an environment of constant demand for specialized jobs. In addition, the Natural Gas sector is for the first time facing competition from countries such as Qatar and the United States. All these factors are stimulating the need to produce local specialists as the demand increases. There are also clear indications that the nation is at the end of an economic downturn and poised for a period of economic boom.\nA wealth of jobs would be created in the short run to feed a diversity of economic demands across all sectors of the economy. Finance minister Winston Dookeran unveiled the largest budget (TT$54b) in the history of the nation in October 2011, reiterating the government's resolve to transform the economy, which will boost investor confidence in the nation. This process of transformation will create a hosts of jobs and numerous foreign investor opportunities. The proverbial wheels of the economy are being oiled the economy and other areas of the economy such as the Financial and Manufacturing Sectors will benefit tremendously from the spin offs.\nGovernment ministers have already made plans to facilitate viable tools in assisting with the roll out. Within the past couple years government agencies have begun to utilize recruitment tools such as agencies and job boards. The government has recognized the usefulness in sourcing and outsourcing labor from different areas. Recruitment on the whole in Trinidad and Tobago have experienced huge strides, from the traditional snail mail to company's emails and job boards. Local experts have mentioned that moving forward in such a small area is a big tool to in executing and rolling out macro plans smoothly.\nTourism.\nTourism is another area which it is believed will soon develop rapidly, and an increased demand for jobs. The European Union Council on Tourism and Trade (EUCTT) has also awarded the nation as being \"The Best Tourist Destination for 2012\". Local hotels have already begun to make plans to facilitate an influx of European tourists upon the nation receiving this designation. However, the EUCTT is not affiliated with any part of the European Union's Institutions. Despite concerns over the global economy, international tourism demand continues to show resilience. The \nnumber of international tourists worldwide grew by 5% (22\u00a0million) between January and June 2012, with Asia and \nthe Pacific (+8%) leading the growth among the regions. Given this growth rate a total of one billion international \ntourists are expected by the end of 2012. In 2011, the total contribution of World Travel &amp; Tourism to global GDP \nwas US$6,346.1bn (9.1% of GDP). \nIn 2011, the Caribbean region received 20.9\u00a0million tourists, a growth of 4.4% over the same period in 2010. The \nCaribbean is the most dependent region on tourism with Travel and Tourism contributing 13.9% (US$47.1bn) to its \neconomic output. Trinidad and Tobago received an estimated 402,058 visitors in 2011, representing 2% of all \nCaribbean visitor arrivals. \nDue to the multifaceted nature of tourism, its economic impact is not confined to any single industry. To \nadequately measure the economic impact of the tourism sector, the United Nations World Travel and Tourism \nCouncil (UNWTO) devised the Tourism Satellite Account (TSA), an extension of the System of National Accounts \n(SNA). The TSA is a detailed production account of the tourism sector showing its linkages to major industries, \ntotal employment, capital formation and additional macro-economic variables.\nTourist arrival statistics.\nMost visitors arriving to Trinidad and Tobago on short-term basis in 2014 were from the following countries of nationality:\nCreative industries.\nRecently, the country's economy has been negatively affected by fluctuating oil and gas prices and in an effort to undergo economic transformation through diversification, the government has identified the creative industries, particularly the music, film and fashion sectors, as pivotal to long-term economic sustainability. As such, the Trinidad and Tobago Creative Industries Company Limited (CreativeTT) was established in 2013 to oversee the strategic and business development of the three niche areas of film, fashion and music.\nMiscellaneous.\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$200,000 (2007 est.)\nReserves of foreign exchange and gold:\n$8.095 billion (February 2018 est.)\nCurrency:\n1 Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TT$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nTrinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) per US$1 :\n6.7283 (2017)\n6.6152 (2016)\n6.3298 (2015)\n6.3613 (2014)\n6.3885 (2013)\n6.3716 (2012)\n6.4200 (2011 est)\n6.3337 (2010)\n6.3099 (2009)\n6.2896 (2008)\n6.3275 (2007)\n6.3107 (2006)\n6.2842 (2005),\n6.2990 (2004),\n6.2951 (2003),\n6.2487 (2002),\n6.2332 (2001),\n6.2697 (2000),\n6.2963 (1999),\n6.2983 (1998),\n6.2517 (1997),\n6.0051 (1996),\n5.9478 (1995)\nStock of direct foreign investment \u2013 at home:\n$12.44 billion (2007)\nStock of direct foreign investment \u2013 abroad:\n$1.419 billion (2007)\nMarket value of publicly traded shares:\n$15.57 billion (2006)\nFiscal year:\n1 October \u2013 30 September\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30174", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30174", "title": "Telecommunications in Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "Telecommunications in Trinidad and Tobago include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nBBC World Service radio is available on 98.7 FM.\nTelephones.\nCountry Code: +1&lt;br&gt;\nArea Code: 868&lt;br&gt;\nInternational Call Prefix: 011 (outside NANP)\nCalls from Trinidad and Tobago to the US, Canada, and other NANP Caribbean nations, are dialed as 1 + NANP area code + 7-digit number. Calls from Trinidad and Tobago to non-NANP countries are dialed as 011 + country code + phone number with local area code.\nNumber Format: nxx-xxxx\nInternet.\nFacebook is the most popular social media platform.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\nThe constitution and the law provide for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and press. The law prohibits acts that would offend or insult another person or group on the basis of race, origin, or religion or that would incite racial or religious hatred. The constitution and the law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30175", "revid": "1295318983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30175", "title": "Transport in Trinidad and Tobago", "text": " \nTrinidad and Tobago, a country that relies heavily on industrialisation and tourism, has various transport systems. The nation drives on the left, and has a network of roads and highways. There is also some ports and smaller harbors, as well as highways. \nAir service.\nTrinidad is the larger island, with a business-oriented economy and the seat of the country's government. Piarco International Airport serves the island of Trinidad with international flights to destinations in the Caribbean, South America, North America and Europe. The airport is located in the town of Piarco off the Churchill Roosevelt Highway, 30 km (19 miles) away from Port of Spain. It has been voted the best airport in the Caribbean on numerous occasions. \nA smaller number of international flights fly directly to Tobago's A.N.R. Robinson International Airport (formerly Crown Point International Airport). The airport is mostly kept active by the domestic airbridge, a heavily subsidized flight service between Trinidad and Tobago, operated as much as 20 times per day by Caribbean Airlines. According to Aviation Week Network for the first quarter of 2025 \"\"Trinidad\u2019s Piarco International Airport to Tobago\u2019s ANR Robinson International Airport is the largest domestic route\",\" with Caribbean Airlines being fifth place of the top 5 airlines for departure seat capacity in the Caribbean region. \nThere is also a small airfield named Camden Airstrip in Couva, which is mainly used for cropdusting planes.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport is provided by a bus service operated by government-owned Public Transport Service Corporation (PTSC), privately owned mini-buses (locally known as maxi-taxis) and privately owned cars. Maxi-taxis and some cars carry passengers along fixed routes for a fixed fare, although cars are slightly more expensive for similar routes carried by maxi-taxis because of their much smaller passenger capacities. Car taxis are not allowed to utilise the Priority Bus Route, and as such maxi-taxis and buses are preferable for speedily entering and exiting the cities (especially Port of Spain) during rush hour (7am\u20139am and 4pm\u20136pm).\nIn downtown Port of Spain on a street referred to as South Quay is the historic site of the Trinidad Government Rail (TGR) building at #60 South Quay, Port of Spain. This former railway facility is now the current administrative and bus loading headquarters of the Public Transport Service Corporation (PTSC). The compound also houses the Maxi Taxi loading facility which is located in its north-eastern quadrant. The Maxi Taxi loading facility is utilized by both route two or red-banded Maxi Taxis and route three which are green-banded. The red-banded Maxi Taxis ply for hire from Port of Spain eastward to as far as the town of Sangre Grande. Green-banded Maxi Taxis ply for hire from Port of Spain in a southern direction to either Chaguanas which is considered central Trinidad or to the region of San Fernando located along the south-western coast of Trinidad. The entire PTSC compound located on South Quay Port of Spain is officially referred to as The Port of Spain Transit Centre. The name \"City Gate\" to which the facility is popularly referred cannot be legally or officially used by the PTSC or on any official documentation used to refer to this facility.\nOther Maxi Taxis such as the Route one or yellow-banded Maxis ply for hire from Port of Spain to West/ North- West Trinidad. This loading facility is located at #19-21 South Quay in downtown Port of Spain approximately two hundred meters West of the PTSC. This Route one facility caters to persons travelling to locations such as Diego Martin, Petit Valley, St. James, Carenage, Chaguaramas and Maraval.\nIn all other locations and for Port of Spain Intra-city transportation, taxi-stands are scattered at various streets of the town or region, and after sunset some of these taxi-stands may change location, although this changed location is also fixed. Recently there has also been a growth in popularity of American-style taxi-cabs that do not work along a fixed route and they can be booked for specific times for specific journeys.\nIn 2023, you'd notice quite a few commuters using bicycles. There has been an uptick over the pandemic, since cars are very expensive. There are no bike lanes for transport in Trinidad and Tobago, although several areas are tiny and easily bikeable.\nFerry service.\nFerries operate between Port of Spain and Scarborough. Cars can be brought onto the ferries and kept in the cargo areas. Ferries run daily, Sundays to Sunday (fewer sailings on the weekend). The ferries are inexpensive, in spite of the minimum 2\u00bd\u20133-hour travel time between Port of Spain and Scarborough.\nThe Water Taxi Service operates between the cities of Port of Spain and San Fernando at a peak rate of five sailings from San Fernando to Port of Spain per morning. Each sailing carries approximately 400 passengers. Travel time is 50 minutes and the cost of the service is heavily subsidized.\nRailways.\nThere was a minimal agricultural railway system near San Fernando, but the Trinidad Government Railway that was built while Trinidad and Tobago was a colony of the United Kingdom was gradually scaled back until it was discontinued in 1968. (The narrow-gauge agricultural railway was shut down in the late 1990s).\nOn April 11, 2008 the Trinitrain consortium announced it would plan and build the two-line Trinidad Rapid Railway. It was claimed that the new railways were needed to overcome growing road congestion. However the project was cancelled in September 2010.\nRoads.\nAs of 2021, there are 9,592 km of roads in the country. The Ministry of Works and Transport (MOWT) Highway Division maintains 2,050 km, including all highways.\nTrinidad also has a large and complex highway network that consists of three 6-lane freeways and four 4-lane freeways:\nTobago Highways (2-Lane Freeway)\nMinor Highways\nStatistics.\nPipelines:\ncrude oil 1,032\u00a0km; petroleum products 19\u00a0km; natural gas 904\u00a0km\nPorts and harbours:\nPointe-\u00e0-Pierre, Point Fortin, Point Lisas, Port of Spain, Scarborough, Tembladora\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n2 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\" (1999 est.)\nAirports:\n6 (1999 est.)\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n3\n&lt;br&gt;\"over 3,047 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n1 (1999 est.)\nAirports - with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n3\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n2 (1999 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30176", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30176", "title": "Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force", "text": "Military forces of Trinidad and Tobago\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force (TTDF) is the military organisation responsible for the defence of the twin-island Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. It consists of the Trinidad and Tobago Regiment, the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard, the Trinidad and Tobago Air Guard and the Defence Force Reserves.\nEach of the three component services of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force is responsible for a different role and domain. The Trinidad and Tobago Regiment is responsible for land operations, the Air Guard is responsible for air operations, and the Coast Guard is responsible for maritime operations and simultaneously acts as a law enforcement agency in the maritime area of Trinidad and Tobago.\nThe Commander in Chief of the Defence Force is the country's President, Christine Kangaloo, it is mostly a ceremonial position. The Ministry of Defence is the current government department that has responsibility for the defence force, since 2025, previously it was the Ministry of National Security. The current Minister of Defence is Wayne Sturge. The operational commander of the TTDF is the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), with the current CDS being Commodore Don Polo, the former commanding officer of the Coast Guard. He replaced Air Vice Marshal Darryl Daniel, on 7 October 2025, whose appointment as CDS was revoked the same day. Polo was promoted to the rank of Commodore, effective October 14, 2025, a week after first being appointed Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) as a Captain \"owing to the exigencies.\" Rear Admiral Hayden Pritchard was the previous CDS before Darryl Daniel, he retired on 25 March 2019.\nOrganisation.\nEstablished in 1962 after Trinidad and Tobago's independence from the United Kingdom, the TTDF is one of the largest Military forces in the English-speaking Caribbean. Its mission statement is to \"defend the sovereign good of The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, contribute to the development of the national community and support the State in the fulfillment of its national and international objectives\". The Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force is made up of four distinct arms; The Regiment/\"Army\" (TTR), the Coast Guard (TTCG), the Air Guard (TTAG) and the Defence Force Reserves (TTDFR), which all fall under the authority of the Ministry of Defence. The TTDF has the world's only Military steelband.\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force (TTDF) comprises 5,622 uniformed personnel, 1 permanent, 35 contracted, and 156 daily paid civilian staff. The President of Trinidad and Tobago is the Commander-in-Chief, while the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) is responsible for the TTDF's operational use, subject to the Minister of Defence's directions as outlined in Section 191(2) of the Defence Act, Chapter 14:01.\nThe CDS leads the Defence Force Headquarters, supported by the VCDS and the Commanding Officers of the TTDF's four formations. The TTDF Headquarters includes administrative and operational units.\nAdministration provides support services such as Human Resource Management, Finance, and Registry. Key roles include:\nOperations utilizes a Joint/United Staff System with the following components:\nRegiment (Army).\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Regiment (TTR) is the main ground force element of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force. It has approximately 3000 men and women, organized into four battalions and a Regiment Headquarters. The regiment has two primary roles: maintaining the internal security of Trinidad and Tobago and support to civil law enforcement. The Commanding Officer of the Regiment is Colonel Dwayne Edwards, effective October 14, 2025. He replaced Colonel Keston Charles, whose appointment as CO Regiment was revoked by the government.\nAlso, as one of the larger military forces in the region, the Trinidad and Tobago Regiment is also one of the main units used in peacekeeping and humanitarian situations from the Caribbean region.\nAlthough it is called the Trinidad &amp; Tobago Regiment, the TTR is in fact structured more like a light infantry brigade, with a pair of infantry battalions, plus engineering and logistic support units:\n1st Battalion (Infantry), Trinidad and Tobago Regiment: \nThis is a light infantry battalion. It is located at Camp Ogden, Long Circular Road, St James.\n2nd Battalion (Infantry), Trinidad and Tobago Regiment: This is also a light infantry battalion. \nFormerly located at Camp Mausica, since then it has been relocated to the Chaguaramas Heliport and La Romain.\n3rd Battalion (1st Engineer Battalion): This provides engineering support, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. \nIt is located at Camp Cumuto, Wallerfield.\n4th Battalion (Support and Service Battalion): This provides logistic and administrative support for the regiment. \nIt is located at the Teteron Barracks, Teteron Bay, Chaguaramas.\nThe Regiment also maintains a Camp Omega, at Chaguaramas, which is used primarily for infantry training.\nSpecial Forces.\nTrinidad and Tobago has a number of Special Units however the notable units are assets under the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force (TTDF).The Special Forces Operations Detachment(SFOD) belong to the Trinidad and Tobago Regiment Their motto is \"To Find a Way.\" and the Special Naval Unit(SNU) belonging to the Trinidad and Tobago Coastguard. These units fulfill specific roles and functions however they do work collaboratively at times. Taskings from Jungle Operations( Sf),Direct Action,Recon,PSD,maritime Ops(snu) and internal and foreign consultancy. SFs training mirrors the US Special Forces in training and mission.Unmatched in the Jungle environment. \nSpecial Naval Unit (SNU) is the Maritime aspect of the Special Operational Forces and runs heavily on the US Navy Seals doctrines and training. Can function on both land and sea.\nCoast Guard.\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard is the seagoing branch of the TTDF which was established on 1 June 1962 and commissioned into service less than 3 months later on 27 August 1962. The Coast Guard consists of a number of vessels designated \"CG&lt;number&gt;\". The Commanding Officer of the Coast Guard is Captain Akenathon Isaac, with his promotion to the rank of Captain and appointment as CO effective October 14, 2025. He replaced Captain Don Riguel Polo, who was appointed Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) on October 7, 2025, and was promoted to Commodore, effective October 14, 2025.\nIts mission statements is \"To Defend the Sovereign Good of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and to provide on a continuous basis, quality service for security and safety within the Maritime Boundaries, and in any other area of responsibility agreed to by the State to fulfill its International Obligations\".\nIts motto is \"Service Before Self\".\nThe Coast Guard is primarily involved with Drug Trade interdiction as well as Search and Rescue within the waters of Trinidad and Tobago and neighbouring Islands. However, the Coast Guard has been involved in major incidents. During the 1970 Army Mutiny in Trinidad and Tobago, the Coast Guard prevented the mutineers from convoying to Port of Spain by firing on an access road from the Regiment base at Teteron Barracks in Chaguaramas. The Coast Guard also played a role during the 1990 Jamaat al Muslimeen coup attempt, providing logistical and naval support to the ground forces of the Regiment, posted outside the besieged city limits.\nNational Roles of the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard include:\nOperational Tasks\nFleet.\nBetween 2001 and 2016, the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard fleet included TTS \"Nelson\", an purchased from the Royal Navy.\nIn April 2007, the Coast Guard contracted for three offshore patrol vessels from VT Shipbuilding (later BAE Systems Surface Ships) in Portsmouth, England. Construction of the s \"Port of Spain\", \"Scarborough\" and \"San Fernando\" suffered significant delays and, in September 2010, though substantially complete, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago cancelled the order. The Brazilian Navy acquired all three ships as their s.\nOn 29 April 2015, the Ministry of National Security placed orders with the Dutch company Damen Shipbuilders for four coastal patrol vessels, two fast utility boats and six interceptors.\nIn August 2018, the government contracted with Austal to build two s at Henderson, Western Australia, scheduled for delivery in mid-2020. The two vessels, \"Port of Spain\" and \"Scarborough\", were delivered to the TTCG in May 2021.\nAir Guard.\nThe Air Wing of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence force was formed on 15 February 1966, and was initially part of the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard and was called the Air Wing of the Coast Guard or the Air Wing. In 1977, it was separated as its own entity. In 2005 it was renamed the Trinidad &amp; Tobago Air Guard (TTAG). Its bases are at Piarco International Airport, Crown Point International Airport, and the Heliport at Chaguaramas. Its purposes are to protect and patrol Trinidad and Tobago's airspace, and is also used for transport, search and rescue, and liaison. The current commander of the Air Guard is Group Captain Kemba Hannays, who took over from Kester Weekes, in a promotion and appointment ceremony on July 10, 2023. Group Captain Weekes took command of the unit in 2019, succeeding then-Air Commodore Daryl Daniel upon his promotion to Chief of Defence Staff in March 2019.\nAircraft.\nCurrent inventory.\nIts former fleet of aircraft included:\nOne Cessna 337 (O-2A) Skymaster (1966\u20131972), One Cessna 402 Utililiner (1972\u20131998), four A\u00e9rospatiale Gazelle (1973\u20131995), One Cessna 172 Skyhawk (1991\u20131998), Two Piper Navajo 2000\u20132009, One Cessna 310 1985-2011\nFour Agusta Westland AW139 helicopters were intended to be used for surveillance and reconnaissance missions related to search and rescue, border patrol and drug interdiction. Due to lack of funding for maintenance, all helicopters were grounded since 2017. In December 2020, The Minister of National Security announced that one AW139 is back up in the air.\nThe Minister of National Security announced that the establishment of a military airfield, construction of an operations/administrative building at the Piarco Air Station and new helicopters would be purchased to equip the Air Guard. The minister also promised training from various international bodies. Cabinet agreed to the change of rank designations from naval to the corresponding aviation designations and the creation of 66 ranks on the establishment of the Air Guard.\nDefence Force Reserves.\nThe Defence Force Reserves, previously called the \"Volunteer Defence Force\", are the non-active duty arm of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force. Its mission statement is \"To be a highly professional, well-trained combat-ready force that will respond effectively in support of our regular forces and the national community\". The Defence Force Reserves are capable of providing reinforcement and be a force multiplier in the event that the Defence Force is called upon to carry out its roles of aid to the civil power. Established in September 1963, its primary purpose at that time was to provide essential reinforcements to the regular force. Today, those roles have grown to include assisting in the promotion of hemispheric and international security and development, with a well-equipped force, trained in a broad range of disciplines and actively involved in community development. In recent years, the Reserves have been called out to assist with law enforcement and most recently to assist with the security in Trinidad's hosting of the 5th Summit of the Americas in 2009. The current Commanding Officer (acting) is Major David Benjamin.\nSee also.\nCARICOM Defence Forces\nReferences and links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30177", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30177", "title": "Foreign relations of Trinidad and Tobago", "text": "Modern Trinidad and Tobago maintains close relations with its Caribbean neighbours and major North American and European trading partners. As the most industrialized and second-largest country in the English-speaking Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago has taken a leading role in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and strongly supports CARICOM economic integration efforts. It also is active in the Summit of the Americas process and supports the establishment of the Free Trade Area of the Americas, lobbying other nations for seating the Secretariat in Port of Spain.\nAs a member of CARICOM, Trinidad and Tobago strongly backed efforts by the United States to bring political stability to Haiti, contributing personnel to the Multinational Force in 1994. After its 1962 independence, Trinidad and Tobago joined the United Nations and Commonwealth of Nations. In 1967, it became the first Commonwealth country to join the Organization of American States (OAS). In 1995, Trinidad played host to the inaugural meeting of the Association of Caribbean States and has become the seat of this 35-member grouping, which seeks to further economic progress and integration among its states.\nIn international forums, Trinidad and Tobago has defined itself as having an independent voting record, but often supports U.S. and EU positions.\nTrinidad and Tobago has historically been a trans-shipment point for South American drugs destined for the United States and Europe. This has created much tension in the country's politics.\nTrinidad and Tobago is also a member-state of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the U.S. military (as covered under Article 98)\nTrinidad and Tobago and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nTrinidad and Tobago became an independent state in 1962 with Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Trinidad and Tobago. She was represented by the Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago.\nOn August 1, 1976, Trinidad and Tobago became a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations with the last Governor-General, Sir Ellis Clarke becoming the first President of Trinidad and Tobago.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Trinidad and Tobago maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational organisations.\nOn its independence in 1962, Trinidad and Tobago joined the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations. In 1967, it became the first Commonwealth country to join the Organization of American States (OAS).\nIn 1995, Trinidad played host to the inaugural meeting of the Association of Caribbean States and has become the seat of this 35-member grouping, which seeks to further economic progress and integration among its states.\nAs the most industrialized and second-largest country in the English-speaking Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago has taken a leading role in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and strongly supports CARICOM economic integration efforts. It also is active in the Summit of the Americas process and supports the establishment of the Free Trade Area of the Americas, lobbying other nations for seating the Secretariat in Port of Spain. As a member of CARICOM, Trinidad and Tobago strongly backed efforts by the United States to bring political stability to Haiti, contributing personnel to the Multinational Force in 1994.\nTrinidad and Tobago is also a member-state of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the U.S. military (as covered under Article 98).\nIn July 2013 the President of Venezuela, Nicol\u00e1s Maduro invited Trinidad and Tobago to join the Union of South American Nations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30178", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30178", "title": "Tromelin Island", "text": "Disputed island in the Indian Ocean\nTromelin Island (; , ), once called the Isle of Sand, is a low, flat island in the Indian Ocean about north of R\u00e9union and about east of Madagascar. Both France and Mauritius claim sovereignty over the islands, and France includes it in the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean, the fifth district of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands.\nTromelin has facilities for scientific expeditions and a weather station. It is a nesting site for birds and green sea turtles.\nEtymology.\nThe island is named in honour of Jacques Marie Boudin de Tromelin de La Nuguy, captain of the French corvette . He arrived at the island on 29\u00a0November 1776, and rescued eight stranded enslaved Malagasy people who had been on the island for 15 years.\nDescription.\nTromelin is situated in the Mascarene Basin and is part of the \u00celes \u00c9parses. It is currently only high. It formed as a volcano, now eroded, and developed an atoll ring of coral.\nTromelin is about long and wide, with an area of , covered in scrub dominated by octopus bush and surrounded by coral reefs. Access by sea is quite difficult as there are no harbours and the only anchorage, to the northwest of the island, is poorly situated. The best, but by no means ideal, landing area is on the east side of the northern peninsula. A 1,200-m (3,900-ft) airstrip provides a link with the outside world.\nFauna and flora.\nFlora are poorly developed due to weather conditions and lack of fresh water. With the exception of two or three months in summer, this flat island is swept day and night by heavy winds that are sustained in winter. In summer, it can suffer the onslaught of cyclones and tropical storms.\nThere is only grass and brush (low shrubs) present on the island. Veloutaries (\"Heliotropium foertherianum\") and purslane (\"Portulaca oleracea\"), with growth shaped by dominant east winds, are present everywhere on the island.\nThe fauna consist mainly of hermit crabs (Paguroidea), seabirds, and sea turtles for which the island is an important nesting place. The green turtle (\"Chelonia mydas\") is mainly encountered and, to a lesser extent, the hawksbill sea turtle.\nThe waters are rich with fish. The French Coral Reef Initiative (IFRECOR) has identified 26 species of corals. Allochthonous species were introduced on the island during the various shipwrecks: rats, mice and rabbits. The latter were decimated in 1986 by cyclone Erinesta.\nImportant bird area.\nThe island has been identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because of its significance as a seabird breeding site. Both masked (with up to 250\u00a0pairs) and red-footed boobies (up to 180 pairs) nest on the island. Sulidae populations have seriously declined in the western Indian Ocean with those on Tromelin among the healthiest remaining.\nThe island's masked boobies are of the western Indian Ocean subspecies (\"Sula dactylatra melanops\"), of which Tromelin is a stronghold. The red-footed boobies constitute the only polymorphic population in the region, indicating its biogeographical isolation. Both great and lesser frigatebirds used to nest on the island. The breeding populations of both birds had been extirpated, though that has changed.\nInvasive rats that arrived on Tromelin Island centuries ago with the wreck of a slave ship decimated the island's seabird population. By the time eradication efforts began in 2005, only two booby species remained. Despite the lack of any active restoration actions after the eradication of rats, and the remoteness of the island, 17 years after rat eradication, the seabird community increased from two to seven breeding species, and from 353 to 4758 breeding pairs (total for all species).\nUnlike seabirds, there are no resident landbirds on Tromelin Island.\nHistory.\nThe island was discovered by France in the 1720s. It was recorded by the French navigator Jean Marie Briand de la Feuill\u00e9e and named \"\u00cele de Sable\" (\"Isle of Sand\").\nWreck of the ship \"Utile\".\nOn 31\u00a0July 1761 the French ship \"Utile\" (\"Useful\"), a frigate of the French East India Company, chartered by Jean-Joseph de Laborde and commanded by Captain Jean de\u00a0La Fargue, transporting slaves from Madagascar to Mauritius in contravention of Mauritian law, ran onto the reefs of the island. The ship had departed Bayonne in France with 142\u00a0men. After a stopover on Mauritius (then called the Isle de France), the ship embarked 160\u00a0Malagasy men, women, and children at Foulpointe, on the east coast of Madagascar, to bring them into slavery on Mauritius, despite the prohibition of trafficking decreed by the governor. A navigation error, due to the use of two conflicting charts, caused the vessel to wreck on the reefs of Tromelin Island (then called the \"Isle of Sand\"). The ship was a frigate, not a slave ship, and thus was not equipped with the shackles and chains usually found on slave ships.\nAfter the wreck, the crew and about 60\u00a0Malagasy people managed to reach the island, but the rest of the slaves, locked in the hold, drowned. The crew retrieved various equipment, food and wood from the wreckage. They dug a well, providing drinking water, and fed on salvaged food, turtles, and seabirds.\nCaptain Jean de\u00a0Lafargue lost his mind as a result of the wreck, and was replaced by his first lieutenant, second-in-command, Barthelemy Castellan du\u00a0Vernet who lost his brother Leon in the shipwreck. Castellan built two camps, one for the crew and one for the slaves, a forge and an oven, and with the materials recovered from the wreckage, began construction of a boat. On 27\u00a0September 1761, a contingent of 122\u00a0French sailors (crew and officers) left Tromelin aboard the newly built boat, \"Providence\". They left the surviving slaves \u2013 60\u00a0Malagasy men and women \u2013 on the desert island, promising to return and rescue them.\nThe sailors reached Madagascar in just over four days and, after a stopover in Foulpointe, where men died of tropical diseases, were transferred to R\u00e9union Island (then named \"Bourbon Island\"), and then to Mauritius (then called the \"Isle de\u00a0France\"). When the crew of the ship reached Mauritius, they requested that colonial authorities send a ship to rescue the Malagasy slaves on the island. However, they met with a categorical refusal from the governor, Antoine Marie Desforges-Boucher, with the justification that France was fighting the Seven Years' War and thus no ship could be spared, the island of Mauritius being itself under threat of attack from British India.\nCastellan left Mauritius (\"Isle de\u00a0France\") to return to France in 1762 and never gave up hope to one day return to the Isle of Sand to save the Malagasy people. The news of the castaway slaves got published and stirred the Parisian intellectual milieu; later, the episode was all but forgotten with the end of the Seven Years' War and the bankruptcy of the East India Company.\nIn 1773, a ship passing close to Tromelin Island located the slaves and reported them to the authorities of Isle de\u00a0France. A boat was sent, but this first rescue failed, as the ship could not approach the island. A year later, a second ship, \"Sauterelle\", also failed to reach the island. During this second failed rescue, a sailor managed to swim to the island, but he had to be abandoned by the ship due to bad weather. This sailor remained on Tromelin Island and, some time later, probably around 1775, built a raft on which he embarked with three men and three women, but which disappeared at sea.\nIt was not until 29\u00a0November 1776, 15 years after the sinking, that Ensign Tromelin-Lanuguy, captain of the corvette \"Dauphine\", reached Tromelin Island and rescued the survivors \u2013 seven women and an eight-month-old child. Upon arriving there, Tromelin-Lanuguy discovered that the survivors were dressed in plaited feather clothes and that they had managed, during all these years, to keep a fire lit (the island did not have a single tree). The Malagasy people, who had been left on the bleak little island, built a shed with coral stones, for most of the wood had been used in the construction of the raft for the crew. They also built a lookout on the highest point of the island in order not to miss the ship that would, they hoped, come to their rescue. They were all from the Central Highlands of Madagascar, and had no knowledge of how to produce food in the coastal environment. Most had died within the first few months on the island. The survivors remained with Jacques Maillart, governor of Mauritius (\"Isle de\u00a0France\"), who declared them free and offered to bring them back to Madagascar, which they refused. Maillart decided to baptize the child Jacques Moyse (Moses), on the day of his arrival in Port-Louis on 15\u00a0December 1776, and to rename his mother Eve (her Malagasy name was Semiavou) and to do the same with the child's grandmother, whom he called Dauphine after the name of the corvette that rescued them. The trio was welcomed in the house of the intendant of Mauritius (\"Isle de\u00a0France\"). Tromelin was the first to precisely describe the island that now bears his name.\nIn 1781 the Marquis de Condorcet recounted the tragedy of the castaways of Tromelin, to illustrate the inhumanity of the slave trade, in his book \"Reflections on the Slavery of Negroes\" advocating the abolition of slavery.\nExpedition \"Forgotten slaves\".\nAn archaeological expedition entitled \"Forgotten Slaves\", led by Max Gu\u00e9rout, a former French naval officer and director of operations of the Naval Archaeology Research Group, and Thomas Romon, archaeologist at INRAP (National Institute for Preventive Archaeological Research), took place from October to November\u00a02006, under the patronage of UNESCO and the French Committee for the History and Remembrance of Slavery (CPMHE). The results of the research were made public on 17\u00a0January 2007. The ten members of the expedition probed the wreck of \"Utile\", and searched the island for traces of shipwreck, in order to better understand the living conditions of the Malagasy people during these fifteen years.\nAccording to Max Gu\u00e9rout, head of the mission, \"In three days, a well 5 metres [16.5 feet] deep was dug. This represented a considerable effort. We found many bones of birds, turtles, and fish.\" One does not have the impression that these people were crushed by their condition. They tried to survive with order and method.\"\nAn anonymous logbook, attributed to a writer of the crew, was found. Basements made of beach sandstone and coral were also found (the survivors thus transgressed a Malagasy custom according to which stone constructions were reserved for tombs). There were also six copper bowls and a pebble used to sharpen knives. The fire was maintained for fifteen years, thanks to the wood from the wreck, the island being devoid of trees.\nA second expedition, organized in November\u00a02008, did not reveal the burials observed in 1851 by an English naval officer. However, the remains of two bodies displaced during the digging of the foundations of a building of the weather station have been uncovered. Three buildings built with coral blocks have been discovered, including the kitchen, which was still equipped with kitchen utensils, and in particular copper containers that had been repaired several times, testifying to the Malagasy's determination to survive.\nA third archaeological mission took place in November\u00a02010. It allowed the discovery of three new buildings and many objects, including two tinder lighters and flints, which elucidated the technique used by the castaways to rekindle the fire.\nThe fourth expedition took place in September\u2013October\u00a02013. It lasted for 45\u00a0days, and enabled the identification of many tools and shelters, as well as the layout of the site.\nIn 2016, an exhibition presenting the results of the various excavation campaigns, entitled \"Tromelin, the island of forgotten slaves\", was presented jointly in metropolitan France and in the DROM: At the Stella Matutina Museum in Saint-Leu (La\u00a0R\u00e9union), the castle of the Dukes of Brittany in Nantes, the House of Agglomeration of Lorient, the Aquitaine Museum in Bordeaux, the departmental museum of archaeology and prehistory of Martinique in Fort-de-France, and finally to the Basque Museum of the History of Bayonne from June to November\u00a02017.\nSovereignty claims.\nTromelin is administered as part of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands, a French Overseas Territory, but Mauritius claims sovereignty over the island despite its absence in the listing of the 8th article of the 1814 Treaty of Paris. Indeed, the treaty does not specifically mention all the dependencies of Mauritius, which leads to uncertainty on the sovereignty of Tromelin, and the official text was that written in French. During the British period of Mauritius, France administered the island as a dependency of the region of R\u00e9union and built infrastructure without British protest. France and Mauritius have been negotiating for years in regard to the possible establishment of a condominium over the island. In 2010, Mauritius and France reached an agreement on the co-management of Tromelin, without prejudice to the sovereignty of Mauritius over Tromelin.\nThe French claim to sovereignty dates from 29\u00a0November 1776, the date that the ship \"Dauphine\" arrived.\nThe Mauritian claim to sovereignty is based on the fact that the island must have been ceded to United Kingdom by the treaty of Paris in 1814 and should not continue to be administered by France as a dependency of R\u00e9union.\nThe United Nations has never recognized Mauritian sovereignty over Tromelin. In 1954, France constructed a meteorological station and a landing strip on the island.\nIt is a matter of dispute whether the building agreement transferred sovereignty of Tromelin from one to the other, and Mauritius claims the island as part of its territory, on the grounds that France did not retain its sovereignty over the island in 1814, which was \"de facto\" part of the colony of Mauritius at the time of independence. Indeed, as early as 1959, even before independence, Mauritius informed the World Meteorological Organization that it considered Tromelin to be part of its territory. A co-management treaty was reached by France and Mauritius in 2010, but has not been ratified.\nThe Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean are partially claimed by the Comoros, Madagascar, and Mauritius. The Malagasy and Mauritian claims, however, are significantly later than their access to independence. However, the agreement reached in October 2024 on the restitution to Mauritius of the Chagos Islands by Great Britain, in the heart of the Indian Ocean, notably home to the American base of Diego Garcia, has relaunched the debate in Madagascar.\nTromelin has an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of , contiguous with that of R\u00e9union. The island's autonomous weather station, which warns of cyclones, is still operated by France and is supported by personnel from the French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF). Staff are rotated every three months through resupply missions mounted from R\u00e9union.\nClimate.\nTromelin Island has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Aw\"). The average annual temperature in Tromelin is . The average annual rainfall is with February as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in February, at around , and lowest in August, at around . The highest temperature ever recorded in Tromelin was on 1 January 1983; the coldest temperature ever recorded was on 12 July 1964.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30179", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30179", "title": "Tromelin Island/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "30180", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30180", "title": "Geography of Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30181", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30181", "title": "Tromelin Island/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "30182", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30182", "title": "Government of Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30183", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30183", "title": "Tromelin Island/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "30184", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30184", "title": "Communications in Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30185", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30185", "title": "Transportation in Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30186", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30186", "title": "Military of Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30187", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30187", "title": "Foreign relations of Tromelin Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "30188", "revid": "49125732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30188", "title": "Tunisia", "text": "Country in North Africa\nTunisia, officially the Republic of Tunisia, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It is bordered by Algeria to the west and southwest, Libya to the southeast, and the Mediterranean Sea to the north and east. Tunisia also shares maritime borders with Italy through the islands of Sicily and Sardinia to the north and Malta to the east. It features the archaeological sites of Carthage dating back to the 9th century BC, as well as the Great Mosque of Kairouan. Known for its ancient architecture, souks, and blue coasts, it covers , and has a population of 12.1 million. It contains the eastern end of the Atlas Mountains and the northern reaches of the Sahara desert; much of its remaining territory is arable land. Its of coastline includes the African conjunction of the western and eastern parts of the Mediterranean Basin. Tunisia is home to Africa's northernmost point, Cape Angela. Located on the northeastern coast, Tunis is the capital and largest city of the country, which is itself named after Tunis. The official language of Tunisia is Arabic. The vast majority of Tunisia's population is Arab and Muslim. Vernacular Tunisian Arabic is the most spoken language, and French serves as an administrative and educational language in some contexts, but has no official status.\nBeginning in early antiquity, Tunisia was inhabited by the indigenous Berbers. The Phoenicians, a Semitic people, began to arrive in the 12th century BC, settling on the coast and establishing several settlements, of which Carthage emerged as the most powerful by the 7th century BC. The descendants of the Phoenician settlers came to be known as the Punic people. Ancient Carthage was a major mercantile empire and a military rival to the Roman Republic until 146 BC when it was defeated by the Romans who occupied Tunisia for most of the next 800 years. The Romans introduced Christianity and left architectural legacies like the Amphitheatre of El Jem. In the 7th century AD, Arab Muslims conquered Tunisia and settled with their tribes and families, bringing Islam and Arab culture. A later large-scale Arab migration of Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym tribes in the 11th-12th centuries accelerated this process. By around the 15th century, the region of modern-day Tunisia had already been almost completely Arabized. Then, in 1546, the Ottoman Empire established control, holding sway until 1881, when the French conquered Tunisia. In 1956, Tunisia gained independence as the Tunisian Republic. Today, Tunisia's culture and identity are rooted in this centuries-long intersection of different cultures and ethnicities.\nIn 2011, the Tunisian Revolution, which was triggered by dissatisfaction with the lack of freedom and democracy under the 24-year rule of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, overthrew his regime and catalyzed the broader Arab Spring movement across the region. Free multiparty parliamentary elections were held shortly thereafter; the country again voted for parliament on 26 October 2014, and for president on 23 November 2014. From 2014 to 2020, it was considered the only democratic state in the Arab world, according to \"The Economist Democracy Index\". After democratic backsliding under President Kais Saied, Tunisia was rated a hybrid regime in 2022 and as of 2025 it no longer has free and fair elections according to Freedom House. It is one of the few countries in Africa ranking high on the Human Development Index, with one of the highest per capita incomes on the continent, ranking 129th in GDP per capita income.\nTunisia is well integrated into the international community. It is a member of the United Nations, , the Arab League, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, the African Union, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the Non-Aligned Movement, the International Criminal Court, the Group of 77, among others. It maintains close economic and political relations with some European countries, particularly with France and Italy, due to their geographical proximity. Tunisia also has an association agreement with the European Union and has attained the status of a major non-NATO ally of the United States.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Tunisia\" is derived from Tunis, a central urban hub and the capital of modern-day Tunisia. The present form of the name, with its Latinate suffix \"-ia\", evolved from French , in turn generally associated with the Berber root , transcribed , which means \"to lay down\" or \"encampment\". It is sometimes also associated with the Carthage goddess Tanith (or Tunit), and the ancient city of Tynes.\nThe French derivative was adopted in some European languages with slight modifications, introducing a distinctive name to designate the country. Other languages have left the name untouched, such as the Russian () and Spanish . In this case, the same name is used for both country and city, as with the Arabic , and only by context can one tell the difference.\nIn English, Tunisia before independence was also often called simply \"Tunis\", a name that persisted until the 1940s; under French influence, the neologism \"Tunisia\", adapted from \"Tunisie\", gradually took hold. The adjective \"Tunisian\" first appeared in English in 1825; the previous adjectival form was \"Tunisine\".\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nFarming methods reached the Nile Valley from the Fertile Crescent region about 5000 BC, and spread to the Maghreb by about 4000 BC. Agricultural communities in the humid coastal plains of central Tunisia then were ancestors of today's Berber tribes.\nIt was believed in ancient times that Africa was originally populated by Gaetulians and Libyans, both nomadic peoples. According to the Roman historian Sallust, the demigod Hercules died in Spain and his polyglot eastern army was left to settle the land, with some migrating to Africa. Persians went to the West and intermarried with the Gaetulians and became the Numidians. The Medes settled and were known as Mauri, later Moors.\nThe Numidians and Moors belonged to the race from which the Berbers are descended. The translated meaning of Numidian is Nomad and indeed the people were semi-nomadic until the reign of Masinissa of the Massyli tribe.\nAt the beginning of recorded history, Tunisia was inhabited by Berber tribes. Its coast was settled by Phoenicians starting as early as the 12th century BC (Bizerte, Utica). The city of Carthage was founded in the 9th century BC by Phoenicians. Legend says that Dido from Tyre, now in modern-day Lebanon, founded the city in 814 BC, as retold by the Greek writer Timaeus of Tauromenium. The settlers of Carthage brought their culture and religion from Phoenicia, now present-day Lebanon and adjacent areas.\nAfter the series of wars with Greek city-states of Sicily in the 5th century BC, Carthage rose to power and eventually became the dominant civilization in the Western Mediterranean. The people of Carthage worshipped a pantheon of Middle Eastern gods including Baal and Tanit. Tanit's symbol, a simple female figure with extended arms and long dress, is a popular icon found in ancient sites. The founders of Carthage also established a Tophet, which was altered in Roman times.\nA Carthaginian invasion of Italy led by Hannibal during the Second Punic War, one of a series of wars with Rome, nearly crippled the rise of Roman power. From the conclusion of the Second Punic War in 202 BC, Carthage functioned as a client state of the Roman Republic for another 50 years.\nFollowing the Battle of Carthage which began in 149 BC during the Third Punic War, Carthage was conquered by Rome in 146 BC. Following its conquest, the Romans renamed Carthage to Africa, incorporating it as a province.\nDuring the Roman period, the area of what is now Tunisia enjoyed a huge development. The economy, mainly during the Empire, boomed: the prosperity of the area depended on agriculture. Called the \"Granary of the Empire\", the area of actual Tunisia and coastal Tripolitania, according to one estimate, produced one million tons of cereals each year, one quarter of which was exported to the Empire. Additional crops included beans, figs, grapes, and other fruits.\nBy the 2nd century, olive oil rivalled cereals as an export item. In addition to the cultivations and the capture and transporting of exotic wild animals from the western mountains, the principal production and exports included textiles, marble, wine, timber, livestock, pottery such as African Red Slip, and wool.\nThere was even a huge production of mosaics and ceramics, exported mainly to Italy, in the central area of El Djem (where there was the second biggest amphitheatre in the Roman Empire).\nBerber bishop Donatus Magnus was the founder of a Christian group known as the Donatists. During the 5th and 6th centuries (from 430 to 533 AD), the Germanic Vandals invaded and ruled over a kingdom in Northwest Africa that included present-day Tripoli. The region was easily reconquered in 533\u2013534 AD, during the rule of Emperor Justinian I, by the Eastern Romans led by General Belisarius, preluding a 165-year era of Byzantine rule.\nMiddle Ages.\nSometime between the second half of the 7th century and the early part of the 8th century, Arab Muslim conquest occurred in the region. They founded the first Islamic city in Northwest Africa, Kairouan. It was there in 670 AD that the Mosque of Uqba, or the Great Mosque of Kairouan, was constructed. This mosque is the oldest and most prestigious sanctuary in the Muslim West with the oldest standing minaret in the world; it is also considered a masterpiece of Islamic art and architecture. The Arab migration to the Maghreb began during this time.\nThe region in its entirety was taken in 695, retaken by the Byzantine Eastern Romans in 697, but lost permanently in 698. The transition from a Latin-speaking Christian Berber society to a Muslim and mostly Arabic-speaking society took over 400 years (the equivalent process in Egypt and the Fertile Crescent took 600 years) and resulted in the final disappearance of Christianity and Latin in the 12th or 13th century. The majority of the population were not Muslim until quite late in the 9th century; a vast majority were during the 10th. Also, some Tunisian Christians emigrated; some richer members of society did so after the conquest in 698 and others were welcomed by Norman rulers to Sicily or Italy in the 11th and 12th centuries \u2013 the logical destination because of the 1200 year close connection between the two regions.\nThe Arab governors of Tunis founded the Aghlabid dynasty, which ruled Tunisia, Tripolitania and eastern Algeria from 800 to 909. Tunisia flourished under Arab rule when extensive systems were constructed to supply towns with water for household use and irrigation that promoted agriculture (especially olive production). This prosperity permitted luxurious court life and was marked by the construction of new palace cities such as al-Abbasiya (809) and Raq Adda (877).\nAfter conquering Cairo, the Fatimids abandoned Tunisia and parts of Eastern Algeria to the local Zirids (972\u20131148). Zirid Tunisia flourished in many areas: agriculture, industry, trade, and religious and secular learning. Management by the later Zirid emirs was neglectful though, and political instability was connected to the decline of Tunisian trade and agriculture.\nThe depredation of the Tunisian campaigns by the Banu Hilal, a warlike Arab tribe encouraged by the Fatimids of Egypt to seize Northwest Africa, sent the region's rural and urban economic life into further decline. Consequently, the region underwent rapid urbanisation as famines depopulated the countryside and industry shifted from agriculture to manufactures. The Arab historian Ibn Khaldun wrote that the lands ravaged by Banu Hilal invaders had become completely arid desert.\nThe main Tunisian cities were conquered by the Normans of Sicily under the Kingdom of Africa in the 12th century, but following the conquest of Tunisia in 1159\u20131160 by the Almohads the Normans were evacuated to Sicily. Communities of Tunisian Christians would still exist in Nefzaoua up to the 14th century. The Almohads initially ruled over Tunisia through a governor, usually a near relative of the Caliph. Despite the prestige of the new masters, the country was still unruly, with continuous rioting and fighting between the townsfolk and wandering Arabs and Turks, the latter being subjects of the Muslim Armenian adventurer Karakush. Also, Tunisia was occupied by Ayyubids between 1182 and 1183 and again between 1184 and 1187.\nThe greatest threat to Almohad rule in Tunisia was the Banu Ghaniya, relatives of the Almoravids, who from their base in Mallorca tried to restore Almoravid rule over the Maghreb. Around 1200 they succeeded in extending their rule over the whole of Tunisia until they were crushed by Almohad troops in 1207. After this success, the Almohads installed Walid Abu Hafs as the governor of Tunisia. Tunisia remained part of the Almohad state, until 1230 when the son of Abu Hafs declared himself independent.\nDuring the reign of the Hafsid dynasty from their capital Tunis, fruitful commercial relationships were established with several Christian Mediterranean states. In the late 16th century the coast became a pirate stronghold.\nOttoman Tunisia.\nIn the last years of the Hafsid dynasty, Spain seized many of the coastal cities, but these were recovered by the Ottoman Empire.\nThe first Ottoman conquest of Tunis took place in 1534 under the command of Barbarossa Hayreddin Pasha, the younger brother of Oru\u00e7 Reis, who was the Kapudan Pasha of the Ottoman Fleet during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent. However, it was not until the final Ottoman reconquest of Tunis from Spain in 1574 under Kapudan Pasha Ulu\u00e7 Ali Reis that the Ottomans permanently acquired the former Hafsid Tunisia, retaining it until the French conquest of Tunisia in 1881.\nInitially under Turkish rule from Algiers, soon the Ottoman Porte appointed directly for Tunis a governor called the Pasha supported by janissary forces. Before long, however, Tunisia became in effect an autonomous province, under the local bey. Under its Turkish governors, the beys, Tunisia attained virtual independence. The Hussein dynasty of beys, established in 1705, lasted until 1957. This evolution of status was from time to time challenged without success by Algiers. During this era, the governing councils controlling Tunisia remained largely composed of a foreign elite who continued to conduct state business in the Turkish language.\nAttacks on European shipping were made by corsairs, primarily from Algiers, but also from Tunis and Tripoli, yet after a long period of declining raids the growing power of the European states finally forced its termination.\nThe plague epidemics ravaged Tunisia in 1784\u20131785, 1796\u20131797 and 1818\u20131820.\nIn the 19th century, the rulers of Tunisia became aware of the ongoing efforts at political and social reform in the Ottoman capital. The Bey of Tunis then, by his own lights but informed by the Turkish example, attempted to effect a modernizing reform of institutions and the economy. Tunisian international debt grew unmanageable. This was the reason or pretext for French forces to establish a protectorate in 1881.\nFrench Protectorate of Tunisia (1881\u20131956).\nIn 1869, Tunisia declared itself bankrupt and an international financial commission took control over its economy. In 1881, using the pretext of a Tunisian incursion into Algeria, the French invaded with an army of about 36,000 and forced the Bey of Tunis, Muhammad III as-Sadiq, to agree to the terms of the 1881 Treaty of Bardo. With this treaty, Tunisia was officially made a French protectorate, over the objections of Italy. European settlements in the country were actively encouraged; the number of French colonists grew from 34,000 in 1906 to 144,000 in 1945. In 1910 there were also 105,000 Italians in Tunisia.\nDuring the Second World War, the protectorate of Tunisia was controlled by the collaborationist Vichy government in Metropolitan France. The antisemitic Statute on Jews enacted by the Vichy government was also implemented in Vichy-controlled Northwest Africa and other overseas French territories. Thus, the persecution and murder of the Jews from 1940 to 1943 was part of the Holocaust in France.\nFrom November 1942 until May 1943, Vichy-controlled Tunisia was occupied by Germany. SS Commander Walter Rauff continued to implement the \"Final Solution\" there. From 1942 to 1943, Tunisia was the scene of the Tunisia Campaign, a series of battles between the Axis and Allied forces. The battle opened with initial success by the German and Italian forces, but the massive supply and numerical superiority of the Allies led to the Axis surrender on 13 May 1943. The six-month campaign of Tunisia's liberation from Axis occupation signalled the end of the war in Africa.\nStruggle for independence (1943\u20131956).\nAfter the liberation of Tunisia from the Germans, the French regained control over the government and made participation in a nationalist party illegal once more. Moncef Bey, who was popular amongst Tunisians, was deposed by the French. The French claimed that his removal was due to him being sympathetic to the Axis countries during German occupation, but the real reason is up for debate.\nIn 1945 after escaping French surveillance, Tunisian nationalist Habib Bourguiba arrived in Cairo. While there, he was able to make contact with the Arab League. Later in 1946, after traveling to other Middle Eastern countries, he made his way to the United States to speak to both the United Nations at their headquarters at Lake Success and U.S. State Department officials in Washington D.C., pleading the case of the Tunisian nationalists.\nAs part of postwar Tunisia, a new all-Tunisian labor organization was formed, the Union G\u00e9n\u00e9rale des Travailleurs (UGTT). This was one of the stronger components of the nationalist group Neo-Destour.\nHabib Bourguiba made his way to the United States on 13 September 1949. He attended the American Federation of Labor meeting in San Francisco, California. The French were opposed to his presence there, and the US feared political change in North Africa due to the looming presence of possible Soviet Union communist expansion.\nBourguiba continued to plead to foreign leaders when he traveled to Italy on 6 November 1951. His contacts included Alberto Mellini Ponce De Le\u00f3n, Mario Toscano, and Licinio Vestri. De Le\u00f3n was an old friend of Bourguiba who had helped free him from German captivity, Toscano was the head of the \"Ufficio Studi e Documentazione\" in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Vestri was an Africanist scholar. Despite his best efforts, the Italians remained neutral as they did not want to ruin relations with NATO ally France, nor did they want to hamper any possibility of future relations with Tunisia as it served as a key part of the Mediterranean.\nThe French Resident General in Tunisia, Jean de Hautecloque left Tunis to go to Paris on 25 August 1953, when he was replaced by Pierre Voizard. Voizard had previously been the French Minister to Monaco. A month after his arrival in Tunis on 26 September 1953, Voizard made many changes to ease tensions in Tunisia. He lifted press censorship and freed several political prisoners. He also restored the full powers of civil authorities and raised the state of siege in the Sahel.\nOn 26 January 1954, Voizard announced that there would soon be new reforms in favor of granting more sovereignty to Tunisians while insuring the interests of the French and French citizens in Tunisia, at the Cercle Republicain d'outre Mer in Paris. The Neo-Destour group was not in favor of these reforms if they themselves were not involved in their creation. They also demanded the freedom of Bourguiba who was imprisoned on the Isle of Galete.\nPost-independence (1956\u20132011).\nTunisia achieved independence from France on 20 March 1956 with Habib Bourguiba as Prime Minister. 20 March is celebrated annually as Tunisian Independence Day. A year later, Tunisia was declared a republic, with Bourguiba as the first President. From independence in 1956 until the 2011 revolution, the government and the Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD), formerly Neo Destour and the Socialist Destourian Party, were effectively one. Following a report by Amnesty International, \"The Guardian\" called Tunisia \"one of the most modern but repressive countries in the Arab world\". On 12 May 1964, Tunisia nationalized foreign farmlands. Immediately after, France canceled all financial assistance for the country, which was to amount to more than $40 million. This led to the Tunisian National Assembly passing a bill that required all residents of the country to subscribe to a \"popular loan\" in proportion to their income. From 1977 until 2005, Tunisia was a shooting location for five films of the \"Star Wars\" film franchise.\nIn 1982, Tunisia became the center of the Palestine Liberation Organization, based in the capital Tunis. On 1 October 1985, the Israeli Air Force bombed the PLO Headquarters, killing at least 60 people.\nIn November 1987, doctors declared Bourguiba unfit to rule and, in a bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat, Prime Minister Zine El Abidine Ben Ali assumed the presidency in accordance with Article 57 of the Tunisian constitution. The anniversary of Ben Ali's succession, 7 November, was celebrated as a national holiday. He was consistently re-elected with enormous majorities every five years (well over 80 percent of the vote), the last being 25 October 2009, until he fled the country amid popular unrest in January 2011.\nBen Ali and his family were accused of corruption and plundering the country's money. Economic liberalisation provided further opportunities for financial mismanagement, while corrupt members of the Trabelsi family, most notably in the cases of Imed Trabelsi and Belhassen Trabelsi, controlled much of the business sector in the country. The First Lady Leila Ben Ali was described as an \"unabashed shopaholic\" who used the state airplane to make frequent unofficial trips to Europe's fashion capitals. Tunisia refused a French request for the extradition of two of the President's nephews, from Leila's side, who were accused by the French State prosecutor of having stolen two mega-yachts from a French marina. According to \"Le Monde\", Ben Ali's son-in-law was being primed to eventually take over the country.\nIndependent human rights groups, such as Amnesty International, Freedom House, and Protection International, documented that basic human and political rights were not respected. The regime obstructed in any way possible the work of local human rights organizations. In 2008, in terms of press freedom, Tunisia was ranked 143rd out of 173.\nPost-revolution (since 2011).\nThe Tunisian Revolution was an intensive campaign of civil resistance that was precipitated by high unemployment, food inflation, corruption, a lack of freedom of speech and other political freedoms and poor living conditions. Labour unions were said to be an integral part of the protests. The protests inspired the Arab Spring, a wave of similar actions throughout the Arab world. The catalyst for mass demonstrations was the death of Mohamed Bouazizi, a 26-year-old Tunisian street vendor, who set himself afire on 17 December 2010 in protest at the confiscation of his wares and the humiliation inflicted on him by a municipal official named Faida Hamdy. Anger and violence intensified following Bouazizi's death on 4 January 2011, ultimately leading longtime President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to resign and flee the country on 14 January 2011, after 23 years in power.\nProtests continued for banning of the ruling party and the eviction of all its members from the transitional government formed by Mohammed Ghannouchi. Eventually the new government gave in to the demands. A Tunis court banned the ex-ruling party RCD and confiscated all its resources. A decree by the minister of the interior banned the \"political police\", special forces which were used to intimidate and persecute political activists.\nOn 3 March 2011, the interim president announced that elections to a Constituent Assembly would be held on 24 July 2011. On 9 June 2011, the prime minister announced the election would be postponed until 23 October 2011. International and internal observers declared the vote free and fair. The Ennahda Movement, formerly banned under the Ben Ali regime, came out of the election as the largest party, with 89 seats out of a total of 217. On 12 December 2011, former dissident and veteran human rights activist Moncef Marzouki was elected president. In March 2012, Ennahda declared it will not support making sharia the main source of legislation in the new constitution, maintaining the secular nature of the state. Ennahda's stance on the issue was criticized by hardline Islamists, who wanted strict sharia, but was welcomed by secular parties. On 6 February 2013, Chokri Belaid, the leader of the leftist opposition and prominent critic of Ennahda, was assassinated. In 2014, President Moncef Marzouki established Tunisia's Truth and Dignity Commission, as a key part of creating a national reconciliation.\nTunisia was hit by two terror attacks on foreign tourists in 2015, first killing 22 people at the Bardo National Museum, and later killing 38 people at the Sousse beachfront. Tunisian president Beji Caid Essebsi renewed the state of emergency in October for three more months. The Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet won the 2015 Nobel Peace Prize for its work in building a peaceful, pluralistic political order in Tunisia.\nPresidency of Kais Saied (2019\u2013present).\nTunisia's first democratically elected president Beji Caid Essebsi died in July 2019. Following him, Kais Saied became Tunisia's president after a landslide victory in the 2019 Tunisian presidential elections in October. On 23 October 2019, Saied was sworn in as Tunisia's new president.\nOn 25 July 2021, amid ongoing demonstrations concerning government dysfunction and corruption and rises in COVID-19 cases, Kais Saied unilaterally suspended parliament, dismissed the prime minister and withdrew immunity of parliament members. In September 2021, Saied said he would appoint a committee to help draft new constitutional amendments. On 29 September, he named Najla Bouden as the new prime minister and tasked her with forming a cabinet, which was sworn in on 11 October. On 3 February 2022, Tunisia was voted to the African Union's (AU) Peace and Security Council for the term 2022\u20132024, according to the Tunisian Foreign Ministry. The poll took place on the fringes of the AU Executive Council's 40th ordinary session, which was held in the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa, according to the ministry.\nIn February 2022, Tunisia and the International Monetary Fund held preliminary negotiations in the hopes of securing a multibillion-dollar bailout for an economy beset by recession, public debt, inflation, and unemployment.\nIn April 2023, the Tunisian government closed the headquarters of the Ennahda party and arrested its leader Rached Ghannouchi. In October 2023 Abir Moussi, head of the Free Destourian Party (FDL), became the latest prominent opponent of president Saied to have been detained or imprisoned. The FDL had emerged from the Democratic Constitutional Assembly.\nIn September 2023 Saied had asked to postpone a visit by a delegation of the EU commission to discuss migration according to Minister of the Interior Kamel Feki. Meanwhile, human rights organisations were criticizing the July migration agreement. Feki said that Tunisia, which is one of the most important transit countries for people on their way to Europe, cannot act as a border guard for other countries. In October 2023 Saied turned down 127 million in EU aid saying that the amount was small and doesn't square with a deal signed three months ago. This in turn caused surprise in Brussels. In April 2025, Tunisia dismantled dozens of makeshift camps housing African migrants, displacing as many as 7,000 people.\nOn 6 October 2024, President Kais Saied won a second term with more than 90% of the vote in a presidential election with a 28.8% turnout. Five political parties had urged people to boycott the elections.\nGeography.\nTunisia is situated on the Mediterranean coast of Northwest Africa, midway between the Atlantic Ocean and the Nile Delta. It is bordered by Algeria on the west (965\u00a0km) and southwest and Libya on the south east (459\u00a0km). It lies between latitudes 30\u00b0 and 38\u00b0N, and longitudes 7\u00b0 and 12\u00b0E. An abrupt southward turn of the Mediterranean coast in northern Tunisia gives the country two distinctive Mediterranean coasts, west\u2013east in the north, and north\u2013south in the east.\nThough it is relatively small in size, Tunisia has great environmental diversity due to its north\u2013south extent. Its east\u2013west extent is limited. Differences in Tunisia, like the rest of the Maghreb, are largely north\u2013south environmental differences defined by sharply decreasing rainfall southward from any point. The Dorsal, the eastern extension of the Atlas Mountains, runs across Tunisia in a northeasterly direction from the Algerian border in the west to the Cape Bon peninsula in the east. North of the Dorsal is the Tell, a region characterized by low, rolling hills and plains, again an extension of mountains to the west in Algeria. In the Khroumerie, the northwestern corner of the Tunisian Tell, elevations reach and snow occurs in winter.\nThe Sahel, a broadening coastal plain along Tunisia's eastern Mediterranean coast, is among the world's premier areas of olive cultivation. Inland from the Sahel, between the Dorsal and a range of hills south of Gafsa, are the Steppes. Much of the southern region is semi-arid and desert.\nTunisia has a coastline long. In maritime terms, the country claims a contiguous zone of , and a territorial sea of . The city of Tunis is built on a hill slope down to the lake of Tunis. These hills contain places such as Notre-Dame de Tunis, Ras Tabia, La Rabta, La Kasbah, Montfleury and La Manoubia with altitudes just above 50 metres (160 feet). The city is located at the crossroads of a narrow strip of land between Lake Tunis and S\u00e9joumi.\nTunisia's climate is Mediterranean in the north, with mild rainy winters and hot, dry summers. The south of the country is desert. The terrain in the north is mountainous, which, moving south, gives way to a hot, dry central plain. The south is semiarid, and merges into the Sahara. A series of salt lakes, known as \"chotts\" or \"shatts\", lie in an east\u2013west line at the northern edge of the Sahara, extending from the Gulf of Gabes into Algeria. The lowest point is Chott el Djerid at below sea level and the highest is Jebel ech Chambi at .\nTunisia is home to five terrestrial ecoregions: Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests, Saharan halophytics, Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe, Mediterranean woodlands and forests, and North Saharan steppe and woodlands.\nGovernment and politics.\nTunisia is a presidential republic with a president serving as head of state, a prime minister as head of government, a bicameral parliament, and a civil law court system. The Constitution of Tunisia, adopted 26 January 2014, guarantees rights for women and states that the President's religion \"shall be Islam\". In October 2014 Tunisia held its first elections under the new constitution following the Arab Spring. Tunisia was the only democracy in North Africa until 2021. After a democratic backsliding, the country now classifies as \"hybrid regime\" in the Democracy Index (The Economist). Between 2020 and 2022 the V-Dem Democracy indices score for electoral democracy dropped from 0.727 to 0.307. After the 2022 constitutional referendum, Tunisia became a unitary presidential republic.\nThe number of legalized political parties in Tunisia has grown considerably since the revolution. There are now over 100 legal parties, including several that existed under the former regime. During the rule of Ben Ali, only three functioned as independent opposition parties: the PDP, FDTL, and Tajdid. While some older parties are well-established and can draw on previous party structures, many of the 100-plus parties extant as of February 2012 are small.\nRare for the Arab world, women held more than 20% of seats in the country's pre-revolution bicameral parliament. In the 2011 constituent assembly, women held between 24% and 31% of all seats. Tunisia is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer. On 23 November 2014, Tunisia held its first presidential election following the Arab Spring in 2011. The Tunisian legal system is heavily influenced by French civil law, while the law of personal status is based on Islamic law. Sharia courts were abolished in 1956.\nA Code of Personal Status was adopted shortly after independence in 1956, which, among other things, gave women full legal status (allowing them to run and own businesses, have bank accounts, and seek passports under their own authority). The code outlawed the practices of polygamy and repudiation and a husband's right to unilaterally divorce his wife. Further reforms in 1993 included a provision to allow Tunisian women to transmit citizenship even if they are married to a foreigner and living abroad. The Law of Personal Status is applied to all Tunisians regardless of their religion. The Code of Personal Status remains one of the most progressive civil codes in North Africa and the Muslim world. On 25 May 2022, President Kais Saied issued a decree for change of constitution by 25 July. The referendum was held that day to a low turnout of 30% of voters, the overwhelming majority of whom accepted the new constitution, strengthening significantly the presidential powers. Maghreb countries have toughened their tone towards Europe recently.\nForeign relations.\nTunisia maintains diplomatic relations with over 160+ countries. Former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali has maintained its long-time policy of seeking good relations with the West, while playing an active role in Arab and African regional bodies. President Habib Bourguiba took a nonaligned stance but emphasized close relations with the European Union, Pakistan, and the United States.\nMilitary.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], Tunisia had an army of 27,000 personnel equipped with 84 main battle tanks and 48 light tanks. The navy had 4,800 personnel operating 25 patrol boats and 6 other craft. The Tunisian Air Force has 154 aircraft and 4 UAVs. Paramilitary forces consisted of a 12,000-member national guard. Tunisia's military spending was 1.6% of GDP as of 2006[ [update]]. The army is responsible for national defence and also internal security. Tunisia has participated in peacekeeping efforts in the DROC and Ethiopia/Eritrea. United Nations peacekeeping deployments for the Tunisian armed forces have been in Cambodia (UNTAC), Namibia (UNTAG), Somalia, Rwanda, Burundi, Western Sahara (MINURSO) and the 1960s mission in the Congo, ONUC.\nThe military has historically played a professional, apolitical role in defending the country from external threats. Since January 2011 and at the direction of the executive branch, the military has taken on increasing responsibility for domestic security and humanitarian crisis response.\nTunisia is the 73rd most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nAdministrative divisions.\n \nMediterranean sea\nDjerba\nKerkennah\nJendouba\nBizerte\nKef\nB\u00e9ja\nKasserine\nGafsa\nTozeur\nKebili\nTataouine\nMedenine\nGab\u00e8s\nSfax\nMahdia\nMonastir\nSousse\nNabeul\nSidi Bouzid\nKairouan\nSiliana\nZaghouan\nManouba\nBen Arous\nAriana\nTunis\nTunisia is subdivided into 24 governorates (\"Wilaya\"), which are further divided into 264 \"delegations\" or \"districts\" (\"mutamadiyat\"), and further subdivided into municipalities (\"baladiyats\") and sectors (\"imadats\").\nEconomy.\nRanked the most competitive economy in Africa by the World Economic Forum in 2009, Tunisia is an export-oriented country in the process of liberalizing and privatizing an economy that, while averaging 5% GDP growth since the early 1990s, has suffered from corruption benefiting politically connected elites. Tunisia's Penal Code criminalises several forms of corruption, including active and passive bribery, abuse of office, extortion and conflicts of interest, but the anti-corruption framework is not effectively enforced. However, according to the Corruption Perceptions Index published annually by Transparency International, Tunisia was ranked the least corrupt North African country in 2016, with a score of 41. Tunisia has a diverse economy, ranging from agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and petroleum products, to tourism, which accounted for 7% of the total GDP and 370,000 jobs in 2009. In 2008 it had an economy of US$41 billion in nominal terms, and $82 billion in PPP.\nThe agricultural sector accounts for 11.6% of the GDP, industry 25.7%, and services 62.8%. The industrial sector is mainly made up of clothing and footwear manufacturing, production of car parts, and electric machinery. Although Tunisia managed an average 5% growth over the last decade, it continues to suffer from a high unemployment rate, especially among youth.\nThe European Union remains Tunisia's first trading partner, currently accounting for 72.5% of Tunisian imports and 75% of Tunisian exports. Tunisia is one of the European Union's most established trading partners in the Mediterranean region and ranks as the EU's 30th largest trading partner. Tunisia was the first Mediterranean country to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union, in July 1995, although even before the date of entry came into force, Tunisia started dismantling tariffs on bilateral EU trade. Tunisia finalised the tariffs dismantling for industrial products in 2008 and therefore was the first non-EU Mediterranean country to enter in a free trade area with the EU.\nThe consequences of the Russian invasion of Ukraine for the global food supply are being felt particularly strongly in Tunisia.\nIn June 2023 the World Bank Group lent Tunisia $268.4 million to finance ELMED, an electrical interconnection project with Italy to import electricity generated from renewable energy sources to Sicily and the EU via a 600 Megawatt undersea cable.\nTunisia was ranked 76th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nTourism.\n \nAmong Tunisia's tourist attractions are its cosmopolitan capital city of Tunis, the ancient ruins of Carthage, the Muslim and Jewish quarters of Djerba, coastal resorts outside of Monastir, and the night life-driven city of Hammamet. According to \"The New York Times\", Tunisia is \"known for its golden beaches, sunny weather and affordable luxuries\".\nEnergy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTunisia's current power production capacity is estimated at 5,944 MW installed in 25 power plants as of 2024. Tunisia produced 19,520 GWh in 2022. State owned power utility company STEG (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Tunisienne d'Electricit\u00e9 et de Gas) controls 92.1% of the country's installed power production capacity and produces 83.5% of the electricity.\nOil production began in 1966 in Tunisia. In 2006 there were 12 oil fields. The main field is El Borma. The production rate of crude oil in Tunisia was at the end of September 2024.\nTunisia had plans for two nuclear power stations, to be operational by 2020. Both facilities are projected to produce 900\u20131000 MW. France is set to become an important partner in Tunisia's nuclear power plans, having signed an agreement, along with other partners, to deliver training and technology. As of 2015[ [update]], Tunisia has abandoned these plans. Instead, Tunisia is considering other options to diversify its energy mix, such as renewable energies, coal, shale gas, liquified natural gas and constructing a submarine power interconnection with Italy.\nAccording to the Tunisian Solar Plan (which is Tunisia's Renewable Energy Strategy not limited to solar, contrary to what its title may suggest), proposed by the http:// (), Tunisia's objective is to reach a share of 30% of renewable energies in the electricity mix by 2030, most of which should be accounted for by wind power and photovoltaics. As of 2015[ [update]], Tunisia had a total renewable capacity of 312 MW (245 MW wind, 62 MW hydropower, 15 MW photovoltaics.)\nTransport.\nThe country maintains of roads, with three highways: the A1 from Tunis to Sfax (works ongoing for Sfax-Libya), A3 Tunis-Beja (works ongoing Beja \u2013 Boussalem, studies ongoing Boussalem \u2013 Algeria) and A4 Tunis \u2013 Bizerte. There are 29 airports in Tunisia, with Tunis Carthage International Airport and Djerba\u2013Zarzis International Airport being the most important ones. A new airport, Enfidha \u2013 Hammamet International Airport opened in 2011. The airport is located north of Sousse at Enfidha and is to mainly serve the resorts of Hamammet and Port El Kantaoui, together with inland cities such as Kairouan. Five airlines are headquartered in Tunisia: Tunisair, Syphax Airlines, Karthago Airlines, Nouvelair, and Tunisair Express. The railway network is operated by SNCFT and amounts to in total. The Tunis area is served by a Light rail network named \"Metro Leger\" which is managed by Transtu.\nWater supply and sanitation.\nTunisia has achieved the highest access rates to water supply and sanitation\nservices in the Middle East and North Africa. As of 2011[ [update]], access to\nsafe drinking water became close to universal approaching 100% in urban\nareas and 90% in rural areas. Tunisia provides good quality drinking water throughout the year.\nResponsibility for the water supply systems in urban areas and large rural centers is assigned to the \"Soci\u00e9te Nationale d'Exploitation et de Distribution des Eaux\" (SONEDE), a national water supply authority that is an autonomous public entity under the Ministry of Agriculture. Planning, design, and supervision of small and medium water supplies in the remaining rural areas are the responsibility of the \"Direction G\u00e9n\u00e9rale du G\u00e9nie Rurale\" (DGGR).\nIn 1974, ONAS was established to manage the sanitation sector. Since 1993, ONAS has had the status of a main operator for the protection of the water environment and combating pollution. The rate of non-revenue water is the lowest in the region at 21% in 2012.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to the CIA, as of 2021, Tunisia has a population of 11,811,335 inhabitants. The government has supported a successful family planning program that has reduced the population growth rate to just over 1% per annum, contributing to Tunisia's economic and social stability.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook, ethnic groups in Tunisia are: Arab 98%, European 1%, Jewish and other 1%.\nAccording to the 1956 Tunisian census, Tunisia had a population at the time of 3,783,000 residents, 95% consisting of Arabs and Berbers, 256,000 Europeans and 105,000 Jews. Speakers of Berber dialects were 2% of the population. According to another source, the population of Arabs is estimated to be 98%, and that of Berbers at 1%.\nBlack Tunisians make up 10\u201315% of the population and are mostly descended from sub-Saharan Africans brought to Tunisia as part of the slave trade.\nAmazighs are generally concentrated in the Dahar mountains and on the island of Djerba in the southeast, and in the Khroumire mountainous region in the north-west. An important number of genetic and other historical studies point to the predominance of the Amazighs in Tunisia.\nAn Ottoman influence has been particularly significant in forming the Turco-Tunisian community. Other peoples have also migrated to Tunisia during different time periods, including West Africans, Greeks, Romans, Vandals, Phoenicians (Punics), Jews, and French and Italian settlers. By 1870, the distinction between the Arabic-speaking population and the Turkish elite had blurred.\nFrom the late 19th century to the period after World War II, Tunisia was home to large populations of French and Italians (255,000 Europeans in 1956), although nearly all of them, along with the Jewish population, left after Tunisia became independent. The history of the Jews in Tunisia goes back some 2,000 years. In 1948, the Jewish population was estimated at 105,000, but by 2013 only about 1000 remained.\nThe first people known to history in what is now Tunisia were the Berbers. Numerous civilizations and peoples have invaded, migrated to, or have been assimilated into the population over the millennia, with influences of population from Phoenicians/Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Arabs, Spaniards, Ottoman Turks and Janissaries, and French. There was a continuing inflow of nomadic Arab tribes from the Arabian Peninsula.\nAfter the Reconquista and expulsion of non-Christians and Moriscos from Spain, many Spanish Muslims and Jews arrived in Tunisia. According to Matthew Carr, \"As many as eighty thousand Moriscos settled in Tunisia, most of them in and around the capital, Tunis, which still contains a quarter known as Zuqaq al-Andalus, or Andalusia Alley.\"\nLanguages.\nArabic is the official language of Tunisia. Tunisian Arabic, known as Tounsi, is the national, vernacular variety of Arabic used by the public. There is also a small minority of speakers of Berber languages known collectively as Jebbali or Shelha in the country. Actively spoken Berber languages are Jerba Berber on the island of Djerba and Matmata Berber in the city of Matmata. The Sened language is extinct.\nFrench also plays a major role in Tunisian society, despite having no official status. It is widely used in education (e.g., as the language of instruction in the sciences in secondary school), the press, and business. In 2022, there were 6,321,000 French-speakers in Tunisia, or about 52% of the population. Italian is understood and spoken by a small part of the Tunisian population. Shop signs, menus and road signs in Tunisia are generally written in both Arabic and French.\nReligion.\nTunisia's constitution declares Islam as the official state religion\u2014and the absolute majority of its population, or around 98%, report to be Muslims, while some 2% follow predominantly Christianity or Judaism. According to a 2018 survey conducted by the Arab Barometer, the vast majority of Tunisians (99.4%) continue to identify as Muslim. The survey also found that more than one third of Tunisians identify as non-religious. The percentage of Tunisians identifying themselves as non-religious has recently increased from around 12% in 2013 to around 33% in 2018, making Tunisia the least religious country in the Arab world. Nearly half of young Tunisians described themselves as non-religious, according to that same survey. However, as of July 2022, new surveys by the Arab Barometer say otherwise, particularly BBC's programme, \"The Newsroom\" journalists highlighting that the previously noted wave of those saying they were not religious has been, in fact, \"reversed\". The most recent 2021 Arab Barometer survey reported that 44% of Tunisians consider themselves religious, 37% somewhat religious, and 19% non-religious.\nTunisians enjoy a significant degree of religious freedom, a right enshrined and protected in its constitution, which guarantees the freedom of thoughts, beliefs and to practice one's religion. The country has a secular culture where religion is separated from not only political, but also public life. Individual Tunisians are tolerant of religious freedom and generally do not inquire about a person's personal beliefs.\nThe bulk of Tunisians belong to the Maliki school of Sunni Islam, and their mosques are easily recognizable by square minarets. However, the Turks brought with them the teaching of the Hanafi school during Ottoman rule, which still survives among families of Turkish descent today; their mosques traditionally have octagonal minarets. Sunnis form the majority, with non-denominational Muslims being the second largest group of Muslims, followed by Ibadite Amazighs.\nThe Church of Carthage, in particular, became significant in the history of Christianity, playing a key role in the development of Christian philosophy and theology, and producing many prominent religious scholars and theologians. Prior to independence, Tunisia was home to more than 250,000 Christians (mostly of Italian and Maltese ancestry). Many Christian Italian settlers left to Italy or France after independence from France. Today, Tunisia's sizable Christian community of something over 35,000 is composed mainly of Catholics (22,000), and to a lesser degree Protestants. Berber Christians continued to live in some Nefzaoua villages up until the early fifteenth century, and the community of Tunisian Christians existed in the town of Tozeur up to the 18th century. The International Religious Freedom Report for 2007 estimates that thousands of Tunisian Muslims have converted to Christianity.\nJudaism is the third largest religion, with between 1,000 and 1,400 members. One third of the Jewish population lives in and around the capital. The remainder lives on the island of Djerba with 39 synagogues where the Jewish community dates back 2,600 years, in Sfax, and in Hammam-Lif. Djerba, an island in the Gulf of Gab\u00e8s, is home to El Ghriba synagogue, which is one of the oldest synagogues in the world and the oldest continuously used. Many Jews consider it a pilgrimage site, with celebrations taking place there once a year due to its age and the legend that the synagogue was built using stones from Solomon's temple. Although antisemitic violence has been reported, Tunisia and Morocco are said to be the Arab countries most accepting of their Jewish populations.\nThere is also a Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community.\nEducation.\nThe total adult literacy rate in 2008 was 78% and this rate goes up to 97.3% when considering only people from 15 to 24 years old. Education is given a high priority and accounts for 6% of GNP. A basic education for children between the ages of 6 and 16 has been compulsory since 1991. Tunisia ranked 17th in the category of \"quality of the [higher] educational system\" and 21st in the category of \"quality of primary education\" in The Global Competitiveness Report 2008\u201309, released by the World Economic Forum.\nWhile children generally acquire Tunisian Arabic at home, when they enter school at age six, they are taught to read and write in Standard Arabic. From the age of 8, they are taught French while English is introduced at the age of 11.\nThe four years of secondary education are open to all holders of where the students focus on entering university level or join the workforce after completion. The Enseignement secondaire is divided into two stages: general academic and specialized. The higher education system in Tunisia has experienced a rapid expansion and the number of students has more than tripled over the past 10 years from approximately 102,000 in 1995 to 365,000 in 2005. The gross enrollment rate at the tertiary level in 2007 was 31 percent, with gender parity index of GER of 1.5.\nHealth.\nIn 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.37% of the country's GDP. In 2009, there were 12.02 physicians and 33.12 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 75.73 years in 2016, or 73.72 years for males and 77.78 years for females. Infant mortality in 2016 was 11.7 per 1,000.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Tunisia is mixed due to its long established history of outside influence from people \u2013 such as Phoenicians, Romans, Vandals, Byzantines, Arabs, Siculo-Normans, Turks, Italians, Maltese and the French \u2013 who all left their mark on the country.\nPainting.\nThe birth of Tunisian contemporary painting is strongly linked to the School of Tunis, established by a group of artists from Tunisia united by the desire to incorporate native themes and rejecting the influence of Orientalist colonial painting. It was founded in 1949 and brings together French and Tunisian Muslims, Christians and Jews. Pierre Boucherle was its main instigator, along with Yahia Turki, Abdelaziz Gorgi, Moses Levy, Ammar Farhat, and Jules Lellouche. Given its doctrine, some members have therefore turned to the sources of aesthetic Arab-Muslim art, such as miniature Islamic architecture, etc. Expressionist paintings by Amara Debbache, Jellal Ben Abdallah, and Ali Ben Salem are recognized while abstract art captures the imagination of painters like Edgar Naccache, Nello Levy, and Hedi Turki.\nAfter independence in 1956, the art movement in Tunisia was propelled by the dynamics of nation building and by artists serving the state. A Ministry of Culture was established, under the leadership of ministers such as Habib Boular\u00e8s who oversaw art and education and power. Artists gained international recognition such as Hatem El Mekki or Zoubeir Turki and influenced a generation of new young painters. Sadok Gmech draws his inspiration from national wealth while Moncef Ben Amor turns to fantasy. In another development, Youssef Rekik reused the technique of painting on glass and founded Nja Mahdaoui calligraphy with its mystical dimension.\nThere are currently fifty art galleries housing exhibitions of Tunisian and international artists. These galleries include Gallery Yahia in Tunis and Carthage Essaadi gallery.\nA new exposition opened in an old monarchal palace in Bardo dubbed the \"awakening of a nation\". The exposition boasts documents and artifacts from the Tunisian reformist monarchial rule in mid-19th century.\nLiterature.\nTunisian literature exists in two forms: Arabic and French. Arabic literature dates back to the 7th century with the arrival of Arab civilization in the region. It is more important in both volume and value than French literature, which was introduced during the French protectorate from 1881.\nAmong the literary figures include Ali Douagi, who has produced more than 150 radio stories, over 500 poems and folk songs and nearly 15 plays, Khraief Bashir, an Arabic novelist who published many notable books in the 1930s and which caused a scandal because the dialogues were written in Tunisian dialect, and others such as Moncef Ghachem, Mohamed Salah Ben Mrad, or Mahmoud Messadi.\nAs for poetry, Tunisian poetry typically opts for nonconformity and innovation with poets such as Aboul-Qacem Echebbi.\nAs for literature in French, it is characterized by its critical approach. Contrary to the pessimism of Albert Memmi, who predicted that Tunisian literature was sentenced to die young, a high number of Tunisian writers are abroad including Abdelwahab Meddeb, Bakri Tahar, Mustapha Tlili, Hele Beji, or Mellah Fawzi. Themes of wandering, exile, heartbreak, disconnection, memory, and representation are often focuses of Tunisian literature.\nThe national bibliography lists 1249 non-school books published in 2002 in Tunisia, with 885 titles in Arabic. In 2006 this figure had increased to 1,500 and 1,700 in 2007. Nearly a third of the books are published for children.\nMusic.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, musical activity was dominated by the liturgical repertoire associated with different religious brotherhoods and secular repertoire which consisted of instrumental pieces and songs in different Andalusian forms and styles of origins, essentially borrowing characteristics of musical language. In 1930 The Rachidia was founded, well known thanks to artists from the Jewish community. The founding in 1934 of a musical school helped revive Arab Andalusian music largely to a social and cultural revival led by the elite of the time who became aware of the risks of loss of the musical heritage and which they believed threatened the foundations of Tunisian national identity. The institution did not take long to assemble a group of musicians, poets, scholars. The creation of Radio Tunis in 1938 allowed musicians a greater opportunity to disseminate their works, with the station employing a policy of promoting Tunisian musicians exclusively.\nNotable Tunisian musicians include Saber Reba\u00ef, Dhafer Youssef, Belgacem Bouguenna, Sonia M'barek, Latifa, Salah El Mahdi, Anouar Brahem, Emel Mathlouthi and Lotfi Bouchnak.\nFestivals.\nHundreds of international festivals, national, regional or local punctuate the calendar year. Music and theatrical festivals dominate the national cultural scene.\nSeveral festivals take place annually in summer: the International Festival of Carthage in July, the International Festival of Arts of Mahr from late July to early August, and the International Festival of Hammamet in July and August.\nThe Carthage Film Festival is held in October and November of every other year, alternating with the Carthage Theatre Festival. It was created in 1966 by the Tunisian Minister of Culture to showcase films from the Maghreb, Africa and the Middle East. In order to be eligible for the competition, a film must have a director of African or Middle Eastern nationality, and have been produced at least two years before entry. The grand prize is the \"Tanit d'or\", or \"Golden Tanit\", named for the lunar goddess of ancient Carthage; the award is in the shape of her symbol, a trapezium surmounted by a horizontal line and a circle.\nThe International Festival of the Sahara, celebrated annually at the end of December, honors the cultural traditions associated with the Tunisian desert. This attracts many tourists and musicians from all around the world, as well as horsemen who flaunt their saddles and local fabrics and skills.\nThere are also a number of musical festivals; some honor traditional Tunisian music, while others, including the Tabarka Jazz Festival, focus on other genres.\nIn the city of Sousse, the Carnival of Awussu is an annual festive and cultural event that unfolds each 24 July. It is a parade of symbolic chariots, fanfares and folk groups from Tunisia and elsewhere which takes place near the beach of Boujaafar, at the eve of the beginning of \"'Awussu\" (The word designating the heat wave of the month of August according to the Berber calendar). Originally it was a Pagan feast (Neptunalia) celebrating the god of the seas, Neptune in the Roman province of Africa, and might even go back to Phoenician times : the appellation Awussu is a possible deformation of Oceanus.\nOmek Tannou is an ancient Tunisian rainmaking festival which was inherited from Punic and Berber traditions involving invocations of the goddess Tanit. It features the ritual use of the sculpted head of a woman (somewhat resembling the head of a girl's doll), which is carried in procession between the houses of a village during periods of drought by children singing the refrain (transliteration: \"amk \u1e6dangu ya nsa\u02be tlbt rbi \u02bfalshta'a\"), \"Amek tango, o women, ask God to rain\". This song varies according to the region because the term \"shta\" designates rain only in certain urban areas. Each housewife then pours a little water on the statuette, invoking rain.\nMedia.\nThe TV media has long remained under the domination of the Establishment of the Broadcasting Authority Tunisia (ERTT) and its predecessor, the Tunisian Radio and Television, founded in 1957. On 7 November 2006, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali announced the demerger of the business into two separate companies, which became effective on 31 August 2007. Until then, ERTT managed all public television stations (T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Tunisienne 1 as well as T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Tunisienne 2 which had replaced the defunct RTT 2) and four national radio stations (Radio Tunis, Tunisia Radio Culture, Youth and RTCI) and five regional stations in Sfax, Monastir, Gafsa, Le Kef and Tataouine. Most programs are in Arabic, but some are in French. Growth in private sector radio and television broadcasting has seen the creation of numerous operations including Radio Mosaique FM, Jawhara FM, Zaytuna FM, Hannibal TV, Ettounsiya TV, and Nessma TV.\nIn 2007, some 245 newspapers and magazines (compared to only 91 in 1987) are 90% owned by private groups and independents. The Tunisian political parties have the right to publish their own newspapers, but those of the opposition parties have very limited editions (like Al Mawkif or Mouwatinoun). Before the recent democratic transition, although freedom of the press was formally guaranteed by the constitution, almost all newspapers have in practice followed the government line report. Critical approach to the activities of the president, government and the Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (then in power) were suppressed. In essence, the media was dominated by state authorities through the Agence Tunis Afrique Presse. This has changed since, as the media censorship by the authorities have been largely abolished, and self-censorship has significantly decreased. Nonetheless, the current regulatory framework and social and political culture mean that the future of press and media freedom is still unclear. In September 2022 Tunisian president Kais Saied signed Decree Law 54, which purported to combat \"false information and rumours\" on the Internet. Article 24 of the decree gives up to five years imprisonment and a fine of up to 50,000 dinar for anyone found to be spreading such information. This is doubled if the offending statement is made about a state official.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Tunisia. The Tunisia national football team, also known as \"The Eagles of Carthage\", won the 2004 African Cup of Nations (ACN) as hosts. They also represented Africa in the 2005 FIFA Cup of Confederations, which was held in Germany, but they could not go beyond the first round.\nTheir premier football league is the Tunisian Ligue Professionnelle 1. The main clubs are Esp\u00e9rance Sportive de Tunis, \u00c9toile Sportive du Sahel, Club Africain, Club Sportif Sfaxien, Union Sportive Monastirienne, Stade Tunisien, and CA Bizertin.\nThe Tunisia men's national handball team has participated in several handball world championships. In 2005, Tunisia came fourth. The national league consists of about 12 teams, with Club Africain and Esp\u00e9rance dominating. The most famous Tunisian handball player is Wissem Hmam. In the 2005 Handball Championship in Tunis, Wissem Hmam was ranked as the top scorer of the tournament. The Tunisian national handball team won the African Cup ten times, being the team dominating this competition. The Tunisians won the 2018 African Cup in Gabon by defeating Egypt.\nTunisia's national basketball team has emerged as a top side in Africa. The team won the 2011 Afrobasket and hosted Africa's top basketball event in 1965, 1987 and 2015. Tunisia was one of the continent's pioneers in basketball as it established one of Africa's first competitive leagues.\nIn boxing, Victor \"Young\" Perez was world champion in the flyweight weight class in 1931 and 1932.\nIn the 2008 Summer Olympics, Tunisian Oussama Mellouli won a gold medal in 1500 meter freestyle. In the 2012 Summer Olympics, he won a bronze medal in the 1500 meter freestyle and a gold medal in the men's marathon swim at a distance of 10 kilometers.\nIn 2012, Tunisia participated for the seventh time in its history in the Summer Paralympic Games. Their national team finished the competition with 19 medals; 9 golds, 5 silvers and 5 bronzes. Tunisia was classified 14th on the Paralympics medal table and 5th in Athletics.\nThroughout the years 2021 to 2023, tennis saw a spike of popularity in Tunisia and other Arabic countries as tennis player Ons Jabeur rapidly moved up the rankings reaching a career high ranking of number 3, and making 3 grand slam finals, including 2 at Wimbledon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30197", "revid": "50922132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30197", "title": "Foreign relations of Tunisia", "text": " \nFormer President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali has maintained Tunisia's long-time policy of seeking good relations with the West, while playing an active role in Arab and African regional bodies. President Habib Bourguiba took a nonaligned stance but emphasized close relations with Europe, Pakistan, and the United States.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Tunisia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAsia.\nTunisia has long been a voice for moderation and realism in the Middle East. Tunisia served as the headquarters of the Arab League from 1979 to 1990 and hosted the Palestine Liberation Organization's (PLO) headquarters from 1982 to 1993, when the PLO Executive Committee relocated to Jericho and the Palestinian Authority was established after the signing of the Oslo Accords. The PLO Political Department remains in Tunis.\nTunisia consistently has played a moderating role in the negotiations for a comprehensive Middle East peace. In 1993, Tunisia was the first Arab country to host an official Israeli delegation as part of the Middle East peace process and maintained an Interests Section until the outbreak in 2000 of the Intifada. Israeli citizens of Tunisian descent may travel to Tunisia on their Israeli passports.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30198", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30198", "title": "Turkey/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "30199", "revid": "40071767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30199", "title": "Geography of Turkey", "text": " \nThe Anatolian side of Turkey is the largest portion in the country that bridges southeastern Europe and west Asia. East Thrace, the European portion of Turkey comprises 3% of the landmass but over 15% of the population. East Thrace is separated from Asia Minor, the Asian portion of Turkey, by the Bosporus, the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles. \u0130skilip, \u00c7orum province, is considered to be the geographical center of Earth. Turkey is very vulnerable to earthquakes. \nExternal boundaries.\nTurkey, surrounded by water on three sides, has well-defined natural borders with its eight neighbors.\nTurkey\u2019s frontiers with Greece\u2014206 kilometers\u2014and Bulgaria\u2014240 kilometers\u2014 were settled by the Treaty of Constantinople (1913) and later confirmed by the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923.\nThe 1921 treaties of Moscow and Kars with the Soviet Union defines Turkey\u2019s current borders with Armenia (268 kilometers), Azerbaijan (9 kilometers), and Georgia (252 kilometers). The 499-kilometer Iranian border was first settled by the 1639 Treaty of Kasr-\u0131 \u015eirin and confirmed in 1937.\nWith the exception of Mosul, Turkey ceded the territories of the present-day Iraq and Syria with the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923. In 1926, Turkey ceded Mosul to the United Kingdom in exchange for 10% the oil revenues from Mosul for 25 years. Syria\u2019s border with Turkey changed with the 1939 transfer of Hatay Province, following a referendum that favored union with Turkey.\nMain articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRegions.\nThe First Geography Congress, held in Ankara between 6\u201321 June 1941, divided Turkey into seven regions after long discussions and work. These geographical regions were separated according to their climate, location, flora and fauna, human habitat, agricultural diversities, transportation, topography, etc. At the end, 4 coastal regions and 3 inner regions were named according to their proximity to the four seas surrounding Turkey, and their positions in Anatolia.\nTurkey has a diverse terrain: the plains of Anatolia, and forests of the Black Sea, semi-arid lands, natural lakes and the coastlines of the Aegean and Mediterranean. The Anatolian plain is separated from the Black Sea by the Pontic Mountains, converging with the Taurus Mountains in the Northeast of the country where Mount Ararat is located. The full territory of Turkey is 783,356 square kilometers (756,688 of those in Anatolia, and 23,764 in European Thrace).\nBlack Sea region.\nThe physical geography of the Black Sea region landscapes is characterized by the mountain range forming a barrier parallel with the Black Sea Coast and high humidity and precipitation. The eastern Black Sea region presents alpine landscapes with steep and densely forested slopes. Steep slopes, as a morphological feature, occur both under the sea, and in the mountain ranges, with the sea floor at below 2000\u00a0m along a line from Trabzon to the Turkish\u2013Georgian border, and the mountains quickly reaching over 3000\u00a0m, with a maximum of 3971\u00a0m in Ka\u00e7kar Peak. The parallel valleys running north to the Black Sea used to be isolated from one another until a few decades ago because the densely forested ridges made transportation and exchange very difficult. This allowed for the development of a strong cultural identity\u2014 the Laz language, music and dance\u2014linked to this specific geographic context.\nFrom west to east, the main rivers of the region are the Sakarya (824\u00a0km), the K\u0131z\u0131l\u0131rmak River (1355\u00a0km, the longest river of Turkey), the Ye\u015fil\u0131rmak (418\u00a0km) and the \u00c7oruh (376\u00a0km).\nYear-round high precipitation\u2014up to 2200mm\u2014generate dense forests, with oak, beech family trees, hazel (Corylus avellana), hornbeam (Carpinus betulus) and sweet chesnut (Castanea sativa) prevailing.\nIsolated from one another because of steep valleys, the Black Sea region includes 850 plant taxa of which 116 is endemic to the area, and of which 12 are endangered and 19 vulnerable. Hazelnut is a native species for this region, which covers 70 and 82% of the world's production and exports respectively.\nThe Ka\u00e7kar Range at altitudes of 3000\u00a0m and above is heavily glaciated owing to the suitable geomorphological- climatological conditions during the Pleistocene.\nMarmara region.\nThe European portion of Turkey consists mainly of rolling plateau country well suited to agriculture.\nDensely populated, this area includes the cities of Istanbul and Edirne. The Bosphorus, which links the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea, is about twenty-five kilometers long and averages 1.5 kilometers in width but narrows in places to less than 1,000 meters. There are two suspension bridges over the Bosphorus, both its Asian and European banks rise steeply from the water and form a succession of cliffs, coves, and nearly landlocked bays. Most of the shores are densely wooded and are marked by numerous small towns and villages. The Dardanelles (ancient Hellespont) strait, which links the Sea of Marmara (ancient Propontis) and the Aegean Sea, is approximately forty kilometers long and increases in width toward the south. Unlike the Bosphorus, the Dardanelles has fewer settlements along its shores. The Saros Bay is located near the Gallipoli peninsula and is disliked because of dirty beaches. It is a favourite spot among scuba divers for the richness of its underwater fauna and is becoming increasingly popular due to its vicinity to Istanbul.\nThe most important valleys are the Kocaeli Valley, the Bursa Ovas\u0131 (Bursa Basin), and the Plains of Troy (historically known as the Troad). The valley lowlands around Bursa is densely populated.\nAegean region.\nLocated on the western side of Anatolia, the Aegean region has fertile soil and a typically Mediterranean climate; with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers. The broad, cultivated valley lowlands contain about half of the country's richest farmlands.\nThe largest city in the Aegean region of Turkey is \u0130zmir, which is also the country's third-largest city and a major manufacturing center; as well as its second-largest port after Istanbul.\nOlive and olive oil production is particularly important for the economy of the region. The seaside town of Ayval\u0131k and numerous towns in the provinces of Bal\u0131kesir, \u0130zmir and Ayd\u0131n are particularly famous for their olive oil and related products; such as soap and cosmetics.\nThe region also has many important centers of tourism which are known both for their historic monuments and for the beauty of their beaches; such as Assos, Ayval\u0131k, Bergama, Fo\u00e7a, \u0130zmir, \u00c7e\u015fme, Sardis, Ephesus, Ku\u015fadas\u0131, Didim, Miletus, Bodrum, Marmaris, Dat\u00e7a and Fethiye.\nMediterranean region.\nToward the east, the extensive Cilician Plain, around Adana, Turkey's fifth most populous city, consist largely of reclaimed flood lands. In general, rivers have not cut valleys to the sea in the western part of the region. Historically, movement inland from the western Mediterranean coast was difficult. East of Adana, much of the coastal plain has limestone features such as collapsed caverns and sinkholes. Between Adana and Antalya, the Taurus Mountains rise sharply from the coast to high elevations. Other than Adana, Antalya, and Mersin, the Mediterranean coast has few major cities, although it has numerous farming villages.\nParalleling the Mediterranean coast, the Taurus Mountains () are Turkey's second chain of folded mountains. The range rises just inland from the coast and trends generally in an easterly direction until it reaches the Arabian Platform, where it arcs around the northern side of the platform. The Taurus Mountains are more rugged and less dissected by rivers than the Pontic Mountains and historically have served as a barrier to human movement inland from the Mediterranean coast except where there are mountain passes such as the historic Cilician Gates (G\u00fclek Pass), northwest of Adana.\nCentral Anatolia region.\nStretching inland from the Aegean coastal plain, the Central Anatolia region occupies the area between the two zones of the folded mountains, extending east to the point where the two ranges converge. The plateau-like, semi-arid highlands of Anatolia are considered the heartland of the country. The region varies in elevation from 700 to 2000 meters from west to east. Mount Erciyes is the peak at 3916 meters. The two largest basins on the plateau are the \"Konya Ovas\u0131\" and the basin occupied by the large salt lake, Tuz G\u00f6l\u00fc. Both basins are characterized by inland drainage. Wooded areas are confined to the northwest and northeast of the plateau. Rain-fed cultivation is widespread, with wheat being the principal crop. Irrigated agriculture is restricted to the areas surrounding rivers and wherever sufficient underground water is available. Important irrigated crops include barley, corn, cotton, various fruits, grapes, opium poppies, sugar beets, roses, and tobacco. There also is extensive grazing throughout the plateau.\nCentral Anatolia receives little annual rainfall. For instance, the semi-arid center of the plateau receives an average yearly precipitation of only 300 millimeters. However, actual rainfall from year to year is irregular and occasionally may be less than 200 millimeters, leading to severe reductions in crop yields for both rain-fed and irrigated agriculture. In years of low rainfall, stock losses also can be high. Overgrazing has contributed to soil erosion on the plateau. During the summers, frequent dust storms blow a fine yellow powder across the plateau. Locusts occasionally ravage the eastern area in April and May. In general, the plateau experiences moderate heat, with almost no rainfall in summer and cold weather with heavy snow in winter.\nFrequently interspersed throughout the folded mountains, and also situated on the Anatolian Plateau, are well-defined basins, which the Turks call \"ova\". Some are no more than a widening of a stream valley; others, such as the \"Konya Ovas\u0131\", are large basins of inland drainage or are the result of limestone erosion. Most of the basins take their names from cities or towns located at their rims. Where a lake has formed within the basin, the water body is usually saline as a result of the internal drainage\u2014the water has no outlet to the sea.\nEastern Anatolia region.\nEastern Anatolia, where the Pontic and Anti-Taurus mountain ranges converge, is rugged country with higher elevations, a more severe climate, and greater precipitation than are found on the Anatolian Plateau. The western part of the Eastern Anatolia region is known as the Anti-Taurus, where the average elevation of mountain peaks exceed 3,000 meters; while the eastern part of the region was historically known as the Armenian Highland and includes Mount Ararat, the highest point in Turkey at 5,137 meters. Many of the East Anatolian peaks apparently are recently extinct volcanoes, to judge from extensive green lava flows. Turkey's largest lake, Lake Van, is situated in the mountains at an elevation of 1,546 meters. The headwaters of three major rivers arise in the Anti-Taurus: the east-flowing Aras, which pours into the Caspian Sea; the south-flowing Euphrates; and the south-flowing Tigris, which eventually joins the Euphrates in Iraq before emptying into the Persian Gulf. Several small streams that empty into the Black Sea or landlocked Lake Van also originate in these mountains.\nIn addition to its rugged mountains, the area is known for severe winters with heavy snowfalls. The few valleys and plains in these mountains tend to be fertile and to support diverse agriculture. The main basin is the Mu\u015f Valley, west of Lake Van. Narrow valleys also lie at the foot of the lofty peaks along river corridors.\nSoutheastern Anatolia region.\nSoutheast Anatolia is south of the Anti-Taurus Mountains. It is a region of rolling hills and a broad plateau surface that extends into Syria. Elevations decrease gradually, from about 800 meters in the north to about 500 meters in the south. Traditionally, wheat and barley were the main crops of the region, but the inauguration of major new irrigation projects in the 1980s has led to greater agricultural diversity and development.\nClimate.\nTurkey's diverse regions have different climates, with the weather system on the coasts contrasting with that prevailing in the interior. The Aegean and Mediterranean coasts have cool, rainy winters and hot, moderately dry summers. Annual precipitation in those areas varies from , depending on location. The Black Sea coast receives the greatest amount of precipitation and is the only region of Turkey that receives high precipitation throughout the year. The eastern part of that coast averages annually which is the highest precipitation in the country.\nMountains close to the coast prevent Mediterranean influences from extending inland, giving the interior of Turkey a continental climate with distinct seasons. The Anatolian Plateau is much more subject to extremes than are the coastal areas. Winters on the plateau are especially severe. Temperatures of can occur in the mountainous areas in the east, and snow may lie on the ground 120 days of the year. In the west, winter temperatures average below . Summers are hot and dry, with temperatures above . Annual precipitation averages about , with actual amounts determined by elevation. The driest regions are the Konya Ovasi and the Malatya Ovasi, where annual rainfall frequently is less than . May is generally the wettest month and July and August the driest.\nThe climate of the Anti-Taurus Mountain region of eastern Turkey can be inhospitable. Summers tend to be hot and extremely dry. Winters are bitterly cold with frequent, heavy snowfall. Villages can be isolated for several days during winter storms. Spring and autumn are generally mild, but during both seasons sudden hot and cold spells frequently occur.\nNatural hazards.\nVery severe earthquakes, especially on the North Anatolian Fault and East Anatolian Fault, occur along an arc extending from the Sea of Marmara in the west to Lake Van in the east. On August 17, 1999, a 7.4-magnitude earthquake struck northwestern Turkey, killing more than 17,000 and injuring 44,000.\nCurrent issues.\nWater pollution from dumping of chemicals and detergents; air pollution, particularly in urban areas; deforestation; concern for oil spills from increasing Bosphorus ship traffic.\nRatified international agreements.\nAir Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Paris Agreement, Ship Pollution, Wetlands.\nSigned but unratified international agreements.\nEnvironmental Modification, Kigali Amendment\nHydrography.\nThe Lakes region contains some of the largest lakes in Turkey, such as Lake Bey\u015fehir, Lake E\u011firdir, Lake Burdur, Lake Ak\u015fehir, Lake Eber and Lake I\u015f\u0131kl\u0131. Lake Tuz, Lake Akdo\u011fan, Lake Nemrut, Lake \u00c7\u0131ld\u0131r, Lake \u0130znik, Lake Uluabat, Lake Manyas, Lake Sapanca, Lake Salda, Lake Meke and Lake Uzung\u00f6l are among other renowned lakes in Turkey. The rocks along the shoreline of Lake Salda were formed over time by microbes; these so-called microbialites provide some of the oldest known fossilized records of life. Studying these microbial fossils from Lake Salda has helped scientists prepare for NASA's Mars 2020 mission. In 2021, NASA reported that its Mars surface-exploring rover Perseverance showed that \"the minerals and rock deposits at Lake Salda are the nearest match on Earth to those around the Jezero Crater where the spacecraft landed.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30200", "revid": "51068939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30200", "title": "Demographics of Turkey", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Turkey include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. As of 2025,[ [update]] the population of Turkey was over 85.8 million with an annual growth rate of 0.36%. This official population number excludes the registered Syrian refugees under temporary protection status which have a population of about 2.6 million as of the date.\nTurks are the largest ethnic group, comprising 70\u201375% of the population while Kurds are the second largest with 19%. The others, including Armenians, Arabs, Assyrians, Albanians, Bulgarians, Bosniaks, Circassians, Chechens, Georgians, Greeks, Pomaks, Rum, Russians, Romani, Jews, Laz people and others make 6\u201311% of the population according to a 2016 estimate by the CIA.\nThe population has been aging in recent years, with just 20.6% falling in the 0\u201314 age bracket (down from 26.4% in 2007). The population over the age of 65 is 11.0% (up from 7.1% in 2007). As of 2024,[ [update]] the median age of the Turkish population is 34.4 years (up from 28.3 in 2007). According to OECD/World Bank population statistics, from 1990 to 2008 the population growth in Turkey was 16 million or 29%.\nPopulation.\nHistorical population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population\nStructure of the population (20.10.1935):\nStructure of the population (20.10.1940):\nStructure of the population (22.10.1945):\nStructure of the population (22.10.1950):\nStructure of the population (23.10.1955):\nStructure of the population (23.10.1960):\nStructure of the population (24.10.1965):\nStructure of the population (25.10.1970):\nStructure of the population (26.10.1975):\nStructure of the population (12.10.1980):\nStructure of the population (20.10.1985):\nStructure of the population (21.10.1990):\nStructure of the population (22.10.2000):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2007):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2008):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2009):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2010):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2011):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2012):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2013):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2014):\n \nStructure of the population (31.12.2015) (Data based on Address Based Population Registration System.):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2016):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2017):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2018):\nStructure of the population (31.12.2019):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (31.12.2020):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (31.12.2021):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (31.12.2022):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (31.12.2023):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (31.12.2024):\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nCurrent vital statistics.\nBirth statistics of Turkey from 2001 onward are from the Central Population Administrative System (MERNIS) database which is available online. Birth statistics are updated continually because MERNIS has dynamic structure.\nIn 2023 Turkey had a crude birth rate of 11.3 per 1000, in 2024 11.0, down from 20.3 in 2001. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2023 was 1.51 children per woman, in 2024 1.48 The crude birth rate in 2023 ranged from 8.7 per 1,000 in West Marmara (TFR 1.31) (8.3;1.72 in 2024), similar to neighbouring Bulgaria, to 19.1 per 1,000 in Southeast Anatolia (TFR 2.44) (21.7;2.69 in 2024), similar to neighbouring Syria. Similarly, in 2024, the TFR ranged from 1.12 in Bart\u0131n, to 3.28 in \u015eanl\u0131urfa. Death statistics from MERNIS are available as of 2009. Mortality data prior to 2009 are incomplete.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nTotal fertility rate by region in Turkey by Turkish General Census (GNS) and Turkish population and health research (TNSA).\nFertility rate in Turkey as per GNS (2000) for Rural, Urban and Metropolitan areas. \nUN estimates.\nThe 2018 figures from the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs:\nLife expectancy.\nby regions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nData source: Global Data Lab\nRegional data.\nBirth and death rates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Birth and Death Rate by Region and Year\nRegional births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Absolute Births and Deaths by Region and Year \nRegional natural increase.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Natural Increase by Region and Year\nRegional total fertility rate (TFR).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Total fertility rate (TFR) by province and year \nFigures from Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat):\n \nEthnicity.\nModern Turkey was founded by Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk as secular (\"Laiklik\", Turkish adaptation of French \"La\u00efcit\u00e9\"), i.e. without a state religion, or separate ethnic divisions/ identities. The concept of \"minorities\" has only been accepted by the Republic of Turkey as defined by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923) and thence strictly limited to Greeks, Jews and Armenians, only based on religious affiliation, excluding from the scope of the concept the ethnic identities of these minorities as of others such as the Kurds who make up 15% of the country; others include Assyrians of various Christian denominations, Alevis and all the others. Provisions of the Lausanne Treaty were extended to Bulgarians in Turkey by the Turkey-Bulgaria Friendship Treaty () of 18 October 1925. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Turkey), as of 2008, there were 89,000 Turkish citizens belonging to one of the three recognized minorities, two thirds of Armenian descent. On 18 June 2013, the Ankara 13th Circuit Administrative Court unanimously ruled that the Assyrians were included as beneficiaries of the Lausanne Treaty, so that Assyrians were allowed to open the first school teaching in their mother tongue.\nThe word Turk or Turkish also has a wider meaning in a historical context because, at times, especially in the past, it has been used to refer to all Muslim inhabitants of the Ottoman Empire irrespective of their ethnicity.\nAccording to the 2016 edition of the CIA World Factbook, 70\u201375% of Turkey's population consists of ethnic Turks, with Kurds accounting for 19% and other minorities between 6 and 11%.\nAccording to Milliyet, a 2008 report prepared for the National Security Council of Turkey by academics of three Turkish universities in eastern Anatolia suggested that there are approximately 55 million ethnic Turks, 9.6 million Kurds, 3 million Zazas, 2.5 million Circassians, 2 million Bosniaks, 500,000\u20131.3 million Albanians, 1,000,000 Georgians, 870,000 Arabs, 600,000 Pomaks, 80,000 Laz, 60,000 Armenians, 30,000 British, 25,000 Assyrians, 20,000 Jews, 15,000 Greeks, and 500 Yazidis living in Turkey.\nAccording to a survey published in 2022 by Konda Research, Turks make up 77% of the population, while 19% self-identify as Kurd. Arabs (Syrian refugees excluded) make up 2%, and other ethnic groups are 2% of the population.\nSince the immigration to the big cities in the west of Turkey, interethnic marriage has become more common. A recent study estimates that there are 2,708,000 marriages between Turks and Kurds.\nAccording to a survey done in March 2020 by Area Ara\u015ft\u0131rma, 20.4% of the total population of Turkey claim to be Kurdish (either Kurmanji speaking or Zazaki speaking).\nEthnolinguistic estimates in 2014 by Ethnologue and Jacques Leclerc:\nLanguages.\nNo exact data are available concerning the different ethnic groups in Turkey. The last census data according to language date from 1965 and major changes may have occurred since then. However, it is clear that the Turkish are in the majority, while the largest minority groups are Kurds and Arabs. Smaller minorities are the Armenians, Greeks and others.\nA possible list of ethnic groups living in Turkey could be as follows:\nReligion.\nTurkey has officially been a secular country since its 1924 constitution was amended in 1928. This was later strengthened and entrenched with the wider appliance of laicism by founder Atat\u00fcrk during the mid-1930s, as part of the Republican reforms.\nThere are no official statistics of people's religious beliefs nor is it asked in the census. According to the United States Department of State's International Religious Freedom Report 2008, the Turkish government considers 99 percent of the population is Muslim, the majority of which is Hanafi Sunni. A similar figure can be found in the current US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) the World Factbook (99.8%). The remaining 0.2% is other - mostly Christians and Jews. However, these are based on the existing religion information written on every citizen's national id card, that is automatically passed on from the parents to every newborn, and do not necessarily represent individual choice. Religious records can be changed or even blanked on the request of citizen, by filing an e-government application since May 2020, using a valid electronic signature to sign the electronic application. Any change in religion records additionally results in a new ID card being issued. Any change in religion record also leaves a permanent trail in the census record, however, record of change of religion is not accessible except for the citizen in question, next-of-kins of the citizen in question, the citizenship administration and courts.\nIn 2023, according to Ipsos, 83% are Muslim, 12% have no religion, 2% prefer not to say, 2% are Christian and 2% are other religions. In a similar survey in 2016, Islam comprised 82% of the total population (65% Sunni and 4% Shi'a), followed by 7% no religion, 6% Spiritual but not religious, 4% Atheism, 3% Agnosticism, 2% Christian, 1% Protestantism, 1% Buddhism, 1% Mahayana and 1% other.\nIn 2018, a poll conducted by Eurobarometer and KONDA Research and Consultancy and some other research institutes showed that 3% of those interviewed had no religion. In 2013, the same institutions showed that around 0.5% of the population had no religion.\nBetween 8 million and 20 million Turks are Alevis.\nIn 2006, in a poll conducted by Sabanc\u0131 University, 98.3% of Turks revealed they were Muslim.\nIn 2005, a Eurobarometer poll on Europeans views on ethics in science and technology reported 95% of Turkish citizens answered that \"they believe there is a God\", while about 2% responded \"I believe there is some sort of spirit or life force\", about 1% that \"they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force\" and about 1% \"DK\" (that they don't know). Similar figures were found in some other European countries.\nThere is concern over the future of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate, which suffers from a lack of trained clergy due to the closure of the Halki seminary. The state does not recognise the Ecumenical status of the Patriarch of Constantinople.\nThe percentage of non-Muslims in Turkey fell from 19.1% in 1914 to 2.5% percent in 1927. The drop was the result of the late Ottoman genocides, the population exchange between Greece and Turkey and the emigration of Christians. The 1942 Wealth Tax on non-Muslims, the emigration of many of Turkish Jews to Israel after 1948, and the 1955 Istanbul pogrom further contributed to the decline of Turkey's non-Muslim population.\nReligiosity.\nIn 2018, according to a KONDA survey, the religiosity was the following:\nAmong those aged between 15 and 29 years old:\nAccording to the 2007 KONDA survey:\nIn a 2006 Pew Research Center survey, 69% of Turkey's Muslims said that \"religion is very important in their lives\". Based on the Gallup Poll 2006\u201308, Turkey was defined as \"More religious\", in which over 63 percent of people believe religion is important.\nAround 2007, according to the Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation, 62% of women wore the headscarf or hijab in Turkey.\nHeadscarf.\nThe survey reported that 44.5% of women who lived in metropolitan areas wore the headscarf, increasing to 62.8% in towns and 74.1% in the countryside. There was also an increase in the percentage of women wearing headscarves going from west to east across the country.\nMigration.\nImmigration.\nImmigration to Turkey is the process by which people migrate to Turkey to reside in the country. After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire following Turkish War of Independence, and The 1923 Population exchange between Greece and Turkey, exodus by the large portion of Turkish (Turkic) and Muslim peoples from the Balkans (Balkan Turks, Albanians, Bosniaks, Pomaks), Caucasus (Abkhazians, Ajarians, Circassians, Chechens, Lezgins), Crimea (Crimean Tatar diaspora), and Crete (Cretan Turks) took refuge in present-day Turkey and moulded the country's fundamental features. Trends of immigration towards Turkey continue to this day, although the motives are more varied and are usually in line with the patterns of global immigration movements \u2014 Turkey, for example, receives many economic migrants from nearby countries such as Armenia, Moldova, Georgia, Iran, and Azerbaijan, but also from Central Asia, Ukraine and Russia. Turkey's migrant crisis during the 2010s saw high numbers of people arriving in Turkey, particularly those fleeing the Syrian civil war.\nAs of August 2024, the number of refugees of the Syrian civil war in Turkey was estimated to be 3,097,660 people. The number of Syrians had decreased by 321,118 people in 2023. In 2022, nearly 100,000 Russian citizens migrated to Turkey, becoming the first in the list of foreigners who moved to Turkey, meaning an increase of more than 218% from 2021.\nIn order to obtain Turkish citizenship there is a range of legal grounds, which can include: reunification with their family, marriage to a Turkish citizen, for the purchase of real estate worth $400,000 from a Turkish citizen or company. The minimum investment amount was increased in May 2022, previously it was enough to invest $250,000. Also the basis is to work in Turkey, training, business, medical treatment, refugee status.\nPopulation in Turkey by country of citizenship by the end of each years:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30201", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30201", "title": "Politics of Turkey", "text": "Political system of Turkey\nThe politics of Turkey take place in the framework of a constitutional republic and presidential system, with various levels and branches of power.\nTurkey's political system is based on a separation of powers. Executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers, which is appointed and headed by the President, who serves as country's head of state and head of government. Legislative power is vested in the Grand National Assembly. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Its current constitution was adopted on 7 November 1982 after a constitutional referendum.\nMajor constitutional revisions were passed by the National Assembly on 21 January 2017 and approved by referendum on 16 April 2017. The reforms, among other measures, abolished the position of Prime Minister and designated the President as both head of state and government, effectively transforming Turkey from a parliamentary regime into a presidential one.\nSuffrage is universal for citizens 18 years of age and older.\nNational government.\nTurkey is a presidential representative democracy and a constitutional republic within a pluriform multi-party system, in which the president (the head of state and head of government), parliament, and judiciary share powers reserved to the national government.\nThe government is divided into three branches, as per the specific terms articulated in part three of the Turkish Constitution:\nLegislative power is invested in the 600-seat Grand National Assembly of Turkey (\"T\u00fcrkiye B\u00fcy\u00fck Millet Meclisi\"), representing 81 provinces. The members are elected for a five-year term by mitigated proportional representation with an election threshold of 7%. To be represented in Parliament, a party must win at least 7% of the national vote in a national parliamentary election. Independent candidates may run, and to be elected, they must only win enough to get one seat.\nThe freedom and independence of the judicial system is protected within the constitution. There is no organization, person, or institution which can interfere in the running of the courts, and the executive and legislative structures must obey the courts' decisions. The courts, which are independent in discharging their duties, must explain each ruling on the basis of the provisions of the Constitution, the laws, jurisprudence, and their personal convictions.\nThe Judicial system is highly structured. Turkish courts have no jury system; judges render decisions after establishing the facts in each case based on evidence presented by lawyers and prosecutors. For minor civil complaints and offenses, justices of the peace take the case. This court has a single judge. It has jurisdiction over misdemeanors and petty crimes, with penalties ranging from small fines to brief prison sentences. Three-judge courts of first instance have jurisdiction over major civil suits and serious crimes. Any conviction in a criminal case can be taken to a court of Appeals for judicial review.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe political system of Turkey is highly centralized. However, as a member state of the Council of Europe, Turkey is under an obligation to implement the European Charter of Local Self-Government. In its 2011 report, the \"Monitoring Committee\" of the Council of Europe found fundamental deficits in implementation, in particular administrative tutelage and prohibition of the use of languages other than Turkish in the provision of public services.\nPolitical principles of importance in Turkey.\nThe Turkish Constitution is cumulatively built on the following principles:\nMost mainstream political parties are alternatively built either on the following principles:\nOther political ideas have also influenced Turkish politics and modern history. Of particular importance are:\nThese principles are the continuum around which various \u2013 and often rapidly changing \u2013 political parties and groups have campaigned (and sometimes fought). On a superficial level, the importance which state officials attach to these principles and their posts can be seen in their response to breaches of protocol in official ceremonies.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nPolitical parties.\nAfter World War II, Turkey started operating under a multi-party system. \nOn the center right to right side of the Turkish political spectrum, these parties have had large majorities:\nSome other parties that have had similar politics but never had large majorities are:\nTurkish right-wing parties are more likely to embrace principles of political ideologies such as conservatism, nationalism or Islamism.\nOn the far-right, there have been nationalist parties and Islamist parties:\nOn the center-left to left side of the spectrum, parties like Republican People's Party (CHP), Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP) and Democratic Left Party (DSP) once enjoyed the largest electoral success. Left-wing parties are more likely to embrace principles of social democracy, Kemalism or secularism.\nOn the far-left side, socialist and communist parties tend not to get large votes, but parties like the Workers' Party of Turkey (and the party with the same name founded in 2017) have been able to get elected representatives in the parliament.\nElections.\nElections in Turkey are held for six functions of government: presidential elections (national), parliamentary elections (national), municipality mayors (local), district mayors (local), provincial or municipal council members (local) and muhtars (local).\nApart from elections, referendums are also held occasionally. To put forward a referendum regarding constitutional amendments, a supermajority (three fifths of the votes) in the parliament is required first. These kinds of referendums are binding.\nIn May 2023, President Erdogan won a new re-election and his AK Party with its allies held parliamentary majority in the general election.\nSuffrage.\nEvery Turkish citizen who has turned 18 has the right to vote and stand as a candidate at elections. Universal suffrage for both sexes has been applied throughout Turkey since 1934.\nAccording to the Constitution of the Ottoman Empire (1876), the age of candidacy was 30 and the voting age was 25. In the newly established Republic of Turkey, the voting age was reduced to 18 due to the decreasing population, and the age of candidacy was still 30. The voting age was increased to 22 in 1934, decreased to 21 in 1987, and 18 in 1995.\nThe age of candidacy dropped from 30 to 25 through a constitutional amendment in 2006. Following the 2017 constitutional referendum, it was further lowered to 18.\nFinancing.\nPolitical parties can use donations, dues, real estate income and income from party activities to continue their activities. Since 1965, the Treasury also gives money to political parties. According to the law, parties that participated in the last parliamentary elections and that passed the general threshold are paid 0.04% of the general budget revenues each year. Apart from this, the parties that received more than 3 percent of the votes despite being below the threshold are also given public funding in proportion of support. This amount triples in election years.\nPolitical parties can't receive aid or donations in kind or in cash from foreign states, international organizations and entities not of Turkish nationality. The same rule applies for candidates in presidential elections. \nAnonymous donations to political parties are also not allowed. It should be clearly stated in the receipt given by the party that the donation belong to the donor or the donor's authorized representative or attorney. Donations by political parties cannot be accepted without relying on such a document. Donations from domestic corporations with (partial) government ownership are also not allowed.\nAccording to article 74 of the Political Parties Law, the financial control of political parties is carried out by the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court supervises the compliance of the property acquisitions, income and expenses of political parties with the Law. Presidents of political parties are obliged to submit a certified copy of the final account and the final accounts of the local organizations, including the party headquarters and its affiliated districts, to the Constitutional Court and to the Office of the Chief Public Prosecutor of the Supreme Court for information, until the end of June.\nMilitary involvement in politics.\nSince Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk founded the modern secular Republic of Turkey in 1923, the Turkish military has perceived itself as the guardian of Kemalism, the official state ideology. The TAF still maintains an important degree of influence over Turkish politics and the decision-making process regarding issues related to Turkish national security, albeit decreased in the past decades, via the National Security Council.\nThe military has had a record of intervening in politics. Indeed, it assumed power for several periods in the latter half of the 20th century. It executed coups d'\u00e9tat in 1960, in 1971, and in 1980. In 1997, it maneuvered the removal of an Islamic-oriented prime minister, Necmettin Erbakan. The military continued to effect politics throughout the first two decades of the 21st century, publishing an e-memorandum in 2007, and attempting a coup in 2016.\nOn 27 April 2007, in advance of 4 November 2007 presidential election, and in reaction to the politics of Abdullah G\u00fcl, who has a past record of involvement in Islamist political movements and banned Islamist parties such as the Welfare Party, the army issued a statement of its interests. It said that the army is a party to \"arguments\" regarding secularism; that Islamism ran counter to the secular nature of the Turkish Republic, and to the legacy of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk. The Army's statement ended with a clear warning that the Turkish Armed Forces stood ready to intervene if the secular nature of the Turkish Constitution is compromised, stating that \"the Turkish Armed Forces maintain their sound determination to carry out their duties stemming from laws to protect the unchangeable characteristics of the Republic of Turkey. Their loyalty to this determination is absolute.\"\nThe Turkish populace is not uniformly averse to coups; many welcome the ejection of governments they perceive as unconstitutional. Members of the military must also comply with the traditions of secularism, according to the US Commission on International Religious Freedom report in 2008, members who performed prayers or had wives who wore the headscarf, have been charged with \"lack of discipline\".\nParadoxically, the military has both been an important force in Turkey's continuous Westernization but at the same time also represents an obstacle for Turkey's desire to join the EU. At the same time, the military enjoys a high degree of popular legitimacy, with continuous opinion polls suggesting that the military is the state institution that the Turkish people trust the most.\nOn 15 July 2016, factions within the Turkish Military attempted to overthrow President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan, citing growing non-secularism and censorship as motivation for the attempted coup. The coup was blamed on the influence of the vast network led by U.S.-based Muslim cleric Fethullah G\u00fclen. In the aftermath of the failed coup, major purges have occurred, including that of military officials, police officers, judges, governors and civil servants. There has also been significant media purge in the aftermath of the failed coup. There has been allegations of torture in connection with these purges.\nOmbudsman.\nIn 2012 the position of ombudsman was created, due to the ratification of the 2010 referendum. The ombudsman is charged with solving, without the need to a recourse before the courts, the disagreements between citizens and the administrations and other entities charged with a mission of a public service proposing reforms to the Government and the administrations to further these goals; and actively participating in the international promotion of human rights. The institution is independent of the government and answers to the Parliament alone.\nThe ombudsman is elected for a period of 4 years by the Parliament.\nForeign relations.\nThroughout the Cold War, Turkey's most important ally has been the United States, which shared Turkey's interest in containing Soviet expansion. In support of the United States, Turkey contributed personnel to the UN forces in the Korean War (1950\u20131953), joined NATO in 1952, recognized Israel in 1948 and has cooperated closely with it.\nTurkey's relations with Israel.\nTurkey's alliance with Israel during the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict strained its relations with the Arab world and Iran, and subsequently led to overt Syrian support for Palestinian and Armenian terrorist operations against Turkish diplomats abroad until 1990.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30202", "revid": "26757177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30202", "title": "Economy of Turkey", "text": "Turkey has an emerging free-market economy. It ranked as the 16th-largest in the world and 7th-largest in Europe by nominal GDP in 2025. It also ranked as the 11th-largest in the world and 5th-largest in Europe by PPP in 2025. Turkey's rapid economic growth since the 2000s was stranded by the economic crisis in 2018, but it began to recover in 2021. Turkey's USD-based nominal GDP per capita and GDP-PPP per capita have eventually reached their all-time peak values in 2024.\nTurkey is a founding member of the OECD and G20. Ratified in 1995, the European Union\u2013Turkey Customs Union has established a free trade area between Turkey and the European Union, which has increased bilateral foreign trade, investment and economic activity.\nAs the fourth-most-visited destination in the world, Turkey has a large tourism industry, which accounted for 12% of the country's total GDP in 2023. First established in 2000, many technoparks were pioneered by Turkish universities, now hosting over 1,600 R&amp;D centers that drew investment by both domestic and international corporations. Turkey is also among the world's leading producers of motor vehicles, consumer electronics, home appliances and defense products. In 2021, the country was ranked eighth in the world in the technology rankings of the Economic Complexity Index.\nIn the first quarter of the 21st century, there have been major developments in the financial and social aspects of Turkey's economy, such as increases in employment and average income since 2000. A period of strong economic growth between 2002 and 2013 (except for 2009 due to the 2008 financial crisis) was followed by a period of stagnation and recession in terms of USD-based nominal GDP figures between 2014 and 2020, especially during the 2018 Turkish currency and debt crisis; even though Turkey's USD-based GDP-PPP and TL-based nominal GDP have continued to grow in this period. Since 2021, there has been a steady recovery and rapid growth in Turkey's USD-based nominal GDP and GDP-PPP figures, which have reached their all-time highest values in both 2023 and 2024.\nGrowth-focused and populist financial policies, such as the preference to keep interest rates as low as possible (dubbed \"Erdoganomics\") have led to one of the world's highest inflation rates since 2018. Following the Turkish parliamentary and presidential elections in 2023, and the appointment of Mehmet \u015eim\u015fek as the Minister of Treasury and Finance, Turkey has adopted a more orthodox monetary policy regarding interest rates and has succeeded in gradually decreasing inflation from 86% in late 2022 to 42% in early 2025. Right to Clean Air Platform estimate that the lack of a legal limit on fine particulate air pollution cost the economy 10% of GDP in 2024.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators from 1980 to 2024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2024\u20132029). Inflation below 10% is in green.\nMain economic sectors.\nAs of November 2023, there are 1,086,670 registered companies based in Turkey. The sector with the highest number of companies registered in the country is manufacturing with 241,362 companies. This is followed by wholesale trading and services with 197,476 and 187,325 companies respectively.\nIndustrial sector.\nHeavy industry is tending to move out of the EU due to Turkey's laxer pollution regulations and cheaper energy.\nConsumer electronics and home appliances.\nTurkey's Vestel is the largest TV producer in Europe, accounting for a quarter of all TV sets manufactured and sold on the continent in 2006. By January 2005, Vestel and its rival Turkish electronics and white goods brand Beko accounted for more than half of all TV sets manufactured in Europe. Another Turkish electronics brand, Profilo Telra, was Europe's third-largest TV producer in 2005.\nTextiles and clothing.\nTurkey is the world's fifth-largest exporter of textiles, accounting for 10% of the country's GDP and employing 750 000 people in 2018. Turkish companies made clothing exports worth $13.98 billion in 2006; more than $10.67 billion of which (76.33%) were exported to the European Union.\nMotor vehicles and automotive products.\nThe automotive industry in Turkey, which plays an important role in the manufacturing sector of the Turkish economy, produced 1,352,648 motor vehicles in 2022, ranking as the 13th largest producer in the world (production peaked at 1,695,731 motor vehicles in 2017, when Turkey also ranked 13th). Turkish automotive companies like TEMSA, Otokar and BMC are among the world's largest van, bus and truck manufacturers. Togg, or Turkey's Automobile Joint Venture Group Inc. is the first all-electric vehicle company of Turkey.\nThe automotive industry is an important part of the economy since the late 1960s. The companies that operate in the sector are mainly located in the Marmara Region. With a cluster of car-makers and parts suppliers, the Turkish automotive sector has become an integral part of the global network of production bases, exporting over $22.94 billion worth of motor vehicles and components in 2008.\nGlobal car manufacturers with production plants include Fiat/Tofa\u015f, Oyak-Renault, Hyundai, Toyota, Honda and Ford/Otosan. Turkish automotive companies like TEMSA, Otokar and BMC are among the world's largest van, bus and truck manufacturers. Togg is a new Turkish automotive company established in 2018 for producing EVs. Togg's factory in Gemlik, Bursa Province, was inaugurated on 29 October 2022, the 99th anniversary of the Turkish Republic.\nTurkey's annual auto exports, including trucks and buses, surpassed 1 million units for the first time in 2016 as foreign automakers' investment in new models and a recovery in its mainstay European market lifted shipments. According to the industry group Automotive Manufacturers Association (OSD), Turkey-based car plants exported 1.14 million units in 2016, up 15% from the year before. Auto exports hit a record high for the fourth straight year. Production grew 9% year on year in 2016 to 1.48 million units, setting a new record for the second consecutive year. Nearly 80% of vehicles produced in Turkey were exported.\nMultiple unit trains, locomotives and wagons.\nT\u00dcLOMSA\u015e (1894), T\u00dcVASA\u015e (1951) and EUROTEM (2006) are among the major producers of multiple unit trains, locomotives and wagons in Turkey, including high-speed EMU and DMU models.\nBozankaya is a Turkish manufacturer of rolling stock including metro, tram and trolleybus vehicles in Ankara.\nDefence industry.\nTurkey has many modern armament manufacturers. Annual exports reached $1.6 billion in 2014. MKEK, TAI, Aselsan, Roketsan, FNSS, Nurol Makina, Otokar, and Havelsan are major manufacturers. On 11 July 2002, Turkey became a Level\u00a03 partner of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) development program. TAI builds various aircraft types and models, such as the F-16 Fighting Falcon for the Turkish Air Force. Turkey has recently launched domestically built new military/intelligence satellites including a 0.8m resolution reconnaissance satellite (Project G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk-1) for use by the Turkish Armed Forces and a 2m resolution reconnaissance satellite (Project G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk-2) for use by the Turkish National Intelligence Organization.\nOther important products include the TAI TF Kaan, TF2000-class destroyer, Milgem class corvette, Baykar MIUS K\u0131z\u0131lelma UCAV, Baykar Ak\u0131nc\u0131 HALE UCAV, Baykar Bayraktar TB2 MALE UCAV, TAI Aksungur MALE UCAV, TAI Anka MALE UAV/UCAV, Aselsan \u0130zci UGV, Altay main battle tank, T-155 F\u0131rt\u0131na self-propelled howitzer, J-600T missile, T-129 attack helicopter, A400M, Roketsan UMTAS anti-tank missile, Roketsan Cirit laser-guided rocket, Panter howitzer, ACV-300, Otokar Cobra and Akrep, BMC Kirpi, FNSS Pars 6x6 and 8x8 APC, Nurol Ejder 6x6 APC, TOROS artillery rocket system, Bayraktar Mini UAV, ASELPOD, and SOM cruise missile.\nSteel-Iron industry.\nTurkey ranks 8th in the list of countries by steel production. In 2013, total steel production was 35.134 million tonnes. Turkey's crude steel production reached a record high of 34.1 million tons in 2011.\nNotable producers (above 2 million tonnes) and their ranks among top steel producing companies.\nScience and technology.\nTurkey boasts over 80 technoparks where around 6,000 national and multinational companies engage in R&amp;D activities. T\u00dcB\u0130TAK is the leading agency for developing science, technology and innovation policies in Turkey. The Turkish Academy of Sciences is an autonomous scholarly society acting to promote scientific activities in Turkey. TAEK is the official nuclear energy institution of Turkey. Its objectives include academic research in nuclear energy, and the development and implementation of peaceful nuclear tools.\nTurkish government companies for research and development in military technologies include Turkish Aerospace Industries, ASELSAN, HAVELSAN, ROKETSAN, MKE, among others. Turkish Satellite Assembly, Integration and Test Center is a spacecraft production and testing facility owned by the Ministry of National Defence and operated by the Turkish Aerospace Industries. The Turkish Space Launch System is a project to develop the satellite launch capability of Turkey. It consists of the construction of a spaceport, the development of satellite launch vehicles as well as the establishment of remote earth stations.\nConstruction and contracting sector.\nThe Turkish construction and contracting industry is made up of a large number of businesses. In 2016 a total of 39 Turkish construction and contracting companies were listed in the Top 250 International Contractors List prepared by the Engineering News-Record. From the beginning of the 1970s to the end of 2022, Turkish contractors have completed more than 11,605 projects in 133 countries. Their business volume abroad has reached 472 billion US Dollars in 2022.\nAs Turkey is prone to strong earthquakes, the buildings that were constructed before the post-1999 safety standards and regulations remain a major concern, with many ongoing urban redevelopment and reconstruction projects, especially in large cities. In 2019, an amnesty plan to register illegally constructed buildings for generating extra tax revenues to the government brought in $3.1 billion, but the plan was criticized for ignoring safety issues. The two major earthquakes on February 6, 2023, in southern Turkey have revealed that some of the recently built structures that collapsed were not constructed in accordance with the latest safety regulations.\nService sector.\nBanking and finance.\nDuring the 19th and early 20th centuries, Bankalar Caddesi (Banks Street) in Istanbul was the financial center of the Ottoman Empire, where the headquarters of the Ottoman Bank (established as the \"Bank-\u0131 Osman\u00ee\" in 1856, and later reorganized as the \"Bank-\u0131 Osman\u00ee-i \u015eahane\" in 1863) and the Ottoman Stock Exchange (1866) were located. Bankalar Caddesi continued to be Istanbul's main financial district until the 1990s, when most Turkish banks began moving their headquarters to the modern central business districts of Levent and Maslak.\nOriginally established as the Ottoman Stock Exchange (\"Dersaadet Tahvilat Borsas\u0131\") in 1866, and reorganized to its current structure at the beginning of 1986, the Istanbul Stock Exchange (ISE) is the sole securities market of Turkey. In 1995, the Istanbul Stock Exchange moved to its current building in the Istinye quarter. The Istanbul Gold Exchange was also established in 1995.\nThe Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (\"T\u00fcrkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankas\u0131\") was founded in 1930 as a privileged joint-stock company. The CBRT possesses the sole right to issue notes. It also has the obligation to provide for the monetary requirements of the state agricultural and commercial enterprises.\nThe \"New Turkish lira\" (TRY) was introduced on 1 January 2005. On 1 January 2009, the New Turkish lira was renamed once again as the \"Turkish lira\", with the introduction of new banknotes and coins.\nBanking came under stress beginning in October 2008, as a result of the 2008 financial crisis. Turkish banking authorities warned state-run banks against the pullback of loans from the larger financial sectors.\nTurkey's economy resumed its growth between 2009 and 2013, which was followed by a period of stagnation and recession between 2014 and 2020. Turkey's GDP began to recover and grow again in the period between 2020 and 2024.\nIn 2020, the total value of assets of the banking sector in Turkey amounted to more than $800 billion. As of January 2021, there were a total of 48 banks operating with 9,880 branches in Turkey and 71 branches abroad. As of October\u00a02021[ [update]], the foreign currency deposits of the citizens and residents in Turkish banks stood at $234 billion, equivalent to around half of all deposits. As of October\u00a02024[ [update]], the foreign currency reserves of the Turkish Central Bank were $85 billion, its gold reserves were $67.4 billion, while its official reserve assets stood at $159.8 billion.\nTransport.\nIn 2013 there were ninety-eight airports in Turkey, including 22 international airports. As of 2015[ [update]], Istanbul Atat\u00fcrk Airport is the 11th busiest airport in the world, serving 31,833,324 passengers between January and July 2014, according to Airports Council International. The new (third) international airport of Istanbul is planned to be the largest airport in the world, with a capacity to serve 150 million passengers per annum.\nThe state-owned utility Turkish State Railways operates the 12,740\u2013km railway network, 23rd longest in the world. Since 2003, Turkish State Railways has also been investing in high-speed rail lines, which at 2,175\u00a0km (1,353\u00a0mi) ranked ninth longest in the world.\nAs of 2010, the country had a roadway network of 426,951\u00a0km, including 2,080\u00a0km of expressways and 16,784\u00a0km of divided highways.\nAs of 2010, the Turkish merchant marine included 1,199 ships (604 registered at home), ranking 7th in the world. Turkey's coastline has 1,200\u00a0km of navigable waterways.\nIn 2008, of natural gas pipelines and of petroleum pipelines spanned the country's territory.\nCommunications.\nAs of 2008, there were 17,502,000 operational landline telephones in Turkey, which ranked 18th in the world; while there were 65,824,000 registered mobile phones in the country, which ranked 15th in the world during the same year. The largest landline telephone operator is T\u00fcrk Telekom, which also owns TTNET, the largest internet service provider in Turkey. The largest mobile phone operators in the country are Turkcell, Vodafone Turkey, Avea and TTNET Mobil.\nThe telecommunications liberalisation process started in 2004 after the creation of the Telecommunication Authority, and is still ongoing. Private sector companies operate in mobile telephony, long-distance telephony and Internet access. Additional digital exchanges are permitting a rapid increase in subscribers; the construction of a network of technologically advanced intercity trunk lines, using both fiber-optic cable and digital microwave radio relay, is facilitating communication between urban centres.\nThe remote areas of the country are reached by a domestic satellite system, while the number of subscribers to mobile-cellular telephone service is growing rapidly.\nThe main line international telephone service is provided by the SEA-ME-WE 3 submarine communications cable and by submarine fiber-optic cables in the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea that link Turkey with Italy, Greece, Israel, Bulgaria, Romania, and Russia. In 2002, there were 12 Intelsat satellite earth stations; and 328 mobile satellite terminals in the Inmarsat and Eutelsat systems.\nT\u00fcrksat A.\u015e. is the primary communications satellite operator of Turkey, controlling the Turksat series of satellites. G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk-1, G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk-2 and G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk-3 are Turkey's earth observation satellites for reconnaissance, operated by the Turkish Ministry of National Defense. BILSAT-1 and RASAT are the scientific observation satellites operated by the T\u00dcB\u0130TAK Space Technologies Research Institute, which (together with Turkish Aerospace Industries and Aselsan) also takes part in the production of Turkey's satellites.\nAs of 2001, there were 16 AM, 107 FM, and 6 shortwave radio stations in the country.\nAs of 2015, there were 42,275,017 internet users in Turkey, which ranked 15th in the world; while as of 2012, there were 7,093,000 internet hosts in the country, which ranked 16th in the world.\nTourism.\nIn 2023, Turkey was the fifth most visited destination in the world, with 55.2 million foreign tourists visiting the country. In 2019, Turkey ranked sixth in the world in terms of the number of international tourist arrivals, with 51.2 million foreign visitors.\nOver the years, Turkey has emerged as a popular tourist destination for many Europeans, competing with other Mediterranean countries such as Greece, Italy and Spain. Resorts in provinces such as Antalya and Mu\u011fla (which are located on the Turkish Riviera) have become very popular among tourists.\nMedical tourism.\nThere are numerous private hospitals in Turkey, which has benefited from medical tourism in recent years. Health tourism generated revenues worth $1 billion in 2019 for Turkey's economy. A total of 662,087 patients were treated at Turkish hospitals in 2019 within the scope of health tourism, with around 60% of the income being obtained from plastic surgeries.\nLargest companies.\nIn 2024, ten publicly traded Turkish companies were listed in the Forbes Global 2000 list \u2013 an annual ranking of the top 2000 public companies in the world by Forbes magazine. The banking industry leads with four companies in the list followed by the airline, automotive and retailer with one company each. There are also three conglomerates. As of 2024, the listed public companies were:\nLong-term GDP forecasts.\nThe following \"OECD Long Term Projections\" table was published in February 2022 for the 16 largest economies by GDP using PPP exchange rates from 2030 to 2060.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nExternal trade and investment.\nAs of 2016, the main trading partners of Turkey are the European Union, Russia, the United Kingdom, the UAE, Iraq, and China, many being top in both export as well as import. Turkey has taken advantage of a customs union with the EU, signed in 1995, to increase industrial production for exports, while benefiting from EU-origin foreign investment into the country. In addition to the European-Turkish Customs Union, the Turkish government has signed free-trade agreements with 22 countries.\nA very large aspect of Turkey trade revolves around the automotive industry, where its top exports are cars, accounting for $13.2 billion. Other top exports from the country are gold, delivery trucks, vehicle parts and jewelry, which are respectively, $6.96 billion, $5.04 billion, $4.64 billion, and $3.39 billion. These values are calculated using the 1992 revision of the Harmonized System classification. Comparatively, it imports many of the same industries, such as, gold valued at $17.1 billion, refined petroleum at $9.8 billion, cars at $8.78 billion, vehicle parts at $6.34 billion and scrap iron at $5.84 billion.\nThe construction and contracting companies, such as Enka, R\u00f6nesans Holding and Tekfen, have been significant players in the country's economy. As the Turkish emissions trading system has not yet been legislated the country has no carbon price, so large exporters to the European Union will have to pay the EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism from 1 January 2026.\nTurkey had many improvements in the ease of doing business index. Its rank increased from 68th in 2017 to 33rd in 2020. As of 2021, it was performing better than countries like the Netherlands and Belgium.\nNatural resources.\nEnergy.\nFossil fuels.\nRight to Clean Air Platform estimate that the lack of a legal limit on fine particulate air pollution cost the economy 10% of GDP in 2024.\nMinerals.\nIn 2019, the country was the world's 2nd largest producer of chromium; the largest producer of boron; 6th largest producer of antimony; 9th largest producer of lead; 13th largest producer of iron ore; 11th largest producer of molybdenum; 4th largest producer of gypsum; 15th largest producer of graphite; in addition to being the 11th largest producer of salt.\nAs a gold producer Turkey is currently ranked 22nd globally. Hosting some of the largest gold deposits on the European continent it is currently Europe's largest gold producer, producing 42 tonnes of gold in 2020. World class deposits include Kisladag Mine 17Moz and Copler 10Moz.\nEnvironment.\nAlmost all \"post-COVID\" stimulus was detrimental to the environment, with Russia being the only worse country. In the 21st century, Turkey's fossil fuel subsidies are around 0.2% of GDP, including at least US$14\u00a0billion (US$169 per person) between January 2020 and September 2021. Data on finance for fossil fuels by state-owned banks and export credit agencies is not public.\nAs of 2023 fossil gas is subsidized more than electricity - equalizing the subsidies would benefit the environment.\nEmployment.\nThe minimum wage in Turkey is \u20ba 22,104 (US$ 630.36) as of January 1, 2025.\nTurkStat estimated unemployment at 9.4% in 2023. The province with the highest unemployment rate was Hakkari at 23.3% and the province with the lowest unemployment rate was Sinop at 4.8%.\nIn 2021, trade unions complained that according to TurkStat data the unemployment rate was falling, whereas the data provided by the government's Employment Agency (\u0130\u015eKUR) showed that it was rising. Environmentalists argue that some actions to improve the environment would also benefit the economy. For example, investing in wind power in Turkey and solar power in Turkey would create jobs and is competitive with fossil fuels.\nPoverty.\nTurkey made steady progress in reducing poverty from the early 2000s to the mid-2010s, after which the trend levelled off. In 2022, social security expenditure stood at 12.4% of GDP according to OECD data.\nRegional disparities.\nAccording to Eurostat data, Turkish GDP per capita adjusted by purchasing power standards stood at 64 percent of the EU average in 2018. Istanbul has the largest GDP, while Kocaeli comes first in GDP per capita.\nThe country's wealth is mainly concentrated in the northwest and west, while the east and southeast suffer from poverty, lower economic production and higher levels of unemployment. However, in line with the rapid growth of Turkey's GDP during the first two decades of the 21st century (with brief periods of stagnation and recession), parts of Anatolia began reaching a higher economic standard. These cities are known as the Anatolian Tigers. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30204", "revid": "26757177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30204", "title": "Transport in Turkey", "text": "Transport in Turkey is road-dominated and mostly fuelled by diesel. Transport consumes a quarter of energy in Turkey, and is a major source of air pollution in Turkey and greenhouse gas emissions by Turkey. The World Health Organization has called for more active transport such as cycling. As of 2023 health impact assessment is not done in Turkey.50\nRail transport.\nRail network.\nThe TCDD \u2013 T\u00fcrkiye Devlet Demir Yollar\u0131 (Turkish State Railways) possess 13,919\u00a0km of gauge, of which 7,142\u00a0km are electrified (2024).\nThere are daily regular passenger trains all through the network. TCDD has started an investment program of building 5.000\u00a0km high-speed lines until 2023. Multiple high speed train routes are running, including: Ankara-Eski\u015fehir-\u0130stanbul, Ankara-Konya and Ankara-Sivas lines.\nThe freight transportation is mainly organized as block trains for domestic routes, since TCDD discourages under 200 to loads by surcharges.\nUrban rail.\nAfter almost 30 years without any trams, Turkey is experiencing a revival in trams. Established in 1992, the tram system of Istanbul earned the best large-scale tram management award in 2005. Another award-winning tram network belongs to Eski\u015fehir (EsTram) where a modern tram system opened in 2004. In 2010, Kayseri (Kayseray) won the \"\"Worldwide Project of the Year\" and \"Best Urban Integration Project of the Year\"\" awards for being a light rail system with nearly the entire route constructed as a green track. Several other cities are planning or constructing tram lines, with modern low-flow trams.\nBy 2014, there have been 12 cities in Turkey using railroads for transportation.\nRoad transport.\nRoad transport is responsible for much air pollution in Turkey and almost a fifth of Turkey's greenhouse gas emissions, mainly via diesel. It is one of 3 G20 countries without a fuel efficiency standard. As of 2020[ [update]] there are many old, inefficient, polluting trucks. Retiring old polluting vehicles by forcing all cars and trucks to meet tailpipe emission standards would reduce disease, especially from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. As of 2024[ [update]], the country has a roadway network of . The Eurasia Tunnel (2016) provides an undersea road connection for motor vehicles. The Bosphorus Bridge (1973), Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge (1988) and Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge (2016) are the three suspension bridges connecting the European and Asian shores of the Bosphorus strait. The Osman Gazi Bridge (2016) connects the northern and southern shores of the Gulf of \u0130zmit. The 1915 \u00c7anakkale Bridge (2022) , connects the European and Asian shores of the Dardanelles strait.\nFuel quality and emissions standards are not as good as those in the EU, and as of 2024[ [update]] about 1% of cars and almost no commercial vehicles on the road are electric.\nIn 2023 the World Bank said the government should plan and subsidize the rollout of public electric car chargers, particularly because so many people live in flats. They said that a subsidy would provide environmental and social benefits. They also said that cities should set an end date for diesel buses.\nIn the same year, according to a study by Dr. H\u00fcseyin Korkmaz of Istanbul University, Istanbul drivers lost an average of 105 hours due to traffic congestion. The research, utilizing AI to analyze data from the Turkish National Police, identified 97,354 traffic accidents in the city that year, with many occurring during peak hours on major routes. The study highlights that even minor accidents can significantly disrupt traffic flow, especially when lanes are closed. Dr. Korkmaz suggests that addressing Istanbul's traffic issues requires improved public transportation, better urban planning, and measures to control population growth and vehicle usage.\nRoad network.\nThere are three types of intercity roads in Turkey:\n\u2013 The first is the historical and free road network called State roads (\"Devlet Yollar\u0131\") that are completely under the responsibility of the General Directorate of Highways except for urban sections (like the sections falling within the inner part of ring roads of Ankara, Istanbul or \u0130zmir. Even if they mostly possess dual carriageways and interchanges, they also have some traffic lights and intersections.\n\u2013 The second type of roads are controlled-access highways that are officially named \"Otoyol\". But it isn't uncommon that people in Turkey call them \"Otoban\" (referring to Autobahn) as this types of roads entered popular culture by the means of Turks in Germany. They also depend on the General Directorate of Highways except those that are financed with a BOT model.\n\u2013 The third type of roads are provincial roads (\"Il Yollar\u0131)\" are highways of secondary importance linking districts within a province to each other , the provincial center, the districts in the neighboring provinces, the state roads, railway stations, seaports, and airports\nAs of 2023, there are 471 tunnels (total length 665\u00a0km) and 9.660 bridges (total length 739\u00a0km) on the network.\nPublic road transport.\nThere are numerous private bus companies providing connections between cities in Turkey.\nFor local trips to villages there are dolmu\u015fes, small vans that seat about twenty passengers.\nAs of 2024, number of road vehicles is around 31 million. The number of vehicles by type and use is as follows.\nMotor vehicles by year (2002-2024).\nSource\nEscooters.\nEscooter rental is available in some cities, and escooters can be used on cycle paths, and on urban roads without cycle paths where the speed limit is below 50 kph.\nCar ownership.\nAs of 2024[ [update]] about 10% of cars sold were electric, and over half the registered motor vehicles were cars - about 16.2 million - of which 5.5 million were diesel fueled, 5.2 million LPG, 4,9 million gasoline, 0.4 million hybrid, and 0.2 million electric.\nAir transport.\nIn 2013 Turkey had the tenth largest passenger air market in the world with 74,353,297 passengers. In 2013 there were 98 airports in Turkey, including 22 international airports. As of 2015[ [update]], Istanbul Atat\u00fcrk Airport is the 11th busiest airport in the world, serving 31,833,324 passengers between January and July 2014, according to Airports Council International. The new (third) international airport of Istanbul is planned to be the largest airport in the world, with a capacity to serve 150 million passengers per annum. Turkish Airlines, flag carrier of Turkey since 1933, was selected by Skytrax as Europe's best airline for five consecutive years in 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. With 435 destinations (51 domestic and 384 international) in 126 countries worldwide, Turkish Airlines is the largest carrier in the world by number of countries served as of 2016[ [update]].\nAirports.\nTotal number of Airports in Turkey: 117 (2007)\nAirports \u2013 with paved runways\n\"total:\"\n88\n\"over 3,047 m:\"\n16\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n19\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n16\n\"under 914 m:\"\n4 (2010)\nAirports \u2013 with unpaved runways\n\"total:\"\n11\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n1\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n6\n\"under 914 m:\"\n4 (2010)\nHeliports\n20 (2010)\nWater transport.\nAbout 1,200\u00a0km\nPorts and harbours.\nBlack Sea\nAegean Sea\nMediterranean Sea\nSea of Marmara\nAir pollution.\nRoad traffic is a major source of air pollution in Turkey, and Istanbul is one of the few European cities without a low emission zone.\nTransport emitted 85 megatonnes of CO2 in 2018, about one tonne per person and 16 percent of Turkey's greenhouse gas emissions. Road transport dominated transport emissions with 79 megatonnes, including agricultural vehicles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30205", "revid": "44092845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30205", "title": "Turkish Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Turkey\nThe Turkish Armed Forces (TAF; , TSK) are the military forces of the Republic of Turkey. The TAF consist of the Land Forces, the Naval Forces and the Air Forces. The Chief of the General Staff is the Commander of the Armed Forces. In wartime, the Chief of the General Staff acts as the Commander-in-Chief on behalf of the President, who represents the Supreme Military Command of the TAF on behalf of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey. Coordinating the military relations of the TAF with other NATO member states and friendly states is the responsibility of the General Staff.\nThe history of the Turkish Armed Forces began with its formation after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. The Turkish military perceived itself as the guardian of Kemalism, the official state ideology, especially of its emphasis on secularism. After becoming a member of NATO in 1952, Turkey initiated a comprehensive modernization program for its armed forces. The Turkish Army sent 14,936 troops to fight in the Korean War alongside South Korea and NATO. Towards the end of the 1980s, a second restructuring process was initiated. The Turkish Armed Forces participate in an EU Battlegroup under the control of the European Council, the Italian-Romanian-Turkish Battlegroup. The TAF also contributes operational staff to the Eurocorps multinational army corps initiative of the EU and NATO.\nThe TAF is the second largest standing military force in NATO, after the U.S. Armed Forces. Turkey is one of five NATO member states which are part of the nuclear sharing policy of the alliance, together with Belgium, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands.\nHistory.\nWar of Independence.\nThe Turkish War of Independence (19 May 1919 \u2013 24 July 1923) was a series of military campaigns waged by the Turkish National Movement after parts of the Ottoman Empire were occupied and partitioned following its defeat in World War I. These campaigns were directed against Greece in the west, Armenia in the east, France in the south, loyalists and separatists in various cities, and British and Ottoman troops around Constantinople (\u0130stanbul).\nThe ethnic demographics of the modern Turkish Republic were significantly impacted by the earlier Armenian genocide and the deportations of Greek-speaking, Orthodox Christian Rum people. The Turkish National Movement carried out massacres and deportations to eliminate native Christian populations\u00a0\u2013 a continuation of the Armenian genocide and other ethnic cleansing operations during World War I. Following these campaigns of ethnic cleansing the historic Christian presence in Anatolia was destroyed, in large part, and the Muslim demographic had increased from 80% to 98%.\nWhile World War I ended for the Ottoman Empire with the Armistice of Mudros, the Allied Powers occupied parts of the empire and sought to prosecute former members of the Committee of Union and Progress and others involved in the Armenian genocide. Ottoman military commanders therefore refused orders from both the Allies and the Ottoman government to surrender and disband their forces. This crisis reached a head when sultan Mehmed VI dispatched Mustafa Kemal Pasha (Atat\u00fcrk), a well-respected and high-ranking general, to Anatolia to restore order; however, Mustafa Kemal became an enabler and eventually leader of Turkish National Movement against the Ottoman government, Allied powers, and Christian minorities. on 3 May 1920, Birinci Ferik Mustafa Fevzi Pasha (\u00c7akmak) was appointed the Minister of National Defence, and Mirliva \u0130smet Pasha (\u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc) was appointed the Minister of the Chief of General Staff of the government of the Grand National Assembly (GNA).\nIn an attempt to establish control over the power vacuum in Anatolia, the Allies persuaded Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos to launch an expeditionary force into Anatolia and occupy Smyrna (\u0130zmir), beginning the Turkish War of Independence. A nationalist Government of the Grand National Assembly (GNA) led by Mustafa Kemal was established in Ankara when it became clear the Ottoman government was backing the Allied powers. The Allies soon pressured the Ottoman government in Constantinople into suspending the Constitution, shuttering the Parliament, and signing the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, a treaty that the \"Ankara government\" declared illegal.\nIn the ensuing war, irregular militia defeated the French forces in the south, and undemobilized units went on to partition Armenia with Bolshevik forces, resulting in the Treaty of Kars (October 1921). The Western Front of the independence war was known as the Greco-Turkish War, in which Greek forces at first encountered unorganized resistance. However \u0130smet Pasha's organization of militia into a regular army paid off when Ankara forces fought the Greeks in the First and Second Battle of \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc. The Greek army emerged victorious in the Battle of K\u00fctahya-Eski\u015fehir and decided to attack Ankara, stretching their supply lines. On 3 August 1921, the GNA fired \u0130smet Pasha from the post of Minister of National Defence because of his failure at the Battle of Afyonkarahisar\u2013Eski\u015fehir and on 5 August, just before the Battle of Sakarya, appointed the chairman of the GNA Atat\u00fcrk as commander-in-chief of the Army of the GNA. The Turks checked the Greek advance in the Battle of Sakarya and counter-attacked in the Great Offensive, which expelled Greek forces from Anatolia in the span of three weeks. The war effectively ended with the Turkish capture of Smyrna and the Chanak Crisis, prompting the signing of the Armistice of Mudanya.\nThe Grand National Assembly in Ankara was recognized as the legitimate Turkish government, which signed the Treaty of Lausanne in July 1923. The Allies evacuated Anatolia and Eastern Thrace, the Ottoman government was overthrown and the monarchy abolished, and the Grand National Assembly of Turkey (which remains Turkey's primary legislative body today) declared the Republic of Turkey on 29 October 1923. With the war, a population exchange between Greece and Turkey, the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, and the abolition of the sultanate, the Ottoman era came to an end, and with Atat\u00fcrk's reforms, the Turks created the modern, secular nation-state of Turkey. On 3 March 1924, the Ottoman caliphate was also abolished.\nFirst Kurdish rebellions.\nThere were several rebellions southeastern Turkey in the 1920s and 1930s, the most important of which were the 1925 Sheikh Said rebellion and the 1937 Dersim rebellion. All were suppressed by the TAF, sometimes involving large-scale mobilisations of up to 50,000 troops.\nWorld War II.\nTurkey remained neutral until the final stages of World War II. In the initial stage of World War II, Turkey signed a treaty of mutual assistance with Great Britain and France. But after the fall of France, the Turkish government tried to maintain an equal distance with both the Allies and the Axis. Following Nazi Germany's occupation of the Balkans, upon which the Axis-controlled territory in Thrace and the eastern islands of the Aegean Sea bordered Turkey, the Turkish government signed a Treaty of Friendship and Non-Aggression with Germany on 18 June 1941.\nAfter the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the Turkish government sent a military delegation of observers under Lieutenant General Ali Fuat Erden to Germany and the Eastern Front. Following the German retreat from the Caucasus, the Turkish government then moved closer to the Allies and Winston Churchill secretly met with \u0130smet \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc at the Adana Conference in Yenice Train Station in southern Turkey on 30 January 1943, with the intent of persuading Turkey to join the war on the side of the Allies. A few days before the start of Operation Zitadelle in July 1943, the Turkish government sent a military delegation under General Cemil Cahit Toydemir to Russia and observed the exercises of the 503rd Heavy Panzer Battalion and its equipment. But after the failure of Operation Zitadelle, the Turkish government participated in the Second Cairo Conference in December 1943, where Franklin D. Roosevelt, Churchill and \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc reached an agreement on issues regarding Turkey's possible contribution to the Allies. On 23 February 1945, Turkey joined the Allies by declaring war against Germany and Japan, after it was announced at the Yalta Conference that only the states which were formally at war with Germany and Japan by 1 March 1945 would be admitted to the United Nations.\nKorean War.\nTurkey participated in the Korean War as a member state of the United Nations and sent the Turkish Brigade to South Korea, and suffered 731 losses while displaying exceptional valor in combat. On 18 February 1952, Turkey became a member of NATO. The South Korean government donated a war memorial for Turkish soldiers who fought and died in Korea. The Korean pagoda was donated in 1973 for the 50th anniversary of the Turkish Republic and is located in Ankara.\nCyprus.\nOn 20 July 1974, the TAF launched an amphibious and airborne assault operation on Cyprus, in response to the 1974 Cypriot coup d'\u00e9tat which had been staged by EOKA-B and the Cypriot National Guard against president Makarios III with the intention of annexing the island to Greece; but the military intervention ended up with Turkey occupying a considerable area on the northern part of Cyprus and helping to establish a local government of Turkish Cypriots there, which has thus far been recognized only by Turkey. The intervention came after more than a decade of intercommunal violence (1963\u20131974) between the island's Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, resulting from the constitutional breakdown of 1963. Turkey invoked its role as a guarantor under the Treaty of Guarantee in justification for the military intervention. Turkish forces landed on the island in two waves, invading and occupying 37% of the island's territory in the northeast for the Turkish Cypriots, who had been isolated in small enclaves across the island prior to the military intervention.\nIn the aftermath, the Turkish Cypriots declared a separate political entity in the form of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus in 1975; and in 1983 made a unilateral declaration of independence as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is recognized only by Turkey to this day. The United Nations continues to recognize the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus according to the terms of its independence in 1960. The conflict continues to overshadow Turkish relations with Greece and with the European Union. In 2004, during the referendum for the Annan Plan for Cyprus (a United Nations proposal to resolve the Cyprus dispute) 76% of the Greek Cypriots rejected the proposal, while 65% of the Turkish Cypriots accepted it.\nKurdish\u2013Turkish conflict.\nThe TAF are in a protracted campaign against the PKK (recognized as a terrorist organization by the United States, the European Union and NATO) which has involved frequent forays into neighbouring Iraq and Syria. The leader of the terrorist organisation PKK; Abdullah \u00d6calan was arrested in 1999 in Nairobi Kenya, taken to Turkey and publicly trialed for several crimes. In 2015, the PKK cancelled their one-sided 2013 ceasefire after tension due to various events (\"Hendek Operasyonlar\u0131\") and threatened to attack dams in Turkey.\nWar in Bosnia and Kosovo.\nTurkey contributed troops in several NATO-led peace forces in Bosnia and Kosovo. Currently there are 402 Turkish troops in Kosovo Force.\nWar in Afghanistan.\nAfter the 2003 Istanbul Bombings were linked to Al-Qaeda, Turkey deployed troops to Afghanistan to fight Taliban forces and Al-Qaeda operatives, with the hopes of dismantling both groups. Turkey's responsibilities included providing security in Kabul (it formerly lead Regional Command Capital), as well as in Wardak Province, where it lead PRT Maidan Shahr. Turkey was once the third largest contingent within the International Security Assistance Force. Turkey's troops were not engaged in combat operations and Ankara has long resisted pressure from Washington to offer more combat troops. According to the Washington Post, in December 2009, after US President Barack Obama announced he would deploy 30,000 more U.S. soldiers, and that Washington wants others to follow suit, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan reacted with the message that Turkey would not contribute additional troops to Afghanistan. \"Turkey has already done what it can do by boosting its contingent of soldiers there to 1,750 from around 700 without being asked\", said Erdo\u011fan, who stressed that Turkey would continue its training of Afghan security forces.\nTurkey withdrew their troops from Afghanistan after the fall of Kabul (2021).\nCross-border operations in the Middle East.\nSyria.\nThe TAF have carried out major military operations against ISIS, YPG and the Assad Regime in Syria; Operation Euphrates Shield in 2016, Operation Olive Branch in 2018, Operation Peace Spring in 2019 and Operation Spring Shield in 2020. As a result of these operations, regions as Jarabulus, Al-Bab, Tell Abyad, Ras al-Ayn and Afrin were captured by Rebel Forces of the Syrian Interim Government and TAF.\nThe TAF implemented new tactics and techniques like the mass use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Thanks to these drone raids, which were used in coordination with electronic warfare, systems such as the Pantsir and Buk used by Ba'athist Syria were neutralized. International relations and policy think tanks as the Middle East Institute, Institute for the Study of War, Rand Corporation, Jamestown Foundation and many military analysts stated that the TAF have made significant changes in military doctrines and have created a new military approach based on drones and electronic warfare with the military operations it has carried out or helped to carry out in regions such as Syria, Libya, Iraq and Karabakh. The developments it has made in drone technology in particular have been interpreted as T\u00fcrkiye's defense industry and armed forces becoming among the world's leading forces.\nHumanitarian relief.\nThe TAF have performed \"Disaster Relief Operations,\" as in the 1999 \u0130zmit earthquake in the Marmara region of Turkey. Apart from contributing to NATO, the Turkish Navy also contributes to the Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group, which was created in early 2001 by Turkey, Bulgaria, Georgia, Romania, Russia and Ukraine for search and rescue and other humanitarian operations in the Black Sea.\nStructure.\nPublicly available audit by the Court of Accounts in 2023 suggests that the Turkish Armed Forces consisted of 210,989 military staff in active service and 121,161 in reserve duties, aggregating a total of 332,150. The term reserve describes those in mandatory service under officer, non-commissioned officer, and enlisted positions. By a 2016 reorganisation, the Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command were subordinated to the Ministry of Interior and therefore, their personnel count is no longer included within the military.\nThe Turkish Armed Forces is headed by the Chief of the General Staff, the principal military officer. It reports to the Minister of National Defense, a cabinet-level civilian position. The service branches, the Land Forces, the Naval Forces, and the Air Force, all subordinate to the ministry under operational supervision of the General Staff. In contrast to the rest of the military, where all elements are bound to a service branch, the Special Forces Command is responsible to the General Staff.\nAs of 2024, there are 327 general officers. The positions are dominated by the Land Forces, while the Air Force is the smallest service branch. In 2016, the Turkish Armed Forces had 326 generals, which plunged to 196 following the 2016 Turkish coup attempt. Although the military suffered personnel shortage, it over the years managed to restore its staff capacity. The cadres were all-male dominated, albeit there was no restriction on women. In 2022, \u00d6zlem Y\u0131lmaz made history by getting promoted to brigadier general within the gendarmerie. The next year, the Naval Forces received its first female rear admiral.\nLand Forces.\nThe Land Forces Command (Turkish: \"Kara Kuvvetleri Komutanl\u0131\u011f\u0131\") is the largest service branch of the Turkish Armed Forces, superdominating the other branches. It was \"de facto\" established in 1920, during the Turkish War of Independence, as a merger of the pre-existing irregular Kuva-yi Milliye forces. The government, however, acknowledges 209 BC as the symbolic date it was founded \u2500 the year when Mete Khan ascended to the throne of the Xiongnu Empire. His heritage stands well-appreciated in Turkish historiography for the contributions to the later Turkish know-how, as he is thought to be the first Turkic ruler to introduce the local tribes into a complex military entity.\nIn 2022, the force is composed of four armies, nine corps, eight commando brigades, one mountain commando brigade, seven armoured brigades, 14 mechanised brigades, seven motorised infantry brigades, and three artillery brigades.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNaval Forces.\nThe Turkish Naval Forces, or Turkish Navy, constitutes the naval warfare service branch of the Turkish Armed Forces. The Turkish Navy maintains several Marines and Special Operations units. The \"Amphibious Marines Brigade\" (Amfibi Deniz Piyade Tugay\u0131) based in Fo\u00e7a near \u0130zmir consists of 4,500 men, three amphibious battalions, an MBT battalion, an artillery battalion, a support battalion and other company-sized units. The \"Su Alt\u0131 Taarruz\" (S.A.T. \u2013 Underwater Attack) is dedicated to missions including the acquisition of military intelligence, amphibious assault, counter-terrorism and VIP protection; while the \"Su Alt\u0131 Savunma\" (S.A.S. \u2013 Underwater Defense) is dedicated to coastal defense operations (such as clearing mines or unexploded torpedoes) and disabling enemy vessels or weapons with underwater operations; as well as counter-terrorism and VIP protection missions.\nAir Force.\nThe Turkish Air Force is the aerial warfare service branch of the Turkish Armed Forces. It is primarily responsible for the protection and sovereignty of Turkish airspace but also provides air-power to the other service branches. Turkey is one of five NATO member states which are part of the nuclear sharing policy of the alliance, together with Belgium, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. A total of 90 B61 nuclear bombs are hosted at the Incirlik Air Base, 40 of which are allocated for use by the Turkish Air Force in case of a nuclear conflict, but their use requires the approval of NATO.\nThe Air Force took part in the Operation Deliberate Force of 1995 and Operation Allied Force of 1999, and later participated in the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina, employing two squadrons (one in the Ghedi fighter wing, and after 2000 one in the Aviano fighter wing.) They returned to Turkey in 2001. In 2006, 4 Turkish F-16 fighter jets were deployed for NATO's Baltic Air Policing operation.\nMilitary bases and soldiers stationed abroad.\nAs of February 2021, Turkey has at least over 50,000+ military personnel stationed outside its territory. The only military base stationed permanently abroad, regardless of the organizations that are members of Turkey, which has been temporarily holding troops several times abroad due to its responsibilities arising from many international political members, particularly NATO membership, is the Cyprus Turkish Peace Force Command. The military bases of the Turkish Armed Forces in Qatar, Syria, Somalia and Bashiqa, among an unknown number of other bases internationally, are currently active. It was announced in 2017 that Turkey would start working on establishing a research base in Antarctica.\nAccording to a study conducted in England, Turkey has the largest deployment of international troops after the United States, with an estimated strength of at least 60,000+ military personnel stationed outside of the borders of Turkey. This means that 1 in 6 of the active military troops of Turkey (which is estimated to be 355,200 in 2020) are deployed outside of the borders of the country.\nTurkey currently has a military presence in the following countries;\nTurkey additionally has a presence in the following countries through UN peacekeeping missions:\nRole of the military in Turkish politics.\nAfter the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk prohibited the political activities of officers in active service with the Military Penal Code numbered 1632 and dated 22 May 1930 (\"Askeri Ceza Kanunu\"). However, after the 1960 coup d'\u00e9tat, the \"Mill\u00ee Birlik Komitesi\" (National Unity Committee) established the Inner Service Act of the Turkish Armed Forces (\"T\u00fcrk Silahl\u0131 Kuvvetleri \u0130\u00e7 Hizmet Kanunu\") on 4 January 1961 to legitimize their military interventions in politics. In subsequent coups d'\u00e9tat and coup d'\u00e9tat attempts, they showed reasons to justify their political activities especially with the article 35 and 85 of this act.\nThe Turkish military perceived itself as the guardian of Kemalism, the official state ideology, especially of its secular aspects. The TAF still maintains an important degree of influence over the decision-making process regarding issues related to Turkish national security, albeit decreased in the past decades, via the National Security Council.\nThe military had a record of intervening in politics, removing elected governments four times in the past. Indeed, it assumed power for several periods in the latter half of the 20th century. It executed three coups d'\u00e9tat: in 1960 (27 May coup), in 1971 (12 March coup), and in 1980 (12 September coup). Following the 1960 coup d'\u00e9tat, the military executed the first democratically elected prime minister in Turkey, Adnan Menderes, in 1961. Most recently, it maneuvered the removal of an Islamist prime minister, Necmettin Erbakan, in 1997 (known as the 28 February memorandum). Contrary to outsider expectations, the Turkish populace was not uniformly averse to coups; many welcomed the ejection of governments they perceived as unconstitutional.\nOn 27 April 2007, in advance of the 4 November 2007 presidential election, and in reaction to the politics of Abdullah G\u00fcl, who has a past record of involvement in Islamist political movements and banned Islamist parties such as the Welfare Party, the army issued a statement of its interests. It said that the army is a party to \"arguments\" regarding secularism; that Islamism ran counter to the secular nature of Turkey, and to the legacy of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk. The Army's statement ended with a clear warning that the TAF stood ready to intervene if the secular nature of the Turkish Constitution is compromised, stating that \"the Turkish Armed Forces maintain their sound determination to carry out their duties stemming from laws to protect the unchangeable characteristics of the Republic of Turkey. Their loyalty to this determination is absolute.\"\nOver a hundred people, including several generals, have been detained or questioned since July 2008 with respect to the so-called organisation Ergenekon, an alleged clandestine, ultra-nationalist organization with ties to members of the country's military and security forces. The group is accused of terrorism in Turkey. These accusing claims are reported, even while the trials are going on, mostly in the counter-secular and Islamist media organs.\nOn 22 February 2010 more than 40 officers were arrested and then formally charged with attempting to overthrow the government with respect to the so-called \"Sledgehammer\" plot. They include four admirals, a general and two colonels, some of them retired, including former commanders of the Turkish navy and air force (three days later, the former commanders of the navy and air force were released). Partially as a result, the Washington Post reported in April 2010 that the military's power had decreased.\nOn the eve of the Supreme Military Council of August 2011, the Chief of the General Staff, along with the Army, Navy, and Air Force commanders, requested their retirement, in protest of the mass arrests which they perceived as a deliberate and planned attack against the Kemalist and secular-minded officers of the Turkish Armed Forces by the Islamists in Turkey, who began to control key positions in the Turkish government, judiciary and police. The swift replacement of the force commanders in the Supreme Military Council meeting affirmed the government's control over the appointment of top-level commanders. However, promotions continue to be determined by the General Staff with limited civilian control. The European Commission, in its 2011 regular yearly report on Turkey's progress towards EU accession, stated that \"further reforms on the composition and powers of the Supreme Military Council, particularly on the legal basis of promotions, still need to materialise.\" The service branch commanders continue to report to the Prime Minister instead of the Defence Minister.\nIn July 2016, a faction within the Turkish Armed Forces attempted to take over the government, but Erdogan supporters and other loyal military units stopped the coup attempt. The parliament house, police headquarters, and some other buildings in Ankara were damaged by aerial bombing and attack helicopter gunfire. In Istanbul, the Bosporus Bridge was blocked, a tank fired a shell, and soldiers shot at people. The incidents caused the death of hundreds and wounding of thousands of unarmed civilians. Following the failed coup attempt, thousands of military personnel were arrested and the structure of the armed forces was overhauled. The total toll of the damages to the economy amounted to US$14 billion.\nOn August 30, 2024, which is celebrated as \"Victory Day\" in Turkey, a graduation ceremony was conducted for the academy's finishing class. During the ceremony, 960 graduates, led by valedictorian Ebru Ero\u011flu, recited the military oath to defend Turkey. The event was attended by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan. Approximately one hour following the graduation, Eroglu and 400 other graduates were recorded raising their swords and pledging allegiance to Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, the secular founder of modern Turkey. The group subsequently took an oath to uphold \"a secular, democratic Turkey.\" In response, eight days later, Erdogan announced the initiation of an investigation and declared that \u201cthe few impertinent individuals responsible will be purged.\u201d\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30206", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30206", "title": "Foreign relations of Turkey", "text": " \nForeign relations of Turkey refers to the diplomatic and trade ties between Turkey and other nations. As of December 2024, Turkey maintains diplomatic relations with 189 member states of the United Nations.\nPrior to declaring war against the Axis powers on February 23, 1945, Turkey's primary ally had been the United States, with both countries aiming to contain Soviet expansion. In support of the United Nations, Turkey contributed personnel to the Korean War in 1950 and joined NATO in 1952.\nTurkey's relations with the Arab World and Iran have been strained due to its recognition of Israel in 1949 and its alliance with Israel during the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This subsequently led to overt Syrian support for Palestinian and Armenian militant operations against Turkish diplomats abroad until 1990.\nHistory.\nHistorically, the foreign relations of the Ottoman Empire and later Turkey balanced regional and global powers against one another, forming alliances that best protected the interests of the incumbent regime. The Soviet Union played a major role in supplying weapons and financing Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk's faction during the Turkish War of Independence, but Turkey followed a course of relative international isolation during the period of Atat\u00fcrk's reforms in the 1920s and 1930s. International conferences gave Turkey full control of the strategic straits linking the Black Sea and the Mediterranean through the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923 and the Montreux Convention of 1936.\nIn the late 1930s, Nazi Germany made a major effort to promote anti-Soviet propaganda in Turkey. In response, Britain and France negotiated a tripartite treaty with Turkey in 1939 in which they gave Turkey a line of credit to purchase war materials from the West and a loan to facilitate the purchase of commodities. After threats from Germany and the Soviet Union, Turkey maintained neutrality. It sold chrome\u2014an important war material\u2014to both sides, but by 1944, as the eventuality of German defeat grew more evident, chrome sales to Germany halted.\nAfter 1945.\nTurkey became one of the early members of the Council of Europe in 1950. Turkey applied for full membership of the EEC in 1987, joined the European Union Customs Union in 1995, and started accession negotiations with the European Union in 2005. In a non-binding vote on 13 March 2019, the European Parliament called on the EU governments to suspend EU accession talks with Turkey, citing violations of human rights and the rule of law. The negotiations, which have been effectively on hold since 2018, remain active as of 2025.\nAccording to the United States government, the other defining aspect of Turkey's foreign policy has been the country's long-standing strategic alliance with the United States. The Truman Doctrine in 1947 enunciated American intentions to guarantee the security of Turkey and Greece during the Cold War, and resulted in large-scale U.S. military and economic support to the countries. In 1948, both Turkey and Greece were included in the Marshall Plan and the OEEC for rebuilding European economies.\nTurkey joined NATO in 1952, strengthening its bilateral ties with the United States. In the following decades, Turkey benefited from American political, economic, and diplomatic support\u2014particularly on critical issues such as its longstanding bid for European Union membership. In the post\u2013Cold War era, Turkey's geostrategic importance shifted towards its proximity to the Middle East, the Caucasus, and the Balkans.\nThe independence of the Turkic states of the Soviet Union in 1991, with which Turkey shares a common cultural, historic and linguistic heritage, allowed Turkey to extend its economic and political relations deep into Central Asia. The International Organization of Turkic Culture (TURKSOY) was established in 1993, and the Organization of Turkic States (OTS) was established in 2009. The Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Ceyhan pipeline, a multi-billion-dollar oil and natural gas pipeline that extends from Baku in Azerbaijan to the port of Ceyhan in Turkey, is a part of Turkey's foreign policy goal to become an energy conduit from the Caspian Sea basin to Europe. Turkey sealed its land border with Armenia in a gesture of support to Azerbaijan (a Turkic state in the Caucasus region) during the First (1993) and Second (2020) Nagorno-Karabakh Wars. The border remains closed as of 2025, opening only twice to allow aid to pass through. In 2022, Armenia and Turkey started diplomatic talks to normalize the relationship between the two countries. Turkey and Armenia have also restarted commercial flights between the two countries.\nUnder the AKP government (2002\u2013present), Turkey's economy has increased rapidly and the country's influence has expanded in the Middle East based on a strategic depth doctrine, though this doctrine has been accused of Neo-Ottomanism. Debate on Turkey's foreign relations is controversial both within Turkey and internationally. In the West, there exists a divide between those who are worried about Turkey's perceived movement away from the West toward a less democratic, more Islamic or more pro-Russian and pro-Chinese orientation and those who do not see Turkey's changing political structure, growing regional power, and diversification of relations with countries such as Russia as a threat.\nDiplomatic relations.\nDespite being one of the first countries to recognize Armenia's independence, Turkey has never established formal diplomatic relations with it. Turkey formerly maintained diplomatic relations with Cyprus and Taiwan.\nList of countries with which Turkey maintains diplomatic relations:\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nThere has been a revival in Turkey's relationships within Africa after 1998, and civil society is the leading factor in this process. Initially, this revival came as a passive attempt, but after 2005 it became an offensive interest in developing relations with the continent. The Turkey\u2013Africa Cooperation Summit in 2008 marked a new stage in Turkey's interest in developing relations with Africa. Turkey, since its involvement in Somalia in 2011, is eager to be considered as a political actor in the continent.\nSub\u2013Saharan Africa.\nSince 2008, economic and diplomatic relations with Africa have flourished due to a strong sentiment of fellowship among Turkish people towards Africans. Foreign trade between sub-Saharan Africa and Turkey increased from US$581 million in 1998 to US$5.08 billion in 2015.\nDating back to 1800, Turkey's relations with sub-Saharan Africa flourished from the 1860s\u2014when the Ottoman Empire started sending trained imams to the region\u2014until 1885, when other European colonial powers blocked Ottoman influence. Relations were restored in the 1950s, and gained momentum when Emperor Haile Selassie visited Turkey in March 1967 and December 1969.\nSince 2008, Turkey has contributed to the region through participation in peacekeeping missions, including the UN Mission in Ivory Coast (UNOC), the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Central African Republic, Chad.\nTurkey has also dramatically increased financial aid to the region, providing a total of US$6.38 billion to the region just between 2006 and 2011 including the 2011 donation of US$200 million to fight the famine in East Africa.\nInternational organizations.\nTurkey is a founding member of the UN (1945), the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (1961), the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (1969), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) (1973), and the G20 industrial nations (1999). Turkey is a member state of the Council of Europe (1949) and NATO (1952) as well as being in full accession negotiations with the European Union since 2005, having been an associate member since 1963. Turkey was also an associate member of the Western European Union from 1992 to 2011, and signed the E.U. Customs Union agreement in 1995.\nTurkey entered NATO in 1952 and serves as a strategic eastern anchor. Its strategic importance lies in its control of the Turkish Straits, which lead from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean and its borders with Syria, Iraq, and Iran. A NATO headquarters is located in \u0130zmir and the United States has maintained a military presence via the Incirlik Air Base in the province of Adana.\nTurkey is also a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) since 1995. It has signed free trade agreements with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), Israel, and many other countries. In 1992, Turkey and 10 other regional nations formed the BSEC to expand regional trade and economic cooperation. In 2017, ASEAN-Turkey Sectoral Dialogue Partnership was recognized by the 50th ASEAN Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Manila, Philippines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
