{"id": "42898", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42898", "title": "Anthrax", "text": "Infection caused by Bacillus anthracis bacteria\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAnthrax is an infection caused by the bacterium \"Bacillus anthracis\" or \"Bacillus cereus\" biovar \"anthracis\". Infection typically occurs by contact with the skin, inhalation, or intestinal absorption. Symptom onset occurs between one day and two months after the infection is contracted. The skin form presents with a small blister with surrounding swelling that often turns into a painless ulcer with a black center. The inhalation form presents with fever, chest pain, and shortness of breath. The intestinal form presents with diarrhea (which may contain blood), abdominal pains, nausea, and vomiting.\nAccording to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the first clinical descriptions of cutaneous anthrax were given by Maret in 1752 and Fournier in 1769. Before that, anthrax had been described only in historical accounts. The German scientist Robert Koch was the first to identify \"Bacillus anthracis\" as the bacterium that causes anthrax.\nAnthrax is spread by contact with the bacterium's spores, which often appear in infectious animal products. Contact includes inhalation, eating, or through an area of broken skin. It does not typically spread directly between people. Risk factors include people who work with animals or animal products, and military personnel. Diagnosis can be confirmed by finding antibodies or the toxin in the blood or by the culture of a sample from the infected site.\nAnthrax vaccination is recommended for people at high risk of infection. Immunizing animals against anthrax is recommended in areas where previous infections have occurred. A two-month course of antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin and doxycycline after exposure can also prevent infection. If infection occurs, treatment is with antibiotics and possibly antitoxin. The type and number of antibiotics used depend on the type of infection. An antitoxin is recommended for those with widespread infection.\nA rare disease, human anthrax is most common in Africa and central and southern Asia. It occurs more regularly in Southern Europe than elsewhere on the continent and is uncommon in Northern Europe and North America. Globally, at least 2,000 cases occur a year, with about two cases a year in the United States. Skin infections represent more than 95% of cases. Without treatment the risk of death from skin anthrax is 23.7%. For intestinal infection the risk of death is 25 to 75%, while respiratory anthrax has a mortality of 50 to 80%, even with treatment. Until the 20th century anthrax infections killed hundreds of thousands of people and animals each year. In herbivorous animals infection occurs when they eat or breathe in the spores while grazing. Humans may become infected by killing and/or eating infected animals.\nSeveral countries have developed anthrax as a weapon. It has been used in biowarfare and bioterrorism since 1914. In 1975, the Biological Weapons Convention prohibited the \"development, production and stockpiling\" of biological weapons. It has since been used in bioterrorism. Likely delivery methods of weaponized anthrax include aerial dispersal or dispersal through livestock; notable bioterrorism uses include the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States and an incident in 1993 by the Aum Shinrikyo group in Japan.\nEtymology.\nThe English name comes from \"anthrax\" (), the Greek word for coal, possibly having Egyptian etymology, because of the characteristic black skin lesions people with a cutaneous anthrax infection develop. The central black eschar surrounded by vivid red skin has long been recognised as typical of the disease. The first recorded use of the word \"anthrax\" in English is in a 1398 translation of Bartholomaeus Anglicus's work \"\" (\"On the Properties of Things\", 1240).\nAnthrax was historically known by a wide variety of names, indicating its symptoms, location, and groups considered most vulnerable to infection. They include Siberian plague, Cumberland disease, charbon, splenic fever, malignant edema, woolsorter's disease and \"\".\nSigns and symptoms.\nSkin.\nCutaneous anthrax, also known as hide-porter's disease, is when anthrax occurs on the skin. It is the most common (&gt;90% of cases) and least dangerous form (low mortality with treatment, 23.7% mortality without). Cutaneous anthrax presents as a boil-like skin lesion that eventually forms an ulcer with a black center (eschar). The black eschar often shows up as a large, painless, necrotic ulcer (beginning as an irritating and itchy skin lesion or blister that is dark and usually concentrated as a black dot, (somewhat resembling bread mold) at the site of infection. In general, cutaneous infections form within the site of spore penetration two to five days after exposure. Unlike bruises or most other lesions, cutaneous anthrax infections normally do not cause pain. Nearby lymph nodes may become infected, reddened, swollen, and painful. A scab forms over the lesion soon, and falls off in a few weeks. Complete recovery may take longer. Cutaneous anthrax is typically caused when \"B. anthracis\" spores enter through cuts on the skin. This form is found most commonly when humans handle infected animals and/or animal products.\nInjection.\nIn December 2009, an outbreak of anthrax occurred among injecting heroin users in the Glasgow and Stirling areas of Scotland, resulting in 14\u00a0deaths. It was the first documented non-occupational human anthrax outbreak in the UK since 1960. The source of the anthrax is believed to have been dilution of the heroin with bone meal in Afghanistan. Injected anthrax may have symptoms similar to cutaneous anthrax, with the exception of black areas, and may also cause infection deep into the muscle and spread faster. This can make it harder to recognise and treat.\nLungs.\nInhalation anthrax usually develops within a week after exposure, but may take up to 2 months. During the first few days of illness, most people have fever, chills, and fatigue. These symptoms may be accompanied by cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, and nausea or vomiting, making inhalation anthrax difficult to distinguish from influenza and community-acquired pneumonia. This is often described as the prodromal period.\nOver the next day or so, shortness of breath, cough, and chest pain become more common, and complaints not involving the chest such as nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, sweats, and headache develop in one-third or more of people. Upper respiratory tract symptoms occur in only a quarter of people, and muscle pains are rare. Altered mental status or shortness of breath generally brings people to healthcare and marks the fulminant phase of illness.\nIt infects the lymph nodes in the chest first, rather than the lungs themselves, a condition called hemorrhagic mediastinitis, causing bloody fluid to accumulate in the chest cavity, thereby causing shortness of breath. The second (pneumonia) stage occurs when the infection spreads from the lymph nodes to the lungs. Symptoms of the second stage develop suddenly within hours or days after the first stage. Symptoms include high fever, extreme shortness of breath, shock, and rapid death within 48 hours in fatal cases.\nGastrointestinal.\nGastrointestinal (GI) infection is most often caused by consuming anthrax-infected meat and is characterized by diarrhea, potentially with blood, abdominal pains, acute inflammation of the intestinal tract, and loss of appetite. Occasional vomiting of blood can occur. Lesions have been found in the intestines and in the mouth and throat. After the bacterium invades the gastrointestinal system, it spreads to the bloodstream and throughout the body, while continuing to make toxins.\nCause.\nBacteria.\n\"Bacillus anthracis\" is a rod-shaped, Gram-positive, facultative anaerobe bacterium about 1 by 9\u00a0\u03bcm in size. It was shown to cause disease by Robert Koch in 1876 when he took a blood sample from an infected cow, isolated the bacteria, and put them into a mouse. The bacterium normally rests in spore form in the soil, and can survive for decades in this state. Herbivores are often infected while grazing, especially when eating rough, irritant, or spiky vegetation; the vegetation has been hypothesized to cause wounds within the gastrointestinal tract, permitting entry of the bacterial spores into the tissues. Once ingested or placed in an open wound, the bacteria begin multiplying inside the animal or human and typically kill the host within a few days or weeks. The spores germinate at the site of entry into the tissues and then spread by the circulation to the lymphatics, where the bacteria multiply.\nThe production of two powerful exotoxins and lethal toxin by the bacteria causes death. Veterinarians can often tell a possible anthrax-induced death by its sudden occurrence and the dark, nonclotting blood that oozes from the body orifices. Most anthrax bacteria inside the body after death are outcompeted and destroyed by anaerobic bacteria within minutes to hours post mortem, but anthrax vegetative bacteria that escape the body via oozing blood or opening the carcass may form hardy spores. These vegetative bacteria are not contagious. One spore forms per vegetative bacterium. The triggers for spore formation are not known, but oxygen tension and lack of nutrients may play roles. Once formed, these spores are very hard to eradicate.\nThe infection of herbivores (and occasionally humans) by inhalation normally begins with inhaled spores being transported through the air passages into the tiny air sacs (alveoli) in the lungs. The spores are then picked up by scavenger cells (macrophages) in the lungs and transported through small vessels (lymphatics) to the lymph nodes in the central chest cavity (mediastinum). Damage caused by the anthrax spores and bacilli to the central chest cavity can cause chest pain and difficulty breathing. Once in the lymph nodes, the spores germinate into active bacilli that multiply and eventually burst the macrophages, releasing many more bacilli into the bloodstream to be transferred to the entire body. Once in the bloodstream, these bacilli release three proteins: lethal factor, edema factor, and protective antigen. The three are not toxic by themselves, but their combination is incredibly lethal to humans. Protective antigen combines with these other two factors to form lethal toxin and edema toxin, respectively. These toxins are the primary agents of tissue destruction, bleeding, and death of the host. If antibiotics are administered too late, even if the antibiotics eradicate the bacteria, some hosts still die of toxemia because the toxins produced by the bacilli remain in their systems at lethal dose levels.\nExposure and transmission.\nAnthrax can enter the human body through the intestines (gastrointestinal), lungs (pulmonary), or skin (cutaneous), and causes distinct clinical symptoms based on its site of entry. Anthrax does not usually spread from an infected human to an uninfected human. If the disease is fatal to the person's body, its mass of anthrax bacilli becomes a potential source of infection to others and special precautions should be used to prevent further contamination. Pulmonary anthrax, if left untreated, is almost always fatal. Historically, pulmonary anthrax was called woolsorters' disease because it was an occupational hazard for people who sorted wool. Today, this form of infection is extremely rare in industrialized nations. Cutaneous anthrax is the most common form of transmission but also the least dangerous of the three transmissions. Gastrointestinal anthrax is likely fatal if left untreated, but very rare.The spores of anthrax are able to survive in harsh conditions for decades or even centuries. Such spores can be found on all continents, including Antarctica. Disturbed grave sites of infected animals have been known to cause infection after 70 years. In one such event, a young boy died from gastrointestinal anthrax due to the thawing of reindeer corpses from 75 years before contact. Anthrax spores traveled through groundwater used for drinking and caused tens of people to be hospitalized, largely children. Occupational exposure to infected animals or their products (such as skin, wool, and meat) is the usual pathway of exposure for humans. Workers exposed to dead animals and animal products are at the highest risk, especially in countries where anthrax is more common. Anthrax in livestock grazing on open range where they mix with wild animals still occasionally occurs in the U.S. and elsewhere.\nMany workers who deal with wool and animal hides are routinely exposed to low levels of anthrax spores, but most exposure levels are not sufficient to produce infection. A lethal infection is reported to result from inhalation of about 10,000\u201320,000 spores, though this dose varies among host species.\nMechanism.\nThe lethality of the anthrax disease is due to the bacterium's two principal virulence factors: the poly-D-glutamic acid capsule, which protects the bacterium from phagocytosis by host neutrophils; and the tripartite protein toxin, called anthrax toxin, consisting of protective antigen (PA), edema factor (EF), and lethal factor (LF). PA plus LF produces lethal toxin, and PA plus EF produces edema toxin. These toxins cause death and tissue swelling (edema), respectively.\nTo enter the cells, the edema and lethal factors use another protein produced by \"B. anthracis\" called protective antigen, which binds to two surface receptors on the host cell. A cell protease then cleaves PA into two fragments: PA20 and PA63. PA20 dissociates into the extracellular medium, playing no further role in the toxic cycle. PA63 then oligomerizes with six other PA63 fragments forming a heptameric ring-shaped structure named a prepore. Once in this shape, the complex can competitively bind up to three EFs or LFs, forming a resistant complex. Receptor-mediated endocytosis occurs next, providing the newly formed toxic complex access to the interior of the host cell. The acidified environment within the endosome triggers the heptamer to release the LF and/or EF into the cytosol. It is unknown how exactly the complex results in the death of the cell.\nEdema factor is a calmodulin-dependent adenylate cyclase. Adenylate cyclase catalyzes the conversion of ATP into cyclic AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. The complexation of adenylate cyclase with calmodulin removes calmodulin from stimulating calcium-triggered signaling, thus inhibiting the immune response. To be specific, LF inactivates neutrophils (a type of phagocytic cell) by the process just described so they cannot phagocytose bacteria. Throughout history, lethal factor was presumed to cause macrophages to make TNF-alpha and interleukin 1 beta (IL1B). TNF-alpha is a cytokine whose primary role is to regulate immune cells, as well as to induce inflammation and apoptosis or programmed cell death. Interleukin 1 beta is another cytokine that also regulates inflammation and apoptosis. The overproduction of TNF-alpha and IL1B ultimately leads to septic shock and death. However, recent evidence indicates anthrax also targets endothelial cells that line serious cavities such as the pericardial cavity, pleural cavity, and peritoneal cavity, lymph vessels, and blood vessels, causing vascular leakage of fluid and cells, and ultimately hypovolemic shock and septic shock.\nDiagnosis.\nVarious techniques may be used for the direct identification of \"B. anthracis\" in clinical material. Firstly, specimens may be Gram stained. \"Bacillus\" spp. are quite large in size (3 to 4\u00a0\u03bcm long), they may grow in long chains, and they stain Gram-positive. To confirm the organism is \"B. anthracis\", rapid diagnostic techniques such as polymerase chain reaction-based assays and immunofluorescence microscopy may be used.\nAll \"Bacillus\" species grow well on 5% sheep blood agar and other routine culture media. Polymyxin-lysozyme-EDTA-thallous acetate can be used to isolate \"B. anthracis\" from contaminated specimens, and bicarbonate agar is used as an identification method to induce capsule formation. \"Bacillus\" spp. usually grow within 24 hours of incubation at 35\u00a0\u00b0C, in ambient air (room temperature) or in 5% CO2. If bicarbonate agar is used for identification, then the medium must be incubated in 5% CO2. \"B. anthracis\" colonies are medium-large, gray, flat, and irregular with swirling projections, often referred to as having a \"medusa head\" appearance, and are not hemolytic on 5% sheep blood agar. The bacteria are not motile, susceptible to penicillin, and produce a wide zone of lecithinase on egg yolk agar. Confirmatory testing to identify \"B. anthracis\" includes gamma bacteriophage testing, indirect hemagglutination, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to detect antibodies. The best confirmatory precipitation test for anthrax is the Ascoli test.\nPrevention.\nPrecautions are taken to avoid contact with the skin and any fluids exuded through natural body openings of a deceased body that is suspected of harboring anthrax. The body should be put in strict quarantine. A blood sample is collected and sealed in a container and analyzed in an approved laboratory to ascertain if anthrax is the cause of death. The body should be sealed in an airtight body bag and incinerated to prevent the transmission of anthrax spores. Microscopic visualization of the encapsulated bacilli, usually in very large numbers, in a blood smear stained with polychrome methylene blue (McFadyean stain) is fully diagnostic, though the culture of the organism is still the gold standard for diagnosis. Full isolation of the body is important to prevent possible contamination of others.\nProtective, impermeable clothing and equipment such as rubber gloves, rubber apron, and rubber boots with no perforations are used when handling the body. No skin, especially if it has any wounds or scratches, should be exposed. Disposable personal protective equipment is preferable, but if not available, decontamination can be achieved by autoclaving. Used disposable equipment is burned and/or buried after use. All contaminated bedding or clothing is isolated in double plastic bags and treated as biohazard waste. Respiratory equipment capable of filtering small particles, such the US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health- and Mine Safety and Health Administration-approved high-efficiency respirator, is worn. Addressing Anthrax from a One Health perspective reduces risks of transmission and better protects both human and animal populations.\nVaccines.\nVaccines against anthrax for use in livestock and humans have had a prominent place in the history of medicine. The French scientist Louis Pasteur developed the first effective veterinary vaccine in 1881. Human anthrax vaccines were developed by the Soviet Union in the late 1930s and in the US and UK in the 1950s. The current FDA-approved US vaccine was formulated in the 1960s.\nCurrently administered human anthrax vaccines include acellular subunit vaccine (United States) and live vaccine (Russia) varieties. All currently used anthrax vaccines show considerable local and general reactogenicity (erythema, induration, soreness, fever) and serious adverse reactions occur in about 1% of recipients. The American product, BioThrax, is licensed by the FDA and was formerly administered in a six-dose primary series at 0, 2, 4 weeks and 6, 12, 18 months, with annual boosters to maintain immunity. In 2008, the FDA approved omitting the week-2 dose, resulting in the currently recommended five-dose series. This five-dose series is available to military personnel, scientists who work with anthrax and members of the public who do jobs which cause them to be at-risk. New second-generation vaccines currently being researched include recombinant live vaccines and recombinant subunit vaccines. In the 20th century the use of a modern product (BioThrax) to protect American troops against the use of anthrax in biological warfare was controversial.\nAntibiotics.\nPreventive antibiotics are recommended in those who have been exposed. Early detection of sources of anthrax infection can allow preventive measures to be taken. In response to the anthrax attacks of October 2001, the United States Postal Service (USPS) installed biodetection systems (BDSs) in their large-scale mail processing facilities. BDS response plans were formulated by the USPS in conjunction with local responders including fire, police, hospitals, and public health. Employees of these facilities have been educated about anthrax, response actions, and prophylactic medication. Because of the time delay inherent in getting final verification that anthrax has been used, prophylactic antibiotic treatment of possibly exposed personnel must be started as soon as possible.\nTreatment.\nAnthrax cannot be spread from person to person, except in the rare case of skin exudates from cutaneous anthrax. However, a person's clothing and body may be contaminated with anthrax spores. Effective decontamination of people can be accomplished by a thorough wash-down with antimicrobial soap and water. Wastewater is treated with bleach or another antimicrobial agent. Effective decontamination of articles can be accomplished by boiling them in water for 30 minutes or longer. Chlorine bleach is ineffective in destroying spores and vegetative cells on surfaces, though formaldehyde is effective. Burning clothing is very effective in destroying spores. After decontamination, there is no need to immunize, treat, or isolate contacts of persons ill with anthrax unless they were also exposed to the same source of infection.\nAntibiotics.\nEarly antibiotic treatment of anthrax is essential; delay significantly lessens chances for survival. Treatment for anthrax infection and other bacterial infections includes large doses of intravenous and oral antibiotics, such as fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin), doxycycline, erythromycin, vancomycin, or penicillin. FDA-approved agents include ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, and penicillin. In possible cases of pulmonary anthrax, early antibiotic prophylaxis treatment is crucial to prevent possible death. Many attempts have been made to develop new drugs against anthrax, but existing drugs are effective if treatment is started soon enough.\nMonoclonal antibodies.\nIn May 2009, Human Genome Sciences submitted a biologic license application (BLA, permission to market) for its new drug, raxibacumab (brand name ABthrax) intended for emergency treatment of inhaled anthrax. On 14 December 2012, the US Food and Drug Administration approved raxibacumab injection to treat inhalational anthrax. Raxibacumab is a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes toxins produced by \"B. anthracis\". In March 2016, FDA approved a second anthrax treatment using a monoclonal antibody which neutralizes the toxins produced by \"B. anthracis\". Obiltoxaximab is approved to treat inhalational anthrax in conjunction with appropriate antibacterial drugs, and for prevention when alternative therapies are not available or appropriate.\nBiologic for Drug-, Antibody- or Vaccine-resistant Anthrax.\nTreatment of multi-drug resistant, antibody- or vaccine-resistant Anthrax is also possible. Legler, et al. showed that pegylated CapD (capsule depolymerase) could provide protection against 5 LD50 exposures to lethal Ames spores without the use of antibiotics, monoclonal antibodies, or vaccines. The CapD enzyme removes the poly-D-glutamate (PDGA) capsular material from the bacteria, rendering it susceptible to the innate immune responses. The unencapsulated bacteria can then be cleared.\nPrognosis.\nCutaneous anthrax is rarely fatal if treated, because the infection area is limited to the skin, preventing the lethal factor, edema factor, and protective antigen from entering and destroying a vital organ. Without treatment, up to 20% of cutaneous skin infection cases progress to toxemia and death.\nBefore 2001, fatality rates for inhalation anthrax were 90%; since then, they have fallen to 45%. People that progress to the fulminant phase of inhalational anthrax nearly always die, with one case study showing a death rate of 97%. Anthrax meningoencephalitis is also nearly always fatal.\nGastrointestinal anthrax infections can be treated, but usually result in fatality rates of 25% to 60%, depending upon how soon treatment commences.\nInjection anthrax is the rarest form of anthrax, and has only been seen to have occurred in a group of heroin injecting drug users.\nEpidemiology.\nGlobally, at least 2,000 cases occur a year.\nUnited States.\nThe last fatal case of natural inhalational anthrax in the United States occurred in California in 1976, when a home weaver died after working with infected wool imported from Pakistan. To minimize the chance of spreading the disease, the body was transported to UCLA in a sealed plastic body bag within a sealed metal container for autopsy.\nGastrointestinal anthrax is exceedingly rare in the United States, with only two cases on record. The first case was reported in 1942, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. During December 2009, the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services confirmed a case of gastrointestinal anthrax in an adult female. The CDC investigated the source and the possibility that it was contracted from an African drum recently used by the woman taking part in a drum circle. The woman apparently inhaled anthrax, in spore form, from the hide of the drum. She became critically ill, but with gastrointestinal anthrax rather than inhaled anthrax, which made her unique in American medical history. The building where the infection took place was cleaned and reopened to the public and the woman recovered. The New Hampshire state epidemiologist, Jodie Dionne-Odom, stated \"It is a mystery. We really don't know why it happened.\"\nIn 2007 two cases of cutaneous anthrax were reported in Danbury, Connecticut. The case involved a maker of traditional African-style drums who was working with a goat hide purchased from a dealer in New York City which had been previously cleared by Customs. While the hide was being scraped, a spider bite led to the spores entering the bloodstream. His son also became infected.\nCroatia.\nIn July 2022, dozens of cattle in a nature park in Lonjsko Polje, a flood plain by the Sava river, died of anthrax and 6 people have been hospitalized with light, skin-related symptoms.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn November 2008, a drum maker in the United Kingdom who worked with untreated animal skins died from anthrax. In December 2009, an outbreak of anthrax occurred among heroin addicts in the Glasgow and Stirling areas of Scotland, resulting in 14\u00a0deaths. The source of the anthrax is believed to have been dilution of the heroin with bone meal in Afghanistan.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nRobert Koch, a German physician and scientist, first identified the bacterium that caused the anthrax disease in 1875 in Wollstein (now Wolsztyn, Poland). His pioneering work in the late 19th century was one of the first demonstrations that diseases could be caused by microbes. In a groundbreaking series of experiments, he uncovered the lifecycle and means of transmission of anthrax. His experiments not only helped create an understanding of anthrax but also helped elucidate the role of microbes in causing illness at a time when debates still took place over spontaneous generation versus cell theory. Koch went on to study the mechanisms of other diseases and won the 1905 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of the bacterium causing tuberculosis.\nAlthough Koch arguably made the greatest theoretical contribution to understanding anthrax, other researchers were more concerned with the practical questions of how to prevent the disease. In Britain, where anthrax affected workers in the wool, worsted, hides, and tanning industries, it was viewed with fear. John Henry Bell, a doctor born &amp; based in Bradford, first made the link between the mysterious and deadly \"woolsorter's disease\" and anthrax, showing in 1878 that they were one and the same. In the early 20th century, Friederich Wilhelm Eurich, the German bacteriologist who settled in Bradford with his family as a child, carried out important research for the local Anthrax Investigation Board. Eurich also made valuable contributions to a Home Office Departmental Committee of Inquiry, established in 1913 to address the continuing problem of industrial anthrax. His work in this capacity, much of it collaboration with the factory inspector G. Elmhirst Duckering, led directly to the Anthrax Prevention Act (1919).\nFirst vaccination.\nAnthrax posed a major economic challenge in France and elsewhere during the 19th century. Horses, cattle, and sheep were particularly vulnerable, and national funds were set aside to investigate the production of a vaccine. French scientist Louis Pasteur was charged with the production of a vaccine, following his successful work in developing methods that helped to protect the important wine and silk industries.\nIn May 1881, Pasteur \u2013 in collaboration with his assistants Jean-Joseph Henri Toussaint, \u00c9mile Roux and others \u2013 performed a public experiment at Pouilly-le-Fort to demonstrate his concept of vaccination. He prepared two groups of 25 sheep, one goat, and several cattle. The animals of one group were twice injected with an anthrax vaccine prepared by Pasteur, at an interval of 15 days; the control group was left unvaccinated. Thirty days after the first injection, both groups were injected with a culture of live anthrax bacteria. All the animals in the unvaccinated group died, while all of the animals in the vaccinated group survived.\nAfter this apparent triumph, which was widely reported in the local, national, and international press, Pasteur made strenuous efforts to export the vaccine beyond France. He used his celebrity status to establish Pasteur Institutes across Europe and Asia, and his nephew, Adrien Loir, travelled to Australia in 1888 to try to introduce the vaccine to combat anthrax in New South Wales. Ultimately, the vaccine was unsuccessful in the challenging climate of rural Australia, and it was soon superseded by a more robust version developed by local researchers John Gunn and John McGarvie Smith.\nThe human vaccine for anthrax became available in 1954. This was a cell-free vaccine instead of the live-cell Pasteur-style vaccine used for veterinary purposes. An improved cell-free vaccine became available in 1970.\nSociety and culture.\nSite cleanup.\nAnthrax spores can survive for very long periods of time in the environment after release. Chemical methods for cleaning anthrax-contaminated sites or materials may use oxidizing agents such as peroxides, ethylene oxide, Sandia Foam, chlorine dioxide (used in the Hart Senate Office Building), peracetic acid, ozone gas, hypochlorous acid, sodium persulfate, and liquid bleach products containing sodium hypochlorite. Nonoxidizing agents shown to be effective for anthrax decontamination include methyl bromide, formaldehyde, and metam sodium. These agents destroy bacterial spores. All of the aforementioned anthrax decontamination technologies have been demonstrated to be effective in laboratory tests conducted by the US EPA or others.\nDecontamination techniques for \"Bacillus anthracis\" spores are affected by the material with which the spores are associated, environmental factors such as temperature and humidity, and microbiological factors such as the spore species, anthracis strain, and test methods used.\nA bleach solution for treating hard surfaces has been approved by the EPA. Chlorine dioxide has emerged as the preferred biocide against anthrax-contaminated sites, having been employed in the treatment of numerous government buildings over the past decade. Its chief drawback is the need for \"in situ\" processes to have the reactant on demand.\nTo speed the process, trace amounts of a nontoxic catalyst composed of iron and tetroamido macrocyclic ligands are combined with sodium carbonate and bicarbonate and converted into a spray. The spray formula is applied to an infested area and is followed by another spray containing tert-butyl hydroperoxide.\nUsing the catalyst method, complete destruction of all anthrax spores can be achieved in under 30 minutes. A standard catalyst-free spray destroys fewer than half the spores in the same amount of time.\nCleanups at a Senate Office Building, several contaminated postal facilities, and other US government and private office buildings, a collaborative effort headed by the Environmental Protection Agency showed decontamination to be possible, but time-consuming and costly. Clearing the Senate Office Building of anthrax spores cost $27\u00a0million, according to the Government Accountability Office. Cleaning the Brentwood postal facility in Washington cost $130\u00a0million and took 26 months. Since then, newer and less costly methods have been developed.\nCleanup of anthrax-contaminated areas on ranches and in the wild is much more problematic. Carcasses may be burned, though often 3 days are needed to burn a large carcass and this is not feasible in areas with little wood. Carcasses may also be buried, though the burying of large animals deeply enough to prevent resurfacing of spores requires much manpower and expensive tools. Carcasses have been soaked in formaldehyde to kill spores, though this has environmental contamination issues. Block burning of vegetation in large areas enclosing an anthrax outbreak has been tried; this, while environmentally destructive, causes healthy animals to move away from an area with carcasses in search of fresh grass. Some wildlife workers have experimented with covering fresh anthrax carcasses with shadecloth and heavy objects. This prevents some scavengers from opening the carcasses, thus allowing the putrefactive bacteria within the carcass to kill the vegetative \"B. anthracis\" cells and preventing sporulation. This method also has drawbacks, as scavengers such as hyenas are capable of infiltrating almost any exclosure.\nThe experimental site at Gruinard Island is said to have been decontaminated with a mixture of formaldehyde and seawater by the Ministry of Defence. It is not clear whether similar treatments had been applied to US test sites.\nBiological warfare.\nAnthrax spores have been used as a biological warfare weapon. Its first modern incidence occurred when Nordic rebels, supplied by the German General Staff, used anthrax with unknown results against the Imperial Russian Army in Finland in 1916. Anthrax was first tested as a biological warfare agent by Unit 731 of the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria during the 1930s; some of this testing involved intentional infection of prisoners of war, thousands of whom died. Anthrax, designated at the time as Agent N, was also investigated by the Allies in the 1940s.\nIn 1942, British scientists at Porton Down began research on Operation Vegetarian, an ultimately unused biowarfare military operation plan which called for animal feed pellets containing linseed infected with anthrax spores of the Vollum-14578 strain to be dropped by air over the countryside of Nazi Germany. The pellets would be eaten by cattle, which would in turn be eaten by the human population and as such severely disrupt the German war effort. In the same year, bioweapons tests were carried out on the uninhabited Gruinard Island in the Scottish Highlands, with Porton Down scientists studying the effect of anthrax on the island's population of sheep. Ultimately, five million pellets were created, though plans to drop them over Germany using Royal Air Force bombers in 1944 were scrapped after the success of Operation Overlord and the subsequent Allied liberation of France. All pellets were destroyed using incinerators in 1945. \nWeaponized anthrax was part of the US stockpile prior to 1972, when the United States signed the Biological Weapons Convention. President Nixon ordered the dismantling of US biowarfare programs in 1969 and the destruction of all existing stockpiles of bioweapons. In 1978\u201379, the Rhodesian government used anthrax against cattle and humans during its campaign against rebels. The Soviet Union created and stored 100 to 200 tons of anthrax spores at Kantubek on Vozrozhdeniya Island; they were abandoned in 1992 and destroyed in 2002.\nAmerican military and British Army personnel are no longer routinely vaccinated against anthrax prior to active service in places where biological attacks are considered a threat.\nSverdlovsk incident (2 April 1979).\nDespite signing the 1972 agreement to end bioweapon production, the government of the Soviet Union had an active bioweapons program that included the production of hundreds of tons of anthrax after this period. On 2 April 1979, some of the over one million people living in Sverdlovsk (now called Ekaterinburg, Russia), about east of Moscow, were exposed to an accidental release of anthrax from a biological weapons complex located near there. At least 94 people were infected, of whom at least 68 died. One victim died four days after the release, 10 over an eight-day period at the peak of the deaths, and the last six weeks later. Extensive cleanup, vaccinations, and medical interventions managed to save about 30 of the victims. Extensive cover-ups and destruction of records by the KGB continued from 1979 until Russian president Boris Yeltsin admitted this anthrax accident in 1992. Jeanne Guillemin reported in 1999 that a combined Russian and United States team investigated the accident in 1992.\nNearly all of the night-shift workers of a ceramics plant directly across the street from the biological facility (compound 19) became infected, and most died. Since most were men, some NATO governments suspected the Soviet Union had developed a sex-specific weapon. The government blamed the outbreak on the consumption of anthrax-tainted meat, and ordered the confiscation of all uninspected meat that entered the city. They also ordered all stray dogs to be shot and people not have contact with sick animals. Also, a voluntary evacuation and anthrax vaccination program was established for people from 18 to 55.\nTo support the cover-up story, Soviet medical and legal journals published articles about an outbreak in livestock that caused gastrointestinal anthrax in people having consumed infected meat, and cutaneous anthrax in people having come into contact with the animals. All medical and public health records were confiscated by the KGB. In addition to the medical problems the outbreak caused, it also prompted Western countries to be more suspicious of a covert Soviet bioweapons program and to increase their surveillance of suspected sites. In 1986, the US government was allowed to investigate the incident, and concluded the exposure was from aerosol anthrax from a military weapons facility. In 1992, President Yeltsin admitted he was \"absolutely certain\" that \"rumors\" about the Soviet Union violating the 1972 Bioweapons Treaty were true. The Soviet Union, like the US and UK, had agreed to submit information to the UN about their bioweapons programs, but omitted known facilities and never acknowledged their weapons program.\nAnthrax bioterrorism.\nIn theory, anthrax spores can be cultivated with minimal special equipment and a first-year collegiate microbiological education. To make large amounts of an aerosol form of anthrax suitable for biological warfare requires extensive practical knowledge, training, and highly advanced equipment.\nConcentrated anthrax spores were used for bioterrorism in the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States, delivered by mailing postal letters containing the spores. The letters were sent to several news media offices and two Democratic senators: Tom Daschle of South Dakota and Patrick Leahy of Vermont. As a result, 22 were infected and five died. Only a few grams of material were used in these attacks and in August 2008, the US Department of Justice announced they believed that Bruce Ivins, a senior biodefense researcher employed by the United States government, was responsible. These events also spawned many anthrax hoaxes.\nDue to these events, the US Postal Service installed biohazard detection systems at its major distribution centers to actively scan for anthrax being transported through the mail. As of 2020, no positive alerts by these systems have occurred.\nDecontaminating mail.\nIn response to the postal anthrax attacks and hoaxes, the United States Postal Service sterilized some mail using gamma irradiation and treatment with a proprietary enzyme formula supplied by Sipco Industries.\nA scientific experiment performed by a high school student, later published in the \"Journal of Medical Toxicology\", suggested a domestic electric iron at its hottest setting (at least ) used for at least 5 minutes should destroy all anthrax spores in a common postal envelope.\nOther animals.\nAnthrax, a bacterial disease caused by \"Bacillus anthracis\", can have devastating effects on animals. It primarily affects herbivores such as cattle, sheep, and goats, but a wide range of mammals, birds, and even humans can also be susceptible. Infection typically occurs through the ingestion of spores in contaminated soil or plants. Once inside the host, the spores transform into active bacteria, producing lethal toxins that lead to severe symptoms. Infected animals often exhibit high fever, rapid breathing, and convulsions, and they may succumb to the disease within hours to days. The presence of anthrax can pose significant challenges to livestock management and wildlife conservation efforts, making it a critical concern for both animal health and public health, as it can occasionally be transmitted to humans through contact with infected animals or contaminated products. Infected animals may stagger, have difficulty breathing, tremble, and finally collapse and die within a few hours.\nAnthrax is especially rare in dogs and cats, as is evidenced by a single reported case in the United States in 2001. Anthrax outbreaks occur in some wild animal populations with some regularity.\nRussian researchers estimate arctic permafrost contains around 1.5\u00a0million anthrax-infected reindeer carcasses, and the spores may survive in the permafrost for 105 years. A risk exists that global warming in the Arctic can thaw the permafrost, releasing anthrax spores in the carcasses. In 2016, an anthrax outbreak in reindeer was linked to a 75-year-old carcass that defrosted during a heat wave.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42899", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42899", "title": "Anthrax (American band)", "text": "American heavy metal band\nAnthrax is an American heavy metal band from New York City, formed in 1981 by rhythm guitarist Scott Ian and bassist Dan Lilker. The group is considered one of the leaders of the thrash metal scene from the 1980s and is part of the \"Big Four\" of the genre, along with Metallica, Megadeth and Slayer. They were also one of the first thrash metal bands (along with Overkill and Nuclear Assault) to emerge from the East Coast. The band's current lineup consists of Scott Ian, drummer Charlie Benante, bassist Frank Bello, vocalist Joey Belladonna and lead guitarist Jonathan Donais. Anthrax's lineup has changed numerous times over their career, leaving Ian as the only constant member of the band. Ian and Benante (who replaced one-time drummer Greg D'Angelo in 1983) are the only two members to appear on all of Anthrax's albums, while Bello has been a member of Anthrax since 1984, replacing Lilker.\nAfter cycling through a number of members, Anthrax released their debut album, \"Fistful of Metal\" (1984), with singer Neil Turbin. Turbin was replaced by Joey Belladonna later that year, stabilizing the band's lineup. Anthrax's third album \"Among the Living\" (1987), which brought the band mainstream success for the first time, is recognized as one of the greatest thrash metal albums. The band's next two albums, \"State of Euphoria\" (1988) and \"Persistence of Time\" (1990), further cemented their reputation as one of the most successful thrash metal bands, with the latter giving Anthrax their first Grammy Award nomination. In 1992, Anthrax signed to Elektra Records for $10 million and Belladonna was replaced by John Bush of Armored Saint. Bush's first album with Anthrax, \"Sound of White Noise\" (1993), reached number seven on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart (their greatest chart success) and spawned the radio hit \"Only\". Anthrax's subsequent albums with Bush would experience less critical and commercial success; the band would part ways with Elektra following the release of \"Stomp 442\" (1995) due to a lack of promotional support, and \"\" (1998) suffered from the bankruptcy of their record label.\nBush left Anthrax in 2005, after which the band reunited with Belladonna and lead guitarist Dan Spitz. After Belladonna and Spitz's departure in 2007, Anthrax recruited singer Dan Nelson and commenced work on a new album, although Nelson would part ways with the band in 2009. Following a short-lived reunion with Bush, Belladonna rejoined the band for a third time in 2010. Anthrax's first studio album in eight years, and first with Belladonna in 21 years, \"Worship Music\" (2011) was released to critical and commercial success, reaching number twelve on the \"Billboard\" 200. Their most recent album to date, \"For All Kings\", was released in 2016. The band is expected to release their twelfth studio album in 2026.\nAnthrax has released 11 studio albums, several other albums, and 26 singles, including collaborating on a single with American hip hop group Public Enemy. Four of the band's studio albums (\"Among the Living\", \"State of Euphoria\", \"Persistence of Time\" and \"Sound of White Noise\") have also achieved gold certifications by the RIAA. According to Nielsen SoundScan, Anthrax sold 2.5\u00a0million records in the United States from 1991 to 2004, with total worldwide sales of ten million.\nHistory.\nFormation (1981\u20131982).\nAnthrax was formed in Queens, New York City, on July 18, 1981, by guitarists Scott Ian and Dan Lilker, with Ian's friend Dave Weiss on drums. The band was named after the disease of the same name which Ian saw in a biology textbook, chosen because it sounded \"sufficiently evil\". Lilker originally intended for Scott Setari to play bass in the band, during their early phases as a cover band. Anthrax's initial lineup was completed by singer John Connelly, and bassist Paul Kahn. Kahn was briefly replaced by bassist Kenny Kushner before Lilker took over on bass. Future Hittman singer Dirk Kennedy replaced Connelly for a few months and the band brought in lead guitarist Greg Walls. Weiss was then replaced early on by drummer Greg D'Angelo, who was recommended to the band by Walls. Ian's younger brother Jason Rosenfeld had been a temporary vocalist until Ian's former schoolmate Neil Turbin joined the band in late August 1982. Turbin joined the band partly because of guitarist Walls, who Turbin later said was \"the best guitarist Anthrax ever had\". The band recorded its first demo tape during this time.\nNeil Turbin era and debut album (1982\u20131984).\nThe band's first performance with Neil Turbin was at Great Gildersleeves, a New York club, in September 1982. This lineup played regularly in the New York\u2013New Jersey area over the next several months. Anthrax was also on the same bill as then-up-and-coming Metallica for several shows in the spring of 1983. Guitarist Walls left Anthrax that summer because of friction with Ian, and drummer D'Angelo left a month later. Turbin said he was seriously considering leaving because of the loss of Walls and D'Angelo, but he stuck it out for another year. Walls was replaced by Bob Berry, who was recommended to Turbin by Rhett Forrester of Riot. Berry was in turn soon replaced by Dan Spitz, who was previously a member of the New Jersey thrash band Overkill.\nDrummer Charlie Benante replaced D'Angelo in September 1983 after a several-month courtship by Ian. By this time, Ian and Lilker had befriended New Jersey record store owner Jon Zazula, to whom they had given their demo tapes to critique. Zazula's new record label Megaforce Records had recently released Metallica's debut album \"Kill 'Em All\" to great success. In late 1983, Zazula agreed to sign Anthrax and the band recorded the \"Soldiers of Metal\" single, which was produced by Ross the Boss of Manowar. The B-side was the song \"Howling Furies\" which was taken from a previous demo with Greg D'Angelo on drums (his only Anthrax recording).\nAnthrax released their debut album \"Fistful of Metal\" in January 1984. Former guitarist Walls said he was shocked that the album was released without giving credit to Walls as the primary songwriter on \"Panic\" and \"Metal Thrashing Mad\", as well as smaller songwriting contributions throughout the album. Tensions were building between Lilker and Turbin for various reasons, eventually leading to Turbin firing Lilker without informing the rest of the band. He would soon form the band Nuclear Assault with former Anthrax roadie / vocalist John Connelly. Lilker was replaced by Benante's nephew and roadie Frank Bello. The band then went on a successful US tour opening for Raven and others to support \"Fistful of Metal\".\nIn August 1984, Turbin and Anthrax went their separate ways after long-standing personal issues. In his book \"Eddie Trunk's Essential Hard Rock and Heavy Metal\", music journalist Eddie Trunk admits pressuring Jon Zazula, Scott Ian and Anthrax into firing Turbin because of his personal taste in vocals. Singer Matt Fallon was briefly hired in late 1984, but he and the band soon parted ways. The remaining members decided to play live shows as a four-piece billed as \"The Diseased\" with Scott Ian on vocals, performing hardcore punk covers until a permanent singer could be found.\nJoey Belladonna era (1984\u20131992).\nIn 1984, Joey Belladonna was chosen as the new vocalist. The \"Armed and Dangerous\" EP marked Belladonna's recording debut with Anthrax. The 1992 reissue of the EP included the two songs from the \"Soldiers of Metal\" single that had Neil Turbin performing on them.\nAnthrax's second album \"Spreading the Disease\" was released in October 1985. It was well-received as both a technical leap forward from \"Fistful of Metal\" and as a more original effort, and remains one of the band's most highly regarded albums. With leftover studio time from these sessions, Ian, Benante and former bandmate Dan Lilker collaborated with vocalist Billy Milano to form the side project Stormtroopers of Death, and recorded the album \"Speak English or Die\" in three days. It was released in August 1985 and is now considered a pioneering crossover thrash release, featuring one of the earliest examples of a blast beat on record. Afterwards, the project was put on hold as Ian and Benante turned their focus back on Anthrax.\nThe US tour to support \"Spreading the Disease\" opening for Black Sabbath was canceled after four dates due to Sabbath singer Glenn Hughes' voice problems. In April 1986, Anthrax attempted its first tour of Europe beginning in Bochum, Germany, supported by Overkill and Agent Steel. The tour included a show near Chernobyl, Ukraine, immediately after the Chernobyl disaster. Later that year, Anthrax toured Europe with Metallica. The tour began on September 10 at St David's Hall and ended on September 26 in Solnahallen, Sweden. The Swedish show was Anthrax's last performance before the bus accident the following day, which killed Metallica bassist Cliff Burton.\nThe band's third studio album \"Among the Living\" was released in March 1987, and is often considered by both the band and critics to be a major breakthrough for Anthrax. Produced by Eddie Kramer, it showcased the band's humorous, experimental side and began a lyrical trend focusing on movies, politics, comic books and Stephen King novels. The album was dedicated to Cliff Burton's memory. Propelled by the singles \"Indians\" and \"I Am the Law\", the success of \"Among the Living\" not only turned Anthrax into a household name (along with the remaining \"big four\" of thrash metal\u2013Metallica, Megadeth and Slayer), but eventually earned them one of their first certified-gold records by the RIAA. \"I Am the Law\", which was released as the album's second single, was backed with a rap-metal hybrid \"I'm the Man\" as its B-side. Anthrax further indulged its appreciation for rap by appearing on the title track of U.T.F.O.'s album, \"Lethal\", and their worship for the genre was also attributed to Ian wearing a t-shirt of Public Enemy both on stage and for publicity photo shoots; in response, Public Enemy name-checked Anthrax in the lyrics to their 1988 single \"Bring the Noise\". Anthrax toured for over a year to promote \"Among the Living\", touring Europe again with Metallica, the United States with Metal Church, Testament, D.R.I., Exodus and Celtic Frost, and supporting Kiss on their \"Crazy Nights\" tour.\nAnthrax released their fourth album \"State of Euphoria\" in September 1988, and it was produced by Mark Dodson, who had previously worked with Judas Priest, U.D.O. and Metal Church. While the album was not quite as well-received as \"Among the Living\", owing to its \"rushed\" finish, \"State of Euphoria\" was certified gold about five months after its release, and one of the singles \"Antisocial\", originally by French heavy metal band Trust, became an MTV staple as part of the rotation on \"Headbangers Ball\". By 1989, Anthrax was starting to play at arenas as a headlining or opening act, first supporting Ozzy Osbourne on his \"No Rest for the Wicked\" tour in North America, and then headlining European tours with Living Colour, Suicidal Tendencies and King's X, and the U.S. Headbangers Ball Tour with Exodus and Helloween. Also in 1989, MTV sponsored a contest in which the winner had her home trashed by the band. This would later inspire Anthrax's 1992 appearance on the television series \"Married... with Children\", in which the Bundys win a similar TV contest.\nAnthrax returned to the studio at the end of 1989 to work on their fifth album, again with Dodson as the producer. Released in August 1990, \"Persistence of Time\" was written and recorded during a period of turmoil for Anthrax, as Ian had recently been divorced from his first wife, and the middle of the recording session was interrupted by a fire that caused the band to lose more than $100,000 worth of gear and their rehearsal studio. The band members also claimed it was during this period that there were talks of potentially working with a different singer, a situation that Belladonna was unaware of at the time. Considered by fans to be their serious effort, \"Persistence of Time\" was darker, more technical and more progressive than the band's previous work, striking a chord with metal fans wary of Anthrax's \"silly\" side. The most successful single from the album was a cover of Joe Jackson's \"Got the Time\", which Jackson said he enjoyed. \"Persistence of Time\" was certified gold by the RIAA in early 1991, and the band toured for nearly two years to promote the album, opening for Iron Maiden on their \"No Prayer for the Dying\" tour in Europe and North America, and appearing on the Clash of the Titans tour with Megadeth, Slayer and opening act Alice in Chains.\nIn 1991, Anthrax collaborated with Public Enemy on a version of \"Bring the Noise\". This was a hit, and a successful tour with Public Enemy followed. \"Bring the Noise\" has been a live staple for Anthrax since they first played it in concert in 1989. The compilation \"Attack of the Killer B's\" was released in 1991, and featured three tracks from their 1989 EP \"Penikufesin\", a new version of \"I'm the Man\" and a cover of \"Bring the Noise\" on which Ian did some vocals.\nJohn Bush era (1992\u20132005).\nIn early 1992, shortly after signing a $10 million record deal with Elektra Records and following their appearance in \"Married... with Children\", Belladonna was fired from Anthrax over creative and stylistic differences. After firing Belladonna, the remaining members of Anthrax auditioned several vocalists including Mark Osegueda of Death Angel and Spike Xavier of Mind Over Four. However, Armored Saint vocalist John Bush was the standout favorite and had in fact been floated as a potential replacement for Belladonna a few years earlier, due to questions about his reliability stemming from drug and alcohol abuse. The band's first album with Bush and for Elektra, \"Sound of White Noise\", was released in 1993. Produced by Dave Jerden (then-known for his work with Jane's Addiction and Alice in Chains), the album marked a change from Anthrax's earlier work, with a dark sound influenced by alternative rock, and it received mostly positive reviews. Critic Dave Connolley of AllMusic wrote that Bush \"has a lower-register voice than Belladonna, and the result is menacing, premeditated, and sinister.\" The song \"Only\" was released as the album's first single. In the liner notes for \"Return of the Killer A's\", Ian said that James Hetfield told him it was a \"perfect song\". In keeping with the band's eye for unlikely collaborations, classical composer Angelo Badalamenti provided music for \"Black Lodge\" (a nod to \"Twin Peaks\"). This album demonstrated that Anthrax had fully shed its cartoonish persona in favor of mature, thoughtful songwriting, which began with \"Persistence of Time\". The success of \"Sound of White Noise\" dissolved any fan worries that the band would not recover from their split with Belladonna; it was certified gold by the RIAA nearly two months after its release, and gave Anthrax their highest chart position to date at number seven on the \"Billboard\" 200. The album also saw Anthrax continuing to headline arenas and theaters or amphitheaters, taking several bands such as Suicidal Tendencies, White Zombie, Quicksand, Fight and Clawfinger out as supporting acts.\nAfter \"Sound of White Noise\" longtime guitarist Dan Spitz left the band to become a watchmaker, leaving Anthrax a quartet temporarily. In 1995, Anthrax released their seventh studio album \"Stomp 442\", on which Charlie Benante played most of the lead-guitar parts. Benante was assisted by Paul Crook, who later became the band's touring lead guitarist for several years, and Dimebag Darrell of Pantera. The album's release followed a shake-up at Elektra the year before, which saw the firing of the label's president, Bob Krasnow, who was replaced by Sylvia Rhone. During a meeting with the band, Rhone told Anthrax that she wouldn't have signed their record deal. Elektra did not promote \"Stomp 442\", and it was less commercially successful than its predecessor. Frustrated by this, Anthrax severed its ties with the label.\nIn late 1997, Anthrax signed with Ignition Records, an independent label distributed by Tommy Boy Records. The label released \"\" in July 1998. As on \"Stomp 442\", Benante performed lead guitar parts along with Crook and Darrell. The album also features Pantera vocalist Phil Anselmo making a guest vocal appearance. Towards the end of 1998, Tommy Boy ended its distribution deal with Ignition, after which the label went bankrupt, disrupting its distribution. Anthrax then signed with Beyond Records, who released the greatest-hits album \"Return of the Killer A's\" (1999), after which Beyond went out of business as well. During this period a two-vocalist tour with Belladonna and Bush was planned, but Belladonna decided not to participate at the last minute; however, on the mentioned \"Return of the Killer A's\" compilation, a cover of The Temptations song \"Ball of Confusion\" was recorded with the then-current lineup of the band (Ian/Benante/Bello/Bush/Crook), in addition to former vocalist Belladonna and former bassist Lilker. This is the only song to feature both Belladonna and Bush on co-vocals.\nDespite hardships and legal entanglements over album rights, Anthrax continued. In 2001, Rob Caggiano joined the band on lead guitar. During the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States the band changed its website, providing information about the disease after people began searching \"anthrax.com\" on internet search engines. Amid a potential PR nightmare, Anthrax issued a press release on October 10, 2001, joking that the band's name would be changed to \"something more friendly, like 'Basket Full of Puppies'.\" Anthrax dispelled any name-change rumors derived from the press release at the November 2001 New York Steel 9/11 benefit concert, when they took the stage in boiler suits with a different word on each one which ultimately read \"We're not changing our name\". Bello has stated they did so after receiving support from members of the NYPD and FDNY, who believed that changing the name of the band would send the wrong message. A picture of the band in the suits is on the inner tray card of \"We've Come for You All\".\nIn 2003, the band signed to Sanctuary Records and released their ninth studio album \"We've Come for You All\", praised by metal journalists as a return to form. The band then spent the summer of 2003 on tour with Mot\u00f6rhead.\nIn early 2004, Anthrax released \"The Greater of Two Evils\", a \"live in the studio\" re-recording of the earlier work with the band's then-current lineup. Bassist Frank Bello announced shortly afterwards that he was leaving the band to join Helmet, and was replaced by Fates Warning and Armored Saint member Joey Vera.\nReunions with Belladonna and Bush (2005\u20132010).\nIn April 2005, Anthrax announced that the \"classic\" lineup of Scott Ian, Charlie Benante, Dan Spitz, Joey Belladonna and Frank Bello would reform. At some shows on the following tour, they played \"Among the Living\" in its entirety. Although the lineup was expected to record a new album after the tour, in January 2007 Ian said that Belladonna had not agreed to a reunion. John Bush also said he wasn't ready to re-commit to Anthrax and said he had been asked to return but had declined. Asked if he wanted to rejoin the band when Belladonna left, Bush said that he \"just didn't feel right to do that.\"\nIn December 2007, it was announced that the band's new vocalist would be Dan Nelson, formerly of Devilsize, and Rob Caggiano would return as lead guitarist. In May 2008, Anthrax played its first show in 19 months at Double Door in Chicago.\nIn his monthly Food Coma column posted in December 2008, Scott Ian wrote that he had \"been in the studio working on the new Anthrax album\", promising to be \"giving birth to a really pissed off, loud, fast and heavy child.\" He later wrote that the album was being mixed by Dave Fortman, who had worked with Evanescence and Slipknot.\nIn early 2009, Anthrax began a brief tour opening for Iron Maiden in South America. In July, band manager Izvor Zivkovic confirmed the departure of Dan Nelson due to illness. Nelson denied this, saying that he was fired. All subsequent performances were canceled except the August UK Sonisphere Festival, which featured John Bush on vocals. Fan response after his performance led to a \"Bring Back Bush\" campaign, which was endorsed by Ian.\nSoon afterwards, Benante said that Bush had rejoined the band. In February 2010, Anthrax performed five shows as part of Soundwave in Australia. After the Australian shows, Bush said the band intended to re-record the vocals of several tracks from the upcoming album.\n\"Worship Music\" and \"For All Kings\" (2010\u20132018).\nIn late 2009, Anthrax confirmed their participation in several \"Big Four\" concerts with Metallica, Megadeth and Slayer as part of the 2010 Sonisphere Festival dates in Europe. John Bush decided that he did not want to commit to the band full-time, and left Anthrax for the second time. Joey Belladonna returned to the band in early 2010 for the Sonisphere dates as well as committing to record a new studio album with the band. In June 2010 Anthrax, Metallica, Megadeth and Slayer performed on the same bill for the first time ever at seven Sonisphere shows. The Sofia, Bulgaria show was broadcast in cinemas and later . The bands would also play a few shows in the U.S. the following year, including a concert at Yankee Stadium in September 2011.\nIn April 2011, Anthrax headlined in the Philippines for the first time at the annual Pulp Summer Slam with Death Angel and Hellyeah. The band also headlined the J\u00e4germeister side stage at the Mayhem Festival of 2012, co-headlined by Slayer and Slipknot, and toured with Testament and Death Angel. In June Anthrax released the single \"Fight 'Em 'Til You Can't\" from the then-upcoming new album on their website as a free download to thank fans for their patience in waiting several years for new material. \"Worship Music\" was released on September 12, 2011, and debuted at No. 12 on the \"Billboard\" 200, their highest chart position since \"Sound of White Noise\" in 1993.\nIn January 2013, Anthrax announced that lead guitarist Rob Caggiano had left the band to join Volbeat. It was announced shortly afterwards that Jonathan Donais of Shadows Fall had been hired as the band's touring lead guitarist. Donais was confirmed as an official member in August of that year. In March, Anthrax released the \"Anthems\" EP featuring cover versions of 1970s rock songs as well as two new versions of the song \"Crawl\" from \"Worship Music\". According to Ian, the band began working on its next studio album in late 2013. They released a live DVD, \"Chile on Hell\" in 2014 which featured the band's 2013 performance at the Teatro Caupolican in Santiago, Chile. In early 2015, the band confirmed that they had recorded new material and embarked on a tour with Volbeat.\nSince Belladonna's return to Anthrax, the band has been nominated for three Grammys, in 2012, 2013, and 2014.\nThe band began 2016 with a short US tour with Lamb of God and released their eleventh studio album \"For All Kings\" on February 26, 2016. The album debuted on the \"Billboard\" 200 charts at number 9, surpassing the number 12 debut of \"Worship Music\". In March, they opened for Iron Maiden on the Latin American leg of their The Book of Souls World Tour. Anthrax spent the summer playing festivals in Europe before embarking on a fall US and Canadian tour with Slayer and Death Angel. The band continued to tour within the next two years, embarking on The Killthrax Tour with Killswitch Engage twice (in 2017 and 2018), and along with Lamb of God, Behemoth, Testament, Napalm Death and Obituary, they supported Slayer on their final world tour from May to December 2018.\nOn February 1, 2017, the band embarked on the 70,000 Tons of Metal cruise. They played two sets and became the first of the \"Big Four\" to attend the open seas festival. During the theater set, they played a cover of Stormtroopers of Death's \"March of the S.O.D.\" and debuted the song \"Blood Eagle Wings\".\nIn a March 2017 interview, drummer Charlie Benante revealed that there were a few unreleased tracks from the \"For All Kings\" sessions that could serve as a genesis for the next Anthrax album, stating, \"I think there are two or three that we could dust off and use as a starting point.\"\nThe band's recording of \"Antisocial\" was prominently featured in the 2017 movie \"It\" but was not included on its official soundtrack release.\nTours, live albums and upcoming twelfth studio album (2018\u2013present).\nWhen asked in May 2018 if Anthrax had begun working on their twelfth studio album, guitarist Scott Ian stated, \"Very, very, very preliminary stages. There's a couple of really great riffs. Charlie's sent around some really great ideas. But we haven't actually started working on anything. We've just been too busy touring.\" A month later, bassist Frank Bello claimed that Anthrax had intended to be back in the studio by mid-2018, but because they agreed to open for Slayer on their farewell tour, they were not expected to start writing their new album until at 2019 at the earliest. The band released the live album and DVD \"Kings Among Scotland\" in April 2018 which was recorded during their Glasgow, Scotland show on the \"For All Kings\" tour.\nAnthrax \u2013 alongside Testament, Corrosion of Conformity, Armored Saint, DevilDriver, John 5, Doro and Metal Church \u2013 participated in Megadeth's first-ever cruise called \"Megacruise\", which took place in October 2019. They resumed live activity during the summer and fall of 2021, with a livestream performance that saw the band celebrate its 40th anniversary, as well as appearances at U.S. festivals such as Aftershock and Welcome to Rockville.\nAlthough 2021 marked the band's 40th anniversary, the planned global anniversary tour was delayed due to travel complications arising from the COVID-19 pandemic; instead, the band performed a livestream concert on July 16 of that year. The tour was delayed to 2022, with a North American leg beginning on July 16 with Black Label Society and Hatebreed as support, followed by a European tour to begin on September 27 with Municipal Waste, and then they toured North America again in January and February 2023 with Black Label Society and Exodus. The band also released the full livestream setlist as a live album under the title \"XL\" on July 15, 2022.\nAfter years of false starts and stops, Anthrax entered the studio in the spring of 2023 to begin recording their twelfth studio album. Frontman Joey Belladonna began recording his vocals on November 5, 2023, and production of the album continued within another two years. Although Bello had stated the album would be in the fall of 2025, it was left unfinished by the middle of the year, with drummer Charlie Benante revealing that the band had thrown \"out a bunch of old tunes and made some new ones that destroy the older ones\", and Belladonna claiming he had \"maybe two or three more\" songs left to record. Bello confirmed in July 2025 that the album was in the mixing stages, and Benante announced the same month that a new Anthrax song will be released before the end of the year.\nOn March 28, 2024, it was announced that original Anthrax bassist Dan Lilker would be performing with the band for the first time in 40 years on their spring 2024 tour dates by filling in for Bello, who was unable to perform due to \"personal reasons\".\nAnthrax co-headlined a European tour with Kreator in November and December 2024, with Testament as the opening act. Along with Metallica, Slayer, Pantera, Alice in Chains and Mastodon, the band served as one of the opening acts of Black Sabbath's one-off reunion show at Villa Park on July 5, 2025. This gig marked the first time in nearly fifteen years, since the \"\" concert series, that Anthrax had shared the stage together with both Metallica and Slayer. In support of their upcoming twelfth studio album, the band (along with Exodus) will open for Megadeth on the Canadian leg of their final tour in February and March 2026. They will also support Iron Maiden on select dates to the North American leg of their Run for Your Lives World Tour that fall.\nEx-members incidents.\nIn 2012, Anthrax and former vocalist Dan Nelson reached an undisclosed settlement after the vocalist was fired during a 2009 tour.\nIn October 2014, ex-vocalist Neil Turbin accused guitarist Scott Ian of \"fabricating lies\" about his split with the band in 1984 to \"draw attention\" to Ian's autobiography.\nIn October 2015, former guitarist Dan Spitz took issue with a 2004 Guitar.com article (since offline) which suggested that the band's drummer, Charlie Benante, was responsible for laying down lead guitar on many of the group's classic songs.\nIn a 2016 interview with Metal Voice, and again in a video that he uploaded to YouTube in December 2020, former guitarist Greg Walls claimed that he had contributed to the writing of the songs on the band's first album, \"Fistful of Metal\", specifically claiming to have written all the music to \"Metal Thrashing Mad\" and the majority of \"Panic\" but the band copyrighted the songs without his credit. In the same videos, Walls also claimed that he told Scott to drop the name \"Rosenfeld\" and simply go by \"Scott Ian\".\nMusical style, influences, and legacy.\nAnthrax is one of the bands responsible for the emergence of speed metal and thrash metal. Unlike other acts from the \"Big Four\" of U.S. thrash metal, such as Metallica or Megadeth, the band has been described as having a \"good sense to temper their often serious music with a healthy dose of humor and realism.\" According to \"Rolling Stone\", Anthrax was one of the few heavy metal bands to receive critical praise and redefine the genre during the 1980s. Original guitarists Scott Ian and Dan Spitz' styles were described as \"aggressive and head pounding\", with power chords and \"chugging\" pedal points providing the sonic drive. Author Thomas Harrison wrote that Anthrax played metal at a faster tempo because of its punk influences. It is said that many pioneering thrash musicians, such as Anthrax, were influenced equally by heavy metal and punk rock. In 1989, Brad Tolinski of \"Guitar World\" magazine noted that, \"If Exodus is a speed metal equivalent of the Rolling Stones, then New York-based Anthrax must surely be the genre's Beatles.\" The band's sixth album, 1993's \"Sound of White Noise\" (its first with singer John Bush), incorporated grunge and alternative metal influences in a darker vein. Critics consider the band's studio releases from the Bush era as having a more alternative metal, grunge, groove metal, and speed metal sound. The album \"Worship Music\" marked a return to thrash metal and the return of singer Joey Belladonna. Although the songs are credited to the whole band, since \"Spreading the Disease\" the music has been written almost entirely by Charlie Benante and the lyrics by Scott Ian, although John Bush made some lyrical contributions during his tenure in the band.\nAnthrax has been influenced by a variety of music, including classic rock and hard rock acts as Rush, Cheap Trick, AC/DC, Kiss, Queen, Thin Lizzy, Boston and Journey, all of whom the band had covered on its EP \"Anthems\". Their other influences include heavy metal bands such as Deep Purple, Black Sabbath, Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Accept, Mot\u00f6rhead, Exodus, UFO, Saxon, and Raven, as well as hardcore punk bands such as Bad Brains, D.R.I., Suicidal Tendencies, and GBH. Anthrax is a member of the \"big four\" of thrash metal with Metallica, Megadeth and Slayer, and often credited as one of the first bands of the genre to emerge from the East Coast, along with Overkill and Nuclear Assault. The band has been credited for laying the groundwork for rap metal and nu metal. According to Nielsen SoundScan, Anthrax sold 2.5 million records in the United States from 1991 to 2004, and 10 million worldwide.\nAnthrax has influenced multiple bands such as Pantera, Sepultura, Cannibal Corpse, Testament, Slipknot, Death Angel, Korn, Limp Bizkit, 311, Papa Roach, Avenged Sevenfold, Killswitch Engage, Children of Bodom, Sevendust, Terror and Insane Clown Posse.\nAnthrax has been known to reference or draw influences from numerous sources in popular culture. \"I Am the Law\" is about the comic book character Judge Dredd. The title track to the album \"Among the Living\" is based on the Stephen King novel \"The Stand\", in particular the character of villain Randall Flagg, while \"A Skeleton in the Closet\" is based on King's novella \"Apt Pupil\" and \"Efilnikufesin (N.F.L.)\" pays tribute to actor and original \"Saturday Night Live\" cast member John Belushi. The song \"The Constant\" is based on an episode of \"Lost\".\nThe band, for a period of time, used a caricature of a bald man's face as a mascot; he was colloquially christened the \"Not Man\". The face itself comes from a rubber kids toy called \"Magic Monster\".\nBand members.\nCurrent members\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nAwards and accolades.\nCalifornia Music Awards\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42900", "revid": "43473484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42900", "title": "Pythagorean tuning", "text": "Method of tuning a musical instrument\nPythagorean tuning is a system of musical tuning in which the frequency ratios of all intervals are determined by choosing a sequence of fifths which are \"pure\" or perfect, with ratio formula_1. This is chosen because it is the next harmonic of a vibrating string, after the octave (which is the ratio formula_2), and hence is the next most consonant \"pure\" interval, and the easiest to tune by ear. As Novalis put it, \"The musical proportions seem to me to be particularly correct natural proportions.\" Alternatively, it can be described as the tuning of the syntonic temperament in which the generator is the ratio 3:2 (i.e., the untempered perfect fifth), which is \u2248\u00a0702 cents wide.\nThe system dates back to Ancient Mesopotamia;. (See .) It is named, and has been widely misattributed, to Ancient Greeks, notably Pythagoras (sixth century BC) by modern authors of music theory. Ptolemy, and later Boethius, ascribed the division of the tetrachord by only two intervals, called \"semitonium\" and \"tonus\" in Latin (256:243\u00a0\u00d7\u00a09:8\u00a0\u00d7\u00a09:8), to Eratosthenes. The so-called \"Pythagorean tuning\" was used by musicians up to the beginning of the 16th century. \"The Pythagorean system would appear to be ideal because of the purity of the fifths, but some consider other intervals, particularly the major third, to be so badly out of tune that major chords [may be considered] a dissonance.\"\nThe Pythagorean scale is any scale which can be constructed from only pure perfect fifths (3:2) and octaves (2:1). In Greek music it was used to tune tetrachords, which were composed into scales spanning an octave. A distinction can be made between extended Pythagorean tuning and a 12-tone Pythagorean temperament. Extended Pythagorean tuning corresponds 1-on-1 with western music notation and there is no limit to the number of fifths. In 12-tone Pythagorean temperament however one is limited by 12-tones per octave and one cannot play most music according to the Pythagorean system corresponding to the enharmonic notation. Instead one finds that for instance the diminished sixth becomes a \"wolf fifth\".\nMethod.\n12-tone Pythagorean temperament is based on a sequence of perfect fifths, each tuned in the ratio 3:2, the next simplest ratio after 2:1 (the octave). Starting from D for example (\"D-based\" tuning), six other notes are produced by moving six times a ratio 3:2 up, and the remaining ones by moving the same ratio down:\nE\u266d\u2013B\u266d\u2013F\u2013C\u2013G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E\u2013B\u2013F\u266f\u2013C\u266f\u2013G\u266f\nThis succession of eleven 3:2 intervals spans across a wide range of frequency (on a piano keyboard, it encompasses 77 keys). Since notes differing in frequency by a factor of 2 are perceived as similar and given the same name (octave equivalence), it is customary to divide or multiply the frequencies of some of these notes by 2 or by a power of 2. The purpose of this adjustment is to move the 12 notes within a smaller range of frequency, namely within the interval between the base note D and the D above it (a note with twice its frequency). This interval is typically called the basic octave (on a piano keyboard, an octave has only 12 keys). This dates to antiquity: in Ancient Mesopotamia, rather than stacking fifths, tuning was based on alternating ascending fifths and descending fourths (equal to an ascending fifth followed by a descending octave), resulting in the notes of a pentatonic or heptatonic scale falling within an octave.\nIn the formulas, the ratios 3:2 or 2:3 represent an ascending or descending perfect fifth (i.e. an increase or decrease in frequency by a perfect fifth, while 2:1 or 1:2 represent a rising or lowering octave). The formulas can also be expressed in terms of powers of the third and the second harmonics.\nThe major scale based on C, obtained from this tuning is:\nIn equal temperament, pairs of enharmonic notes such as A\u266d and G\u266f are thought of as being exactly the same note\u2014however, as the above table indicates, in Pythagorean tuning they have different ratios with respect to D, which means they are at a different frequency. This discrepancy, of about 23.46 cents, or nearly one quarter of a semitone, is known as a \"Pythagorean comma\".\nTo get around this problem, Pythagorean tuning constructs only twelve notes as above, with eleven fifths between them. For example, one may use only the 12 notes from E\u266d to G\u266f. This, as shown above, implies that only eleven just fifths are used to build the entire chromatic scale. The remaining interval (the diminished sixth from G\u266f to E\u266d) is left badly out-of-tune, meaning that any music which combines those two notes is unplayable in this tuning. A very out-of-tune interval such as this one is known as a \"wolf interval\". In the case of Pythagorean tuning, all the fifths are 701.96 cents wide, in the exact ratio 3:2, except the wolf fifth, which is only 678.49 cents wide, nearly a quarter of a semitone flatter.\nIf the notes G\u266f and E\u266d need to be sounded together, the position of the wolf fifth can be changed. For example, a C-based Pythagorean tuning would produce a stack of fifths running from D\u266d to F\u266f, making F\u266f-D\u266d the wolf interval. However, there will always be one wolf fifth in Pythagorean tuning, making it impossible to play in all keys in tune.\nSizes of intervals.\nThe tables above only show the frequency ratios of each note with respect to the base note. However, intervals can start from any note and so twelve intervals can be defined for each interval type \u2013 twelve unisons, twelve semitones, twelve 2-semitone intervals, etc.\nAs explained above, one of the twelve fifths (the wolf fifth) has a different size with respect to the other eleven. For a similar reason, each interval type except unisons and octaves has two different sizes. The table on the right shows their frequency ratios, with deviations of a Pythagorean comma coloured. The deviations arise because the notes determine two different semitones:\nBy contrast, in an equally tempered chromatic scale, all semitones measure\nformula_5\nand intervals of any given type have the same size, but none are justly tuned except unisons and octaves.\nBy definition, in Pythagorean tuning 11 perfect fifths (P5 in the table) have a size of approximately 701.955 cents (700+\u03b5 cents, where \"\u03b5\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.955 cents). Since the average size of the 12 fifths must equal exactly 700 cents (as in equal temperament), the other one must have a size of 700\u00a0\u2212\u00a011\"\u03b5\" cents, which is about 678.495 cents (the wolf fifth). As shown in the table, the latter interval, although enharmonically equivalent to a fifth, is more properly called a diminished sixth (d6). Similarly,\nIn short, similar differences in width are observed for all interval types, except for unisons and octaves, and they are all multiples of\u00a0\"\u03b5\", the difference between the Pythagorean fifth and the average fifth.\nAs an obvious consequence, each augmented or diminished interval is exactly 12\"\u03b5\" (\u2248\u00a023.460) cents narrower or wider than its enharmonic equivalent. For instance, the d6 (or wolf fifth) is 12\"\u03b5\" cents narrower than each P5, and each A2 is 12\"\u03b5\" cents wider than each m3. This interval of size 12\"\u03b5\" is known as a Pythagorean comma, exactly equal to the opposite of a diminished second (\u2248\u00a0\u221223.460 cents). This implies that \"\u03b5\" can be also defined as one twelfth of a Pythagorean comma.\nPythagorean intervals.\nFour of the above-mentioned intervals take a specific name in Pythagorean tuning. In the following table, these specific names are provided, together with alternative names used generically for some other intervals. The Pythagorean comma does not coincide with the diminished second, as its size (524288:531441) is the reciprocal of the Pythagorean diminished second (531441:524288). Also \"ditone\" and \"semiditone\" are specific for Pythagorean tuning, while \"tone\" and \"tritone\" are used generically for all tuning systems. Despite its name, a semiditone (3 semitones, or about 300 cents) can hardly be viewed as half of a ditone (4 semitones, or about 400 cents). All the intervals with prefix \"sesqui-\" are justly tuned, and their frequency ratio, shown in the table, is a superparticular number (or epimoric ratio). The same is true for the octave.\nHistory and usage.\nThe system dates to Ancient Mesopotamia, and consisted of alternating ascending fifths and descending fourths; see . Within Ancient Greek music, the system had been mainly attributed to Pythagoras (who lived around 500 BCE) by modern authors of music theory; Ancient Greeks borrowed much of their music theory from Mesopotamia, including the diatonic scale, Pythagorean tuning, and modes. The Chinese Sh\u00ed-\u00e8r-l\u01dc scale uses the same intervals as the Pythagorean scale and was invented between 600 BCE and 240 CE.\nBecause of the wolf interval when using a 12-tone Pythagorean temperament, this tuning is rarely used today, although it is thought to have been widespread. In music which does not change key very often, or which is not very harmonically adventurous, the wolf interval is unlikely to be a problem, as not all the possible fifths will be heard in such pieces. In extended Pythagorean tuning there is no wolf interval, all perfect fifths are exactly 3:2.\nBecause most fifths in 12-tone Pythagorean temperament are in the simple ratio of 3:2, they sound very \"smooth\" and consonant. The thirds, by contrast, most of which are in the relatively complex ratios of 81:64 (for major thirds) and 32:27 (for minor thirds), sound less smooth depending on the instrument.\nFrom about 1510 onward, as thirds came to be treated as consonances, meantone temperament, and particularly quarter-comma meantone, which tunes thirds to the relatively simple ratio of 5:4, became the most popular system for tuning keyboards. At the same time, syntonic-diatonic just intonation was posited first by Ramos and then by Zarlino as the normal tuning for singers.\nHowever, meantone presented its own harmonic challenges. Its wolf intervals proved to be even worse than those of the Pythagorean tuning (so much so that it often required 19 keys to the octave as opposed to the 12 in Pythagorean tuning). As a consequence, meantone was not suitable for all music. From around the 18th century, as the desire grew for instruments to change key, and therefore to avoid a wolf interval, this led to the widespread use of well temperaments and eventually equal temperament.\nPythagorean temperament can still be heard in some parts of modern classical music from singers and from instruments with no fixed tuning such as the violin family. Where a performer has an unaccompanied passage based on scales, they will tend towards using Pythagorean intonation as that will make the scale sound best in tune, then reverting to other temperaments for other passages (just intonation for chordal or arpeggiated figures, and equal temperament when accompanied with piano or orchestra). Such changes are never explicitly notated and are scarcely noticeable to the audience, just sounding 'in tune'.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42901", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42901", "title": "Native American trade", "text": "Trade among Indigenous people of North America\nNative American trade refers to trade among the Indigenous people of North America and with European settlers. Trade with Europeans began before the colonial period, continuing through the 19th century and declining around 1937.\nThe term Native American Trade in this context describes the people involved in the trade. The products involved varied by region and era. In most of Canada, the term is synonymous with the fur trade, since fur for making beaver hats was by far the most valuable product of the trade, from the European point of view. Demand for other products resulted in trade in those items: Europeans asked for deerskin on the southeast coast of the United States, buffalo skins and meat, and pemmican on the Great Plains. In turn, Native American demand influenced the trade of goods brought by Europeans.\nEconomic contact between Native Americans and European colonists began in the early stages of European settlement. From the 17th century to the 19th century, the English and French mainly traded for animal pelts and fur with Native Americans. In the late 1700s, Spanish explorers started settling in southern California and initiated the establishment of missions. These missions served as focal points for interactions between Native Americans and Spanish settlers, encompassing cultural exchanges, political negotiations, trade activities, and economic developments. Evidence of these exchanges and developments were kept by the Spanish who maintained detailed ledgers documenting items that were traded in Santa Barbara between them and the Chumash that lived in the missions. Eventually, wars, the dwindling of Native American populations, and the westward expansion of the United States led to the confinement of tribes to reservations and the end of this kind of economic relations between Indians and European Americans.\nOther economic relations continued, especially in the alcohol trade around many reservations, and for Native American arts and crafts that are now shown for everyone to see. Today, many Native Americans satisfy a different kind of demand with the associated trades of their gaming casinos on reservations. These have been developed as entertainment and conference resorts, serving a wide market of customers, and generating very little revenues for tribes to use for economic development, as well as welfare and education of their people.\nThe first explorers to conduct trade with Native Americans were Giovanni da Verrazzano and Jacques Cartier in the 1520s\u20131540s. Verrazzano noted in his book, \"If we wanted to trade with them for some of their things, they would come to the seashore on some rocks where the breakers were most violent while we remained on the little boat, and they sent us what they wanted to give on a rope, continually shouting to us not to approach the land.\" As visits from Europeans became more frequent and some Europeans began to settle in North America, Natives began to establish regular trade relations with these new colonists. The ideal locations for fur trading were near harbors where ships could come in.\nTrade between Native tribes.\nDuring the pre-Columbian era, Native American tribes often traded between themselves and outside bands. Throughout the Americas, Native American tribes had been trading for thousands of years using different material goods and/or currency.\nShell beads.\nShell beads (also referred to as shell money) have been used for around 9,000\u201310,000 years in the Americas, both pre-contact and post-contact. It was most commonly used as a form of trade, either as a material to be exchanged, or as a form of currency.\nThe \"Olivella biplicata\", or the purple olive shell was used during the early Holocene period, around 200\u20131835 CE, spanning around 1,500 years. Typically used by the Chumash (located in the central and southern coastal regions of California), it was crafted and shaped into 160 different variations of shell beads, which were used as a form of currency and status. Some examples of these variant styles include; needle-drilled disks, lipped beads, cupped beads, thin rectangles (pendant), thin rectangles (sequin). Made in the Santa Barbara Channel, they were distributed throughout Chumash territory and was used throughout different areas as currency, allowing for trade between different bands, making its way up California, the Great Basin, and in Western North America.\nThe Cahuilla (located in Palm springs) used beads traded from the Serrano (who had received them from the Gabrieleno/Tongva) to create their own form of shell bead currency. Specific lengths were assigned for different amounts of money. An example of this is a \"witchu\", a string of shell beads from the forehead to the ground, then multiplied by 4 equal to 50 United States cents. Another example is\u00a0 the \"napanaa\", measured by wrapping around the wrists and fingers, equal to 20 cents.\nBasketry.\nTrade played a central role in spreading basket designs among California tribes through active exchange networks involving ceremonial events, visits, and intermarriages. This facilitated the advertising of design styles across neighboring communities, resulting in highly similar systems among tribes in close proximity. This uniformity in basket weaving shows a strong trade network, contrasting with the variability observed in tribes like the Pomo, who lived in more isolated communities in northern California. However, tribes such as the Yurok, Karuk, and Hupa, located along the northwestern California coast and in the Klamath Mountains, exhibited nearly identical basketry.\nThe intertribal commerce of Native American tribes across California and adjacent regions was characterized by the exchange of baskets as valuable commodities. Tribes engaged in the exchange of baskets to obtain goods, forge alliances, and foster social connections. For instance, the Yokuts tribes, located in the Central Valley and Sierra Nevada foothills, engaged in extensive trade networks with neighboring tribes such as Miwok, Coast Miwok, and Tubatulabal. Similarly, the Salinan people, residing along the Central Coast of California, participated in basket trade with the Yokuts and Chumash tribes\u00a0 from the coastal regions. Tribes engaged in trade also obtained a variety of goods in return. These included natural resources such as obsidian, fish, salt, acorns, pine nuts, and manzanita berries.\nMaidu baskets originate primarily from northeastern California, the native territory of the Maidu people. The Maidu are indigenous to the Sierra Nevada foothills and adjacent valleys, including areas such as the Sacramento Valley, the northern Sierra Nevada, and the Cascade Range. The Maidu had access to a variety of natural resources, influencing the materials used in their basketry. These baskets are crafted using traditional techniques passed down through generations and are made from locally sourced materials such as willow, maple, redbud, and ferns, abundant in the surrounding forests and valleys. Maidu's skill in crafting high-quality baskets made them desirable trade partners, attracting interest from other tribes seeking their goods. Additionally, engaging in trade allowed the Maidu to acquire resources not readily available in their own territory. Trade served as a means of fostering alliances and maintaining social connections with neighboring groups, contributing to the cohesion and stability of the region. Through trade, the Maidu could also access items of ceremonial significance or prestige, enhancing their cultural practices and status within the broader network of Native American tribes in the region.\nFur trade in California.\nRabbit skin blankets were a textile category that was often traded among California groups. Great Basin and other desert groups fringing California, with a good supply of hares and cottontails, were important sources for trade. The Surprise Valley Northern Paiute traded them to the Central and Southern Miwok but also received them, especially from the T\u00fcbatulabal.\nGreat Plains trading networks.\nThe trading networks encountered by the first Europeans on the Great Plains were built on a number of trading centers acting as hubs in an advanced system of exchange over great distances. The primary centers were found at the villages of the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara, with a surplus of agricultural produce that could be exchanged. Secondary centers were found at the villages of the Pawnee, Kansa, and Osage on the central great plains, and at the Caddo villages on the southern plains. The \"Dakota rendezvous\" was an important annual trading fair among the Sioux. European demand for fur changed the relations of the plains, increased the occurrence of war, and displaced several Indian nations that were forced away by the Sioux coming from the east. On the northern plains, European trade lay in the hands of the Hudson's Bay Company, although most of the territory belonged to France, and later Spain. European trade on the central plains was controlled by French merchants, first from New Orleans, later from St. Louis. From the mid-1700s, the Comanche became an increasingly important military and commercial factor on the southern plains, forcing the Apaches into the mountains, and exchanging goods and spoils with the Southwestern trading networks hubs in New Mexico.\nTrade with early European settlers.\nPlymouth and Jamestown.\nTo set up a thriving colony, settlers in the New World needed the five factors of production that contribute to the creation of wealth: land (natural resources), labor, capital, entrepreneurship, and knowledge. Often, trading with Native Americans resulted in colonists gaining needed knowledge and natural resources. Examples of this can be seen in the English settlements of Plymouth Bay and Jamestown. Massasoit, a sachem of the Wampanoag people, and Squanto, a Patuxet who acted as a diplomat, helped the Pilgrims of Plymouth Bay establish their colony by teaching them skills in cultivating this land and hunting. In return for weapons and tools, these Native Americans provided the colonists with important natural resources, including food. In 1621, Massasoit established one of the earliest trading pacts between Europeans and Natives by signing a treaty with the Plymouth Colony to engage in peaceful trade. However, as the colonial population in New England began to increase, the Wampanoag became uneasy about being displaced by the colonists. Gradually, tensions escalated, leading to King Philip's War, an armed conflict between the Pilgrims and the Native Americans in the area. The war ended with the defeat of the Native tribe, causing a serious fracture amongst relations between the Pilgrims and Native Americans.\nRelations between settlers in the Jamestown area and Native Americans ended similarly. Initially, the Powhatan aided the English settlers with food and clothing, helping them survive the early difficult years. However, relations between the two groups deteriorated after three years, resulting in a war.\nFur trading posts.\nFur trading was one of the main economic activities in Northern America from the late 16th century to the mid-19th century. At the time, the demand for fur was surging in Europe as it was used to make cloth and fancy hats. Data collected from England in the 18th century highlights that the years from 1746 to 1763 saw an increase of 12 shillings per pelt. It has been calculated that over 20 million beaver hats were exported from England alone from 1700 to 1770. Both trading partners, Native Americans, and Europeans, provided the other a comparative advantage in the fur trade industry. The opportunity cost of hunting beavers in Europe was extremely high: by the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Eurasian beaver was near extinction in England and France. On the other hand, traders and trappers thought the wildlife in the New World was essentially limitless. Native Americans made use of the trade goods received, particularly knives, axes, and guns. The fur trade provided a stable source of income for many Native Americans until the mid-19th century when changing fashion trends in Europe and a decline in the beaver population in North America brought about a collapse in demand for fur.\nObsidian.\nArcheological evidence from missions in northern California conclude that Native Americans rerouted obsidian exchange networks through Spanish missions such as Mission San Jos\u00e9 which existed from 1797 into the 1840s. Mission San Jos\u00e9 was located in Ohlone territory, where stone tool technologies were prevalent. Despite the constraints of colonialism, Native Americans who lived at the mission were able to trade obsidian through direct geological sources such as the Cascade Range in modern-day northern California and Oregon or through evolving trade networks, which involved interactions with other tribes, as well as the Spaniards.\nTrade with the Spaniards.\nTrading between Spanish settlers and Native Americans was rare and occurred in parts of New Mexico and California. The Spaniards mainly intended to spread the Christian faith to Natives and to establish the encomienda system. The most significant effect of trading with the Spanish was the introduction of the horse to the Ute in New Mexico. Gradually, horses bred and their use was adopted across the Great Plains, dramatically altering the lifestyles and customs of many Native American tribes. Many Natives switched from a hunter-gatherer economy to a nomadic lifestyle after they began using horses for transportation. They had a greater range for hunting bison and trading with other tribes. Native Americans used obsidian for thousands of years pre-contact with Europeans. As Native Americans began to settle at centralized mission establishments, they brought in obsidian items such as projectile points. The maintenance of resources such as obsidian originated from far distances such as Napa Valley, CA indicates that indigenous stone tools were traded with people at Spanish missions.\nCeramic trade within Spanish missions.\nThe majority of imported ceramics arrived in Alta California, via annual supply ships from the Naval Department of San Blas. San Blas was established in 1768 for the express purpose of facilitating the Manila galleon trade and serving as a supply depot for colonial settlements in Alta California. Local ceramics were produced within each mission community rather than vessels obtained in trade from autonomous Indigenous potters. The San Diego presidio, table service at the four missions San Carlos, San Antonio, San Juan Bautista, and Santa Clara likely included both locally produced wares and imported wares because several typical tableware forms such as cups and plates are not present in ware assemblages.\nRelationship between Europeans and Natives.\nIt took time for Europeans and Native Americans to learn the customs of the other side. When Europeans first encountered a tribe, they would often be offered fur, food, or other items as gifts. The Europeans did not understand they were supposed to take on an alliance with the natives, including helping them against their enemies. Native American tribes regularly practice gift-giving as part of their social relations. Because the Europeans did not (or most of them), they were considered to be rude, and savage.\nAfter observing that Europeans wanted to trade goods for the skins and other items, Native Americans entered into that. Both sides became involved in the conflicts of the other. In New France, Carolina, Virginia, New England, and New Netherland, the Europeans became drawn into the endemic warfare of their trading partners. As Native Americans were pressed into alliances by the Europeans for Queen Anne's War, the Seven Years' War, the Nine Years' War, and other standing competitions among the European powers of France, Great Britain, and Spain, with whom they were dealing in North America, they felt drawn into the Europeans' endemic warfare.\nLate 18th century to present.\nAfter the United States became independent, it enacted legislation to regulate trading with the Indians/Native Americans, under the Indian Intercourse Act, first passed on July 22, 1790. Later the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which was then part of the War Department, issued licenses to traders in the Native Territory. Under removal, the largest tribes from the Southeast and north of Ohio were moved west of the Mississippi River. By 1834, Native territory had been designated as what was then most of the United States west of the Mississippi, primarily what became Arkansas, Kansas, and Oklahoma. Territories of the upper West were still occupied by native tribes as well. Mountain men and traders from Mexico freely operated there independently of the US.\nAfter the formation of the United States, the commerce clause of the Constitution gave Congress the power to \"regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Native tribes.\" In the 19th century, the American government passed legislation to support the relocation of tribes to reservations to extinguish their title to lands that could be sold to European Americans. The Indian Removal Act of 1830 forced tribes such as the Cherokee and the Choctaw to move out of their homelands. Resistance by Native Americans to relocate resulted in conflicts such as the Second Seminole War, that caused the deaths of 3,000 Native Americans. Forcing tribes to relocate and to adjust to isolated reservations often unsuitable for the subsistence farming they were encouraged to undertake, made many of them dependent on the U.S. government for annuities and supplies. They had difficulty trying to develop economic systems of their own.\nAs outlined by Kalt and Cornell in their book, \"What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Native Economic Development\", on reservations, tribes lacked access to capital, were assigned to areas with poor natural resources (or had their resources stolen or kept from their control), and did not possess skilled labor.\nToday, many programs, such as the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, exist to foster conditions that will help reservations become independent and financially stable communities. Since the late 20th century, many tribes have established gaming casinos. The most successful ones use part of the revenues for the economic development of their nations, as well as for welfare and education for all their tribal members.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42903", "revid": "254226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42903", "title": "Meantone temperament", "text": "Musical tuning system\nMeantone temperaments are musical temperaments; that is, a variety of tuning systems constructed, similarly to Pythagorean tuning, as a sequence of equal fifths, both rising and descending, scaled to remain within the same octave. But rather than using perfect fifths, consisting of frequency ratios of value formula_1, these are \"tempered\" by a suitable factor that narrows them to ratios that are slightly less than formula_1, in order to bring the major or minor thirds closer to the just intonation ratio of formula_3 or formula_4, respectively. Among temperaments constructed as a sequence of fifths, a regular temperament is one in which all the fifths are chosen to be of the same size.\nTwelve-tone equal temperament () is obtained by making all semitones the same size, with each equal to one-twelfth of an octave; i.e. with ratios . Relative to Pythagorean tuning, it narrows the perfect fifths by about 2\u00a0cents or of a Pythagorean comma to give a frequency ratio of formula_5. This produces major thirds that are wide by about 13\u00a0cents, or of a semitone. Twelve-tone equal temperament is almost exactly the same as syntonic comma meantone tuning (1.955 cents vs. 1.95512).\nNotable meantone temperaments.\nQuarter-comma meantone, which tempers each of the twelve perfect fifths by of a syntonic comma, is the best known type of meantone temperament, and the term \"meantone temperament\" is often used to refer to it specifically. Four ascending fifths (as C G D A E) tempered by comma (and then lowered by two octaves) produce a just major third (C E) (with ratio ), which is one syntonic comma (or about 22\u00a0cents) narrower than the Pythagorean third that would result from four perfect fifths.\nIt was commonly used from the early 16th\u00a0century till the early\u00a018th, after which twelve-tone equal temperament eventually came into general use. For church organs and some other keyboard purposes, it continued to be used well into the 19th\u00a0century, and is sometimes revived in early music performances today. Quarter-comma meantone can be well approximated by a division of the octave into 31\u00a0equal steps.\nIt proceeds in the same way as Pythagorean tuning; i.e., it takes the fundamental (say, C) and goes up by six successive fifths (always adjusting by dividing by powers of 2 to remain within the octave above the fundamental), and similarly down, by six successive fifths (adjusting back to the octave by multiplying by However, instead of using the ratio, which gives perfect fifths, this must be divided by the fourth root of , which is the syntonic comma: the ratio of the Pythagorean third to the just major third \n. Equivalently, one can use instead of , which produces the same slightly reduced fifths. This results in the interval C E being a just major third , and the intermediate seconds (C D, D E) dividing C E uniformly, so D C and E D are equal ratios, whose square is . The same is true of the major second sequences F G A and G A B.\nHowever, there is a residual gap in quarter-comma meantone tuning between the last of the upper sequence of six fifths and the last of the lower sequence; e.g. between F and G\u266d if the starting point is chosen as C, which, adjusted for the octave, are in the ratio of or This is in the sense opposite to the Pythagorean comma (i.e. the upper end is flatter than the lower one) and nearly twice as large.\nIn third-comma meantone, the fifths are tempered by of a syntonic comma. It follows that three descending fifths (such as A D G C) produce a just minor third (A C) of ratio , which is one syntonic comma wider than the minor third resulting from Pythagorean tuning of three perfect fifths. Third-comma meantone can be very well approximated by a division of the octave into 19\u00a0equal steps.\nThe tone as a mean.\nThe name \"meantone temperament\" derives from the fact that in all such temperaments the size of the whole tone, within the diatonic scale, is somewhere between the major and minor tones (9:8 and 10:9 respectively) of just intonation, which differ from each other by a syntonic comma. In any regular system the whole tone (as C D) is reached after two fifths (as C G D) (lowered by an octave), while the major third is reached after four fifths (lowered by two octaves). It follows that in comma meantone the whole tone is exactly half of the just major third (in cents) or, equivalently, the square root of the frequency ratio of .\nThus, one sense in which the tone is a mean is that, as a frequency ratio, it is the geometric mean of the major tone and the minor tone: \nformula_6 \nequivalent to 193.157\u00a0cents: the quarter-comma whole-tone size. However, \"any\" intermediate tone qualifies as a \"mean\" in the sense of being intermediate, and hence as a valid choice for some meantone system.\nIn the case of quarter-comma meantone, where the major third is made narrower by a syntonic comma, the whole tone is made half a comma narrower than the major tone of just intonation (9:8), or half a comma wider than the minor tone (10:9). This is the sense in which quarter-tone temperament is often considered \"the\" exemplary meantone temperament since, in it, the whole tone lies midway (in cents) between its possible extremes.\nHistory of meantone temperament and its practical implementation.\nMention of tuning systems that could possibly refer to meantone were published as early as 1496 (Gaffurius). Pietro Aron (Venice, 1523) was unmistakably discussing quarter-comma meantone. Lodovico Fogliani mentioned the quarter-comma system, but offered no discussion of it. The first mathematically precise meantone tuning descriptions are to be found in late 16th\u00a0century treatises by Zarlino and de\u00a0Salinas. Both these authors described the comma, comma, and comma meantone systems.\nMarin Mersenne described various tuning systems in his seminal work on music theory, \"Harmonie universelle\", including the 31\u00a0tone equitempered one, but rejected it on practical grounds.\nMeantone temperaments were sometimes referred to under other names or descriptions. For example, in 1691 Huygens advocated the use of the 31\u00a0tone equitempered system as an excellent approximation for the comma meantone system, mentioning prior writings of Zarlino and Salinas, and dissenting from the negative opinion of . He made a detailed comparison of the frequency ratios in the system and the quarter-comma meantone temperament, which he referred to variously as \"temperament ordinaire\", or \"the one that everyone uses\". (See references cited in the article Temperament Ordinaire.)\nOf course, the quarter-comma meantone system (or any other meantone system) could not have been implemented with high accuracy until much later, since devices that could accurately measure all pitch frequencies didn't exist until the mid-19th\u00a0century. But tuners could apply the same methods that \"by ear\" tuners have always used: Go up by fifths, and down by octaves, or down by fifths, and up by octaves, tempering the fifths so they are slightly smaller than the just ratio. How tuners could identify a \"quarter comma\" reliably by ear is a bit more subtle. Since this amounts to about 0.3% of the frequency which, near middle C (~264\u00a0Hz), is about one hertz, they could do it by using perfect fifths as a reference and adjusting the tempered note to produce beats at this rate. However, the frequency of the beats would have to be slightly adjusted, proportionately to the frequency of the note. Alternatively the diatonic scale major thirds can be adjusted to just major thirds, of ratio , by eliminating the beats.\nFor 12\u00a0tone equally-tempered tuning, the fifths have to be tempered by considerably less than a comma (very close to a syntonic comma, or a Pythagorean comma), since they must form a perfect cycle, with no gap at the end (\"circle of fifths\"). For comma meantone tuning, if one artificially stops after filling the octave with only 12\u00a0pitches, one has a residual gap between sharps and their enharmonic flats that is slightly smaller than the Pythagorean one, in the opposite direction. Both quarter-comma meantone and the Pythagorean system do not have a \"circle\" but rather a \"spiral of fifths\", which continues indefinitely. Slightly tempered versions of the two systems that \"do\" close into a much larger circle of fifths are for meantone, and for Pythagorean.\nAlthough meantone is best known as a tuning system associated with earlier music of the Renaissance and Baroque, there is evidence of its continuous use as a keyboard temperament well into the 19th\u00a0century.\n \"The mode of tuning which prevailed before the introduction of equal temperament, is called the \"Meantone System\". It has hardly yet died out in England, for it may still be heard on a few organs in country churches. According to Don B. Y\u00f1iguez, organist of Seville Cathedral, the meantone system is generally maintained on Spanish organs, even at the present day.\" \u2014 \nIt has had a considerable revival for early music performance in the late 20th\u00a0century and in newly composed works specifically demanding meantone by some composers, such as Adams, Ligeti, and Leedy.\nMeantone temperaments.\nA meantone temperament is a regular temperament, distinguished by the fact that the correction factor to the Pythagorean perfect fifths, given usually as a specific fraction of the syntonic comma, is chosen to make the whole tone intervals equal, as closely as possible, to the geometric mean of the major tone and the minor tone. Historically, commonly used meantone temperaments, discussed below, occupy a narrow portion of this tuning continuum, with fifths ranging from approximately 695\u00a0to 699\u00a0cents.\nMeantone temperaments can be specified in various ways: By what fraction of a syntonic comma the fifth is being flattened (as above), the width of the tempered perfect fifth in cents, or the ratio of the whole tone (in cents) to the diatonic semitone. This last ratio was termed by American composer, pianist and theoretician Easley Blackwood. If R happens to be a rational number formula_7 then formula_8 is the closest approximation to the corresponding meantone tempered fifth within the equitempered division of the octave into formula_9 equal parts. Such divisions of the octave into a number of small parts greater than 12 are sometimes refererred to as microtonality, and the smallest intervals called microtones.\nIn these terms, some historically notable meantone tunings are listed below, and compared with the closest equitempered microtonal tuning. The first column gives the fraction of the syntonic comma by which the perfect fifths are tempered in the meantone system. The second lists 5\u00a0limit rational intervals that occur within this tuning. The third gives the fraction of an octave, within the corresponding equitempered microinterval system, that best approximates the meantone fifth. The fourth gives the difference between the two, in cents. The fifth is the corresponding value of the fraction formula_7 and the fifth is the number formula_9 of equitempered (ET ) microtones in an octave.\nEqual temperaments.\nIn neither the twelve tone equitemperament nor the quarter-comma meantone is the fifth a rational fraction of the octave, but several tunings exist which approximate the fifth by such an interval; these are a subset of the equal temperaments in which the octave is divided into some number (N) of equally wide intervals.\nEqual temperaments that are useful as approximations to meantone tunings include (in order of increasing generator width) ( comma), ( comma), ( comma), ( comma), ( comma), ( comma), and ( comma). almost perfectly fits both Pythagorean tuning and 5\u00a0limit just intonation, with a few 7\u00a0limit and 11\u00a0limit intervals. The farther the tuning gets away from quarter-comma meantone, however, the less related the tuning is to harmonic ratios. This can be overcome by tempering the partials to match the tuning, which is possible, however, only on electronic synthesizers. The following table gives various meantone temperaments\nWolf intervals.\nA whole number of just perfect fifths will never add up to a whole number of octaves, because is an irrational number. If a whole number of perfect fifths is stacked-up, then in order to close that stack to fit an octave, at least one of the intervals that is enharmonically equivalent to a fifth must have a different width than all the other fifths. For example, to make a 12\u00a0note chromatic scale in Pythagorean tuning close at the octave, one of the fifth intervals must be lowered (\"out-of-tune\") by the Pythagorean comma; this altered fifth is called a \"wolf fifth\" because it sounds similar to a fifth in its interval size and seems like an out-of-tune fifth, but is \"actually\" a diminished sixth (e.g. between G and E). Likewise, 11 of the 12\u00a0perfect fourths are also in tune, but the remaining fourth is \"actually\" an augmented third (rather than a true fourth).\nWolf intervals are not inherent to a complete tuning system, rather they are an artifact of inadequate keyboards that do not have enough keys for all of the in-tune notes used in any given piece. Keyboard players then create a \"wolf\" by substituting a key that is actually in-tune with a different pitch, nearby the actual notated pitch, but not quite near enough to pass.\nThe issue can be most easily shown by using an isomorphic keyboard, with many more than just 12\u00a0keys per octave, such as that shown in Figure\u00a02 (on an \"isomorphic keyboard\", any given musical interval has the same shape wherever it appears, except at the edges). Here's an example: On the keyboard shown in Figure\u00a02, from any given note, the note that's a perfect fifth higher is always upward-and-rightward adjacent to the given note. There are no wolf intervals within the note-span of this keyboard. The problem is at the edge, on the note E. The note that's a perfect fifth higher than E is B, which is not included on the keyboard shown (although it could be included in a larger keyboard, placed just to the right of A, hence maintaining the keyboard's consistent note-pattern). Because there is no B button, when playing an E power chord (open fifth chord), one must choose some other note, such as C, to play instead of the missing B.\nEven edge conditions produce wolf intervals only if the isomorphic keyboard has fewer buttons per octave than the tuning has enharmonically-distinct notes. For example, the isomorphic keyboard in Figure\u00a02 has 19\u00a0buttons per octave, so the above-cited edge-condition, from E to C, is \"not\" a wolf interval in 12\u00a0tone equal temperament (TET), 17\u00a0TET, or 19\u00a0TET; however, it \"is\" a wolf interval in 26\u00a0TET, 31\u00a0TET, and 50\u00a0ET. In these latter tunings, using electronic transposition could keep the current key's notes on the isomorphic keyboard's white buttons, such that these wolf intervals would very rarely be encountered in tonal music, despite modulation to exotic keys.\nIsomorphic keyboards expose the invariant properties of the meantone tunings of the syntonic temperament isomorphically (that is, for example, by exposing a given interval with a single consistent inter-button shape in every octave, key, and tuning) because both the isomorphic keyboard and temperament are two-dimensional (\"i.e.\", rank\u00a02) entities. One-dimensional keyboards (where N is some number) can expose accurately the invariant properties of only a single one-dimensional tuning in hence, the one-dimensional piano-style keyboard, with 12\u00a0keys per octave, can expose the invariant properties of only one tuning: 12\u00a0TET.\nWhen the perfect fifth is exactly 700\u00a0cents wide (that is, tempered by almost exactly of a syntonic comma, or exactly of a Pythagorean comma) then the tuning is identical to the familiar 12\u00a0tone equal temperament. This appears in the table above when \nBecause of the compromises (and wolf intervals) forced on meantone tunings by the limitation of having only 12\u00a0key per octave on a conventional piano-style keyboard, well temperaments and eventually equal temperament became more popular.\nUsing standard interval names, twelve fifths equal six octaves plus one augmented seventh; seven octaves are equal to eleven fifths plus one diminished sixth. Given this, three \"minor thirds\" are actually augmented seconds (for example, B to C), and four \"major thirds\" are actually diminished fourths (for example, B to E). Several triads (like B E F and B C F) contain both these intervals and have normal fifths.\nExtended meantones.\nAll meantone tunings fall into the valid tuning range of the syntonic temperament, so all meantone tunings are syntonic tunings. All syntonic tunings, including the meantones and the various just intonations, conceivably have an infinite number of notes in each octave, that is, seven natural notes, seven sharp notes (F to B), seven flat notes (B to F) (which is the limit of the orchestral harp, which allows 21\u00a0distinct pitches per octave); then double sharp notes (F to B), double flat notes (F to B), triple sharps and flats, and so on. In fact, double sharps and flats are uncommon, but still needed, but triple sharps and flats are almost never seen, so might be skipped or compromised. In any syntonic tuning that happens to divide the octave into a small number of equally wide smallest intervals (such as 12, 19, or this extended set of notes still exists, but is \"not\" infinite, since some notes will be equivalent. For example, in E and F are the same pitch; in C and E are identical, as are E and G; and in just intonation for C major, C D are within 8.1\u00a0\u00a2, and so can be tempered to be identical, with the compromise note being only a tolerable 4\u00a0\u00a2 off for each.\nMany musical instruments are capable of very fine distinctions of pitch, such as the human voice, the trombone, unfretted strings such as the violin family and fretless guitars, and lutes with movable frets. These instruments are well-suited to the use of meantone tunings.\nOn the other hand, the conventional piano keyboard only has twelve note-producing keys per octave, making it poorly suited to any tunings other than or well temperaments. Almost all of the historic problems with the meantone temperament are caused by the failure to map meantone's infinite number of notes per octave to a finite number of piano keys. This is, for example, the source of the \"wolf fifth\" discussed above. When choosing which notes to map to the piano's black keys, it is convenient to choose those notes that are common to a small number of closely related keys, but this will only work up to the edge of the octave; when crossing up or down to an adjacent octave, for some of the intervals must be a \"wolf fifth\" \u2013 that is, slightly flatter than the others, as described above.\nThe existence of the \"wolf fifth\" is one of the reasons why, before the introduction of well temperament, instrumental music generally stayed in a number of \"safe\" tonalities that did not involve the \"wolf fifth\" (which was generally put between G and E).\nThroughout the Renaissance and Enlightenment, theorists as varied as Nicola Vicentino, Francisco de Salinas, Fabio Colonna, Marin Mersenne, Christiaan Huygens, and Isaac Newton advocated the use of meantone tunings that were extended beyond the keyboard's twelve notes, and hence these are now called \"extended\" meantone tunings.\nSuch efforts required a corresponding extension of keyboard instruments to provide means of producing more than 12\u00a0notes per octave; examples include Vincento's archicembalo, Mersenne's harpsichord, Colonna's sambuca rota, and Huygens's harpsichord.\nOther instruments extended the keyboard by only a few notes. Some period harpsichords and organs have split D / E keys, such that both E major / C minor (4\u00a0sharps) and E major / C minor (3\u00a0flats) can be played with no wolf fifths. Many of those instruments also have split G / A keys, and a few have all the five accidental keys split.\nAll of these alternative instruments were \"complicated\" and \"cumbersome\" (), due to\n (a) not being isomorphic, and\n (b) not having a transposing mechanism,\nwhich can significantly reduce the number of note-controlling buttons needed on an isomorphic keyboard (). Both of these criticisms could be addressed by electronic isomorphic keyboard instruments (such as the open-source hardware jammer keyboard), which could be simpler, less cumbersome, and more expressive than existing keyboard instruments.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42904", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42904", "title": "Suva", "text": "Capital and largest city of Fiji\n \nSuva ( , ) is the capital and the most populous city of Fiji. It is the home of the country's largest metropolitan area and serves as its major port. The city is located on the southeast coast of the island of Viti Levu, in Rewa Province, Central Division.\nIn 1877, the capital of Fiji was moved to Suva from Levuka, the main European colonial settlement at the time, due to the restrictive geography and environs of the latter. The administration of the colony was transferred from Levuka to Suva in 1882.\nAs of the 2017 census, the city of Suva had a population of 93,970, and Suva's metropolitan area, which includes its independent suburbs, had a population of 185,913. The combined urban population of Suva and the towns of Lami, Nasinu, and Nausori that border it was around 330,000: over a third of the nation's population (This urban complex, excluding Lami, is also known as the Suva-Nausori corridor).\nSuva is the political, economic, and cultural centre of Fiji. It is also the economic and cultural capital of the South Pacific, hosting the majority of the regional headquarters of major international corporations, international agencies, and diplomatic missions. The city also has a thriving arts and performance scene, and a growing reputation as the region's fashion capital.\nHistory.\nIn 1868, when Suva was still a small village, the Bauan chieftain, Seru Epenisa Cakobau, granted of land to the Australian-based Polynesia Company, in exchange for the company's promise to pay off debts owed to the United States. More than a tenth of this land area, , was located near Suva. The company's original intention was to develop a cotton farming industry, but the land and climate proved unsuitable.\nIn 1874, control of the Fiji Islands was ceded to the United Kingdom. In 1877, the colonial authorities decided to move the capital to Suva from Levuka, Ovalau, Lomaiviti, because Levuka's location between a steep mountain and the sea made any expansion of the town impractical. Colonel F. E. Pratt of the Royal Engineers was appointed Surveyor-General in 1875 and designed the new capital in Suva, assisted by W. Stephens and Colonel R. W. Stewart. The transfer of the administration to Suva was made official in 1882.\nIn 1910, Suva acquired the status of a municipality, under the Municipal Constitution Ordinance of 1909. Its area remained one square mile until 1952 when Suva annexed the Muanikau and Samabula wards, expanding its territory to . In October of that year, Suva was officially designated a city \u2013 Fiji's first. Suva later annexed Tamavua. Most recently, Suva further extended its boundaries by incorporating the Cunningham area at its northern edge. Since then, urban sprawl has led to the growth of a number of suburbs that remain outside the city limits. Together with the city, they form the metropolitan area known as the Greater Suva Area.\nSuva hosted the South Pacific Games in 2003 for the third time in the event's 40-year history. In preparation for hosting the event, the Fijian government, with the help of a $16\u00a0million aid package from the People's Republic of China, funded the construction of a new gymnasium, indoor sports centre, swimming pool, stadium, field hockey pitch, and grandstands in the area around Suva.\nGeography and physical characteristics.\nIn addition to being the capital of Fiji, Suva is also its commercial and political centre (though not necessarily its cultural centre), and its main port city. It has a mix of modern buildings and colonial-period architecture. \nSuva is located around a harbour on a hilly peninsula in the southeast corner of Viti Levu Island, between Laucala Bay and Suva Harbour. The mountains to its north and west catch the southeast trade winds, producing year-round moist conditions.\nAlthough Suva is on a peninsula, and almost surrounded by sea, its coast is lined with mangroves - the nearest beach is 40 kilometres (25\u00a0mi) away, at Pacific Harbour. A significant part of the city centre, including the Parliament buildings, is built on reclaimed mangrove swampland.\nCity wards.\nBelow is a list of the city's five wards, beginning with the city centre, followed by the northwesternmost ward, and then in clockwise order:\nSuva\u2013Nausori Corridor.\nSuva sits in the middle of a metropolitan area, sometimes known as the Suva Urban Complex, and sometimes informally known as Suva, even though it encompasses a total of four areas with their own town or city names and their own separate local governments. This conurbation stretches from Lami (immediately west of the city of Suva) along the Queens Highway, through Nasinu (immediately east of the city of Suva), to the Rewa River, along the Kings Highway, and then to Nausori across the river. To the north and northeast are the rainforest-park areas of Colo-i-Suva and Sawani, along the Princes Road, which connect at the Rewa River Bridge. This whole area (excluding Lami) is also formally referred to as the Suva\u2013Nausori Corridor. It is the most populous area in Fiji, with over 330,000 inhabitants.\nClimate.\nSuva has a tropical rainforest climate, according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system. But because of its trade winds and occasional cyclones, it is not an equatorial climate. The city sees a copious amount of precipitation throughout the year, with no true dry season; no month has an average rainfall below . Suva averages of precipitation annually. Its driest month, July, averages . As in many other cities with a tropical rainforest climate, temperatures are relatively constant throughout the year, with an average high of about and an average low of about .\nSuva has a markedly higher rainfall than Nadi or the western side of Viti Levu (known to Suva inhabitants as \"the burning west\"). The second governor of Fiji, Sir Arthur Gordon, is said to have remarked that he had never seen it rain anywhere the way it rains in Suva and that there was hardly a day without rain. The most copious rainfall is observed from November to May, while the slightly cooler months from June to October see considerably more moderate rainfall.\nDemographics.\nSuva is a multiracial and multicultural city. Indigenous Fijians and Indo-Fijians, the two principal ethnic groups of Fiji, comprise the bulk of Suva's population, and the city is home to most of Fiji's ethnic minority populations, which include Rotumans, Lauans, Rambians, Europeans (known as \"Kaivalagi\"), part-Europeans (of European and Fijian descent, known as \u201cKailoma\") and Chinese, among others. The most widely spoken language is English, but Fijian, Fiji Hindi, and other languages are also spoken by their respective communities.\nSuva's inhabitants are representative of all the major indigenous Pacific groups: it is sometimes referred to as the \u201cNew York of the Pacific\". The city has a reputation as a major economic centre in the region and is the site of University of the South Pacific's main campus. This has led to an influx of Pacific migrants, who study, work, and live in the city and its boroughs. \nMunicipal government.\nSuva has municipal status and, until 2009, was governed by a lord mayor and a 20-member city council. The Suva City Council was the municipal law-making body of the city of Suva, Fiji's capital. It consisted of 20 councillors, elected for three-year terms from four multi-member constituencies, called wards. Councillors were elected by residents, landowners, and representatives of corporations owning or occupying taxable property in Suva, councillors in turn elect, from among their own members, a lord mayor and deputy lord mayor, who served one-year terms and were eligible for re-election.\nHowever, in 2009, the military-backed interim Fijian government dismissed all municipal government officials throughout Fiji and appointed special administrators to run the urban areas. As of 2015[ [update]], elected municipal government had not been restored. The special administrator of Suva, along with nearby Nasinu, is Chandu Umaria, a former lord mayor of Suva.\nLandmarks.\nA well-known landmark is the Suva City Carnegie Library, which was built in 1909. It is one of many colonial-period buildings in the city. \nAnother landmark is Suva's governmental building complex. It sits on what was once the flowing waters of a creek. In 1935, the creek was drained, and the complex's foundations were created by driving more than five kilometres of reinforced concrete pilings into its bed. The foundation stone was laid in 1937, the building complex was completed in 1939, and a new wing was completed in 1967. However, in 1992, the seat of Fiji's parliament was moved out of that complex and into a new one on Ratu Sukuna Road.\nGovernment House was formerly the residence of Fiji's colonial governors and, after Fijian independence in 1970, governors-general. Today, it is the official residence of Fiji's president. The original house on the site was built in 1882, but a fire caused by a lightning strike destroyed it in 1921, it was rebuilt in 1928. \nThe Suva campus of the University of the South Pacific (USP) occupies what was originally a New Zealand military base. It is the largest of the many USP campuses dotted throughout the South Pacific. USP is the largest university in the Pacific Islands outside Hawaii, and its courses are internationally recognised and endorsed.\nThe Fiji Museum, now located in Thurston Gardens, was founded in 1904, and originally occupied the old town hall. It was moved to its present location in 1954. The museum houses the most extensive collection of Fijian artifacts in the world, and is also a research and educational institution, specialising in archaeology, the preservation of Fiji's oral tradition, and the publication of material on Fiji's language and culture.\nSuva has about 78 parks. The new Takashi Suzuki Garden, in Apted Park at Suva Point, is a popular spot for viewing sunrise and sunset. Thurston Gardens, which opened in 1913, features flora from throughout the South Pacific. \nSuva has many shopping and retail areas, notably Cumming Street, which has been a vibrant and colourful shopping area since colonial times. The Cumming Street area features original colonial buildings and narrow roads. Suva also has modern shopping malls, such as the Suva Central Shopping Mall, the Mid-City Mall, and MHCC, along with other developments give much of the city a modern and sophisticated look.\nTappooCity is one of Fiji's shopping malls, and holds the distinction of being the largest mall in the South Pacific outside of Australia and New Zealand. This low-rise (six-storey) building was constructed in December 2009 in a joint venture by FNPF and the Tappoo Group of Companies. It is valued at US$25.7\u00a0million (FJD50\u00a0million). \nConstruction work began in January 2011 for a FJD30\u00a0-million mini-mall complex at Grantham Road, behind the Sports-City Complex and close to the Suva campus of the University of the South Pacific. It was scheduled to be completed in 2012, and to house restaurants, retail outlets, and cinemas.\nEconomy.\nUnlike most cities and towns in Fiji, and many around the world, Suva did not grow up around a single industry. It has gradually developed to become the largest and most sophisticated city in the Pacific Islands, and a regional hub. Fijians of Indian descent have largely shaped the economy of Fiji, contributing immensely to the growth of Suva and to its status as the economic and political capital of Fiji. Suva is the commercial center of Fiji: Most international banks have their Pacific headquarters here, including ANZ and the Westpac. In addition, most Fijian financial institutions, non-governmental organisations, and government ministries and departments are headquartered here. At one point, both Air Pacific (now Fiji Airways) and Air Fiji were headquartered in Suva.\nA large part of Fiji's international shipping, as well as the docking of international cruise ships, takes place at Suva's Kings Wharf. This has led to the growth of Suva's tourism industry.\nThe largest of Suva's several industrial areas is Walu Bay, which is home to factories, warehouses, import-export companies, shipyards, container yards, a brewery, and many printeries. Other notable industrial areas are Vatuwaqa, Raiwaqa, and Laucala Beach.\nSuva boasts many thriving markets and shopping complexes. Among the most popular areas for shopping and commerce are Cumming Street and Victoria Parade.\nInstitutions.\nSuva is host to more international and regional intergovernmental agencies and NGOs than any other Pacific Island capital. Some of the bodies with a presence in Suva are:\nEntertainment and culture.\nSuva is the cultural and entertainment capital of Oceania and is host to many regional, national, and local events. The city has a very developed and advanced entertainment and event infrastructure and hosts a busy calendar of events every year.\nVenues.\nSuva has many multipurpose venues, the main ones being the Vodafone Arena, which can seat up to 5,000 people, the HFC Bank Stadium, which can seat 15,446 people, the FMF National Gymnasium Suva, which can seat up to 2,000 people, and the Civic Auditorium, which can seat up to 1,000 people.\nParks and gardens.\nSuva has a number of parks and a few gardens. Albert Park, in the City centre, is famous as the stage for many national-historical events such as the Independence of Fiji, the landing by Kingsford Smith on the Southern Cross and many parades and carnivals. Sukuna Park, also in the CBD is a popular recreational park and has many performances and events on a weekly basis. Thurston Gardens (named for Governor of Fiji John Bates Thurston) is the city's main botanical garden and the location of the Fiji Museum. Queen Elizabeth Drive is popular as a scenic walk along Suva's foreshore. Many city residents go to the Colo-i-Suva Forest Reserve, a short drive from the city centre, to swim under the waterfalls.\nMusic.\nMany concerts are held in Suva, some coming from other countries to enjoy world-class performances. Concerts and shows are usually staged at one of the above-mentioned venues on a monthly basis. Some of the famous music artists to hold shows in Suva include UB40, Lucky Dube, O'Yaba, Sean Kingston and many others. Due to a favoured interest in Bollywood by all, some prominent singers and actors have held shows in the capital which include singers like Shaan, Sonu Nigam, Sunidhi Chauhan and movie artists like Shah Rukh Khan, Priyanka Chopra, Johnny Lever, Dino Morea, Rajpal Yadav, Sunny Leone and the like.\nFood.\nSuva, owing to its multi-cultural demographics, offers a variety of global cuisine throughout the city. Particularly popular cuisines are Fijian, Indian, Chinese, American and foods from other cultural and ethnic backgrounds. Fijians of Indian descent have influenced Fiji's cuisine, in the process creating the uniquely Fiji Indian curry. Indentured labourers brought with them spices, chilies, and other herbs and vegetables, which now are part of the Fijian palate and cuisine. \nFestivals.\nDuring the course of the year, arts, music and trade festivals are held in Suva, albeit on a small scale. There are a few large and notable festivals that occur annually and these include the Hibiscus Festival (largest carnival in the South Pacific islands), the New Years Street Party, and the Fiji Show Case tradeshow that includes carnival rides, food as well as magic and circus performances.\nSports.\nSuva plays host to many regional and national sporting events, most notably at the HFC Bank Stadium. A special highlight is the Coca-Cola Games, the largest secondary school athletics meet in the world. The Capital City is represented in major sporting events by its respective rugby, netball and football teams.\nSuva was the host of the first Pacific Games, in 1963. Forty years later in 2003 the Games returned to Fiji's capital, with a full program of 32 sports introduced for the first time. Suva held the games for the second time in 1979. Having hosted the event three times, Suva has held the Pacific Games more often than any other city.\nMass media.\nHeadquartered in Suva are the Fiji's three main national television stations: Fiji One, FBC TV and MAI TV, alongside the Fiji Ministry of Information, the producer of government programming, national news, and current affairs bulletins. Fiji One produces and airs its evening 'National News' bulletin from its studios in Gladstone Road in Central; FBC TV airs its 'FBC News' bulletin from its studios, also on Gladstone Road. Sky Pacific and Pacific Broadcasting Services Fiji are the two pay satellite television company headquartered in Suva.\nSuva is home to the national radio broadcasters Fiji Broadcasting Corporation (FBC) and Communications Fiji Limited (CFL), between them providing 12 national radio stations.\nThe two dailies, \"The Fiji Times\" and \"The Fiji Sun\" are printed here (and, formerly, the \"Fiji Post\"). Many other weekly newspapers are headquartered and published in Suva, including \"Inside Fiji\", \"Nai Lalakai\" (iTaukei language weekly), \"Shanti Dut\" (Fiji Hindi weekly), national magazines such as \"Rep\u00fablika\" and \"Mai Life\" as well as regional magazines such as \"Islands Business\".\nShopping and fashion.\nSuva is one of the most shopper-friendly cities in the Pacific. The city offers its shops in a cluster that is referred to as Suva Central. Areas like Cumming Street and Marks Street are for clothing, jewellery, food, electronics, pharmaceuticals and more. Terry Walk and the Flea Market offer handicrafts and local ware. Close by, huge, new shopping complexes dominate the canal area, such as MHCC (Morris Hedstrom City Center), Tappoo City and Suva Central. There are telecommunication and electronic stores, as well as sporting gear stores in the outer areas of this radius. \nSuva also hosts the headquarters of the Fashion Council of Fiji, the region's most significant fashion organisation. The Fijian Fashion Festival, the region's largest trade and consumer fashion platform, occurs annually at the Grand Pacific Hotel in Suva.\nTransportation.\nNausori International Airport caters mainly to the domestic market, connecting Suva with Fiji's other international airport, Nadi International Airport. \nSuva has a public transport system consisting of buses (Central Transport Co.) and taxis servicing the metropolitan area as well as the cities of Nasinu, Nausori, and Lami town. There are bus services connecting Suva with other towns and cities on Viti Levu by way of either the Kings, Queens, or Princes highways, all originating within Suva, although the latter terminates at Rewa Bridge in Nausori.\nThere is a domestic ferry service from the Princess Wharf to the outer islands of Fiji as well as Vanua Levu. International ships and cruise liners dock at Suva's Kings Wharf.\nNotable residents.\nThis is a list of famous people who are either living in, or are originally from Suva.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSuva is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42905", "revid": "49774224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42905", "title": "NORAD", "text": "Combined organization of the US and Canada providing air defence for North America\nMilitary unit\nEstablished in 1958, North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD ; , CDAAN), formerly North American Air Defense Command, and United States Army Air Defence Command, is the largest established combined bi-national military command in the world. The North American Aerospace Defense Command defends both Canada and the United States, and protects and monitors North America's skies and atmosphere.\nAfter the Cold War, and the collapse and dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, NORAD adapted, and in the early 2000s, following NATO's article five invocation for the first time and only time after the September 11 attacks, Canada partnered with the NORAD as a strategic partner under a permanent bilateral and bi-national mutual defence agreement to prevent and detect attacks by foreign adversaries. \nNORAD collects information about the atmosphere of the earth, space objects, and North America's coastal waters developing trajectories and identifying their origin. Information about potentially hostile targets, originally strategic bombers, but now in 2025 a variety of ballistic and cruise missiles, is disseminated to various armed forces and leadership. NORAD's defensive area covers most of Northern America, and is broken into three areas of responsibility, the Alaskan region, the Canadian region, and the American Continental region. \nNORAD's main headquarters are in Colorado, United States at Peterson Space Force Base (formerly Peterson Air Force Base), with other administrative offices located in New Mexico, United States and Arizona, United States. The combined forces of NORAD include 1,000 soldiers, personnel and military dependents. The Cheyenne Mountain Complex located inside of Cheyenne Mountain, in El Paso County and near Colorado Springs, Colorado is used during a nuclear or air to ground attack.\nStructure.\nDivisions.\nNORAD has administratively divided the North American landmass into The North American Aerospace Defence Command, Alaskan Region (ANR), Canadian Region (CANR), and the Continental United States (CONR\u2013AFNORTH).\nThe structure includes:\nCommand structure.\nThe North American Aerospace Command maintains a headquarters located at Peterson Space Force Base near Colorado Springs, Colorado. The NORAD and USNORTHCOM Command Center at Peterson serves as both a central collection and coordination facility for a worldwide system of sensors designed to provide the commander and the leadership of Canada and the U.S. with an accurate picture of any active aerospace or maritime threat.\nCommand structure by order of authority:\nRegions.\nAlaska, United States.\nThe Alaskan NORAD Region (ANR) maintains continuous capability to detect, validate and warn off any atmospheric threat in its area of operations from its Regional Operations Control Center (ROCC) at Joint Base Elmendorf\u2013Richardson, Alaska.\nANR maintains the readiness to conduct a continuum of aerospace control missions, which include daily air sovereignty in peacetime, contingency and deterrence in time of tension, and active air defense against manned and unmanned air-breathing atmospheric vehicles in times of crisis.\nANR is supported by both active duty and reserve units. Active duty forces are provided by 11\u00a0AF and the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF), and reserve forces provided by the Alaska Air National Guard. Both 11\u00a0AF and the CAF provide active duty personnel to the ROCC to maintain continuous surveillance of Alaskan airspace.\nCanada.\nCanadian NORAD Region Headquarters is at CFB Winnipeg, Manitoba. It was established on 22 April 1983. It is responsible for providing surveillance and control of Canadian airspace. The Royal Canadian Air Force provides alert assets to NORAD. CANR is divided into two sectors, the Canada East Sector and Canada West Sector. Both Sector Operations Control Centers (SOCCs) are co-located at CFB North Bay, Ontario. The routine operation of the SOCCs includes reporting track data, sensor status and aircraft alert status to NORAD headquarters. In 1996, CANR was renamed 1\u00a0Canadian Air Division and moved to CFB Winnipeg.\nCanadian air defense forces assigned to NORAD include 409 Tactical Fighter Squadron at CFB Cold Lake, Alberta and 425 Tactical Fighter Squadron at CFB Bagotville, Quebec. All squadrons fly the McDonnell Douglas CF-18 Hornet fighter aircraft.\nTo monitor for drug trafficking, the Canadian NORAD Region monitors all air traffic approaching the coast of Canada, in cooperation with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the United States drug law enforcement agencies. Any aircraft that has not filed a flight plan may be directed to land and be inspected by RCMP and Canada Border Services Agency.\nContinental U.S..\nThe Continental NORAD Region (CONR) is the component of NORAD that provides airspace surveillance and control and directs air sovereignty activities for the Contiguous United States (CONUS). Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, CONR has been the lead agency for Operation Noble Eagle, an ongoing mission to protect the continental United States from airborne attacks.\nCONR is the NORAD designation of the United States Air Force First Air Force/AFNORTH. Its headquarters is located at Tyndall Air Force Base, Florida. The First Air Force (1\u00a0AF) became responsible for the USAF air defense mission in September 1990. AFNORTH is the United States Air Force component of United States Northern Command (NORTHCOM).\n1\u00a0AF/CONR-AFNORTH comprises Air National Guard Fighter Wings assigned an air defense mission to 1\u00a0AF/CONR-AFNORTH on federal orders, made up primarily of citizen Airmen. The primary weapons systems are the McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle and General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon aircraft.\nIt plans, conducts, controls, coordinates and ensures air sovereignty and provides for the unilateral defense of the United States. A combined First Air Force command post is at Tyndall Air Force Base. The US East ROCC (Eastern Air Defense Sector), Sector Operations Control Center (SOCC) is at Rome, New York. The US West ROCC (Western Air Defense Sector) control center is at McChord Field, Washington. Both maintain continuous surveillance of CONUS airspace.\nIn its role as the CONUS NORAD Region, 1\u00a0AF/CONR-AFNORTH also performs counter-drug surveillance operations.\nHistory.\nThe North American Air Defense Command was recommended by the Joint Canadian\u2013U.S. Military Group in late 1956, approved by the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff in February 1957, and announced in August 1957. NORAD's command headquarters was established on 12 September 1957 at Ent Air Force Base's 1954 blockhouse. In 1958, Canada and the United States agreed that the NORAD commander would always be a United States officer, with a Canadian vice commander. Canada \"agreed the command's primary purpose would be ... early warning and defense for the Strategic Air Command's (SAC)'s retaliatory forces\". \nIn late 1958, Canada and the United States started the Continental Air Defense Integration North (CADIN) for the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment air defense network. The initial CADIN cost-sharing agreement between the two countries was signed in January 1959. Two December 1958 plans submitted by NORAD had \"average yearly expenditure of around five and one half billions\", including \"cost of the accelerated Nike Zeus program\" and three Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) sites.\nCanada's NORAD bunker at CFB North Bay with a SAGE AN/FSQ-7 Combat Direction Central computer was constructed from 1959 to 1963. Each of the USAF's eight smaller AN/FSQ-8 Combat Control Central systems provided NORAD with data and could command the entire United States air defense. The RCAF's 1950 \"ground observer system, the Long Range Air Raid Warning System\", was discontinued. In January 1959, the United States Ground Observer Corps was deactivated. \nThe Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker's planned mission was expanded in August 1960 to \"a hardened center from which CINCNORAD would supervise and direct operations \"against space attack\" as well as air attack\". In October 1960, the Secretary of Defense assigned, \"operational command of all space surveillance to Continental Air Defense Command (CONAD) and operational control to North American Air Defense Command (NORAD)\".\nIn December 1960, the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) placed the Ent Air Force Base Space Detection and Tracking System (496L System with Philco 2000 Model 212 computer) \"under the operational control of CINCNORAD \", during the Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker excavation, and the joint SAC-NORAD exercise \"Sky Shield II\". In September 1962\u2014\"Sky Shield III\" were conducted for mock penetration of NORAD sectors.\nIn 1963, NORAD command center operations moved from Ent Air Force Base to the partially underground \"Combined Operations Center\" for Aerospace Defense Command and NORAD at the Chidlaw Building. President John F. Kennedy visited \"NORAD headquarters\" after the 5 June 1963 United States Air Force Academy graduation. On 30 October 1964, \"NORAD began manning\" the Combat Operations Center in the Cheyenne Mountain Complex. \nIn 1965, about 250,000 United States and Canadian personnel were involved in the operation of NORAD, On 1 January 1966, Air Force Systems Command turned the COC over to NORAD. The NORAD Cheyenne Mountain Complex was accepted on 8 February 1966.\n1968 reorganization.\nUnited States Department of Defense (DoD), also referred to as the Department of War (DoW), realignments for the NORAD command organization began on 15 November 1968 (e.g., Army Air Defense Command (ARADCOM)). By 1972, there were eight NORAD \"regional areas\u00a0... for all air defense\". The NORAD Cheyenne Mountain Complex Improvements Program (427M System) became operational in 1979.\nFalse alarms.\nOn at least three occasions, NORAD systems failed, such as on 9 November 1979, when a technician in NORAD loaded a test tape, but failed to switch the system status to \"test\", causing a stream of constant false warnings to spread to two \"continuity of government\" bunkers as well as command posts worldwide. On 3 June 1980, and again on 6 June 1980, a computer communications device failure caused warning messages to sporadically flash in U.S. Air Force command posts around the world that a nuclear attack was taking place. \nDuring these incidents, Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) properly had their planes loaded with nuclear bombs in the air. Strategic Air Command (SAC) did not and received criticism, because they did not follow procedure, even though the SAC command knew these were almost certainly false alarms, as did PACAF. Both command posts had recently begun receiving and processing direct reports from the various radar, satellite, and other missile attack detection systems, and those direct reports simply did not match the erroneous data received from NORAD.\n1980 reorganization.\nFollowing the 1979 Joint US-Canada Air Defense Study, the command structure for aerospace defense was changed, e.g., \"SAC assumed control of ballistic missile warning and space surveillance facilities\" on 1 December 1979 from ADCOM. The Aerospace Defense Command major command ended 31 March 1980. Its organizations in Cheyenne Mountain became the \"ADCOM\" \"specified\" command under the same commander as NORAD, e.g., HQ NORAD/ADCOM J31 manned the Space Surveillance Center. \nIn 1982, a NORAD Off-site Test Facility called the Test and Development Facility (TDF) was located at Peterson AFB. The DEW Line was to be replaced with the North Warning System (NWS), the Over-the-Horizon Backscatter (OTH-B) radar was to be deployed, more advanced fighters were deployed, and E-3 Sentry AWACS aircraft were planned for greater use. These recommendations were accepted by the governments in 1985. The United States Space Command was formed in September 1985 as an adjunct, but not a component of NORAD.\nNORAD was renamed \"North American Aerospace Defense Command\" in March 1981.\nPost\u2013Cold War.\nIn 1989, NORAD operations expanded to cover counter-drug operations, for example, tracking of small aircraft entering and operating within the United States and Canada. DEW line sites were replaced between 1986 and 1995 by the North Warning System. The Cheyenne Mountain site was upgraded, but none of the proposed OTH-B radars are currently in operation.\nAfter the September 11 attacks, the NORAD Air Warning Center's mission included the interior airspace of North America.\nThe Cheyenne Mountain Realignment was announced in July 2006, to consolidate NORAD's day-to-day operations at Peterson Air Force Base. Cheyenne Mountain remains on \"warm standby\", staffed with support personnel.\nIn popular culture.\nIn film and television.\nThe NORAD command center located under Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado is a setting of the 1983 film \"WarGames\" and the television series \"Jeremiah\" and \"Stargate SG-1\". In the 2014 film \"Interstellar\", NORAD dissolves and its headquarters is converted for NASA. The 1970 movie, is largely based on NORAD.\nIn the \"South Park\" episode \"Back to the Cold War\", Mr. Mackey hacks into NORAD using late-1980s computer hardware.\nSanta tracker.\nAs a publicity move on 24 December 1955, NORAD's predecessor, the Continental Air Defense Command (CONAD), informed the press that CONAD was tracking Santa Claus's sleigh, adding that \"CONAD, Army, Navy and Marine Air Forces will continue to track and guard Santa and his sleigh on his trip to and from the U.S. against possible attack from those who do not believe in Christmas\". A Christmas Eve tradition was born, known as the \"NORAD Tracks Santa\" program. Every year on Christmas Eve, \"NORAD Tracks Santa\" purports to track Santa Claus as he leaves the North Pole and delivers presents to children around the world. Today, NORAD relies on volunteers to make the program possible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42906", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42906", "title": "The Queen of the Damned", "text": "1988 novel by Anne Rice\nThe Queen of the Damned (1988) is a vampire novel by American writer Anne Rice, the third in her \"The Vampire Chronicles\" series. It follows \"Interview with the Vampire\" and \"The Vampire Lestat\". This novel is a continuation of the story that ends in a cliffhanger in \"The Vampire Lestat\" and explores the rich history and mythology of the origin of the vampires, which dates back to Ancient Egypt.\nIn March 2014, a new installment of Rice's series was announced titled \"Prince Lestat\", which Rice's son, novelist Christopher Rice, called \"a true sequel to \"The Queen of the Damned\"\".\nPlot summary.\nPart One follows several people over the same period of several days. Several of the characters from the two previous books appear, including Armand, Daniel Molloy (the \"boy reporter\" of \"Interview with the Vampire\"), Marius de Romanus, Louis de Pointe du Lac, Gabrielle de Lioncourt and Santino. Each of the six chapters in Part One tells a different story about a different person or group of people. Two things unify these chapters: a series of dreams about red-haired twin sisters, and the fact that a powerful being is killing vampires around the world by means of spontaneous combustion.\nPandora and Santino rescue Marius, having answered his telepathic call for help. Marius informs his rescuers that Akasha has been awakened by Lestat de Lioncourt, or rather his rock music, for he has joined a rock band with mortals Alex, Larry and Tough Cookie. Having been awakened by Lestat's rebellious music, Akasha destroys her husband Enkil and plots to rule the world. She is also revealed as the source of the attacks on other vampires.\nPart Two takes place at Lestat's concert. Jesse Reeves, a member of the secret Talamasca and relative of Maharet, is mortally injured while attending the concert, and is taken to be made into a vampire at Maharet's compound in California's Sonoma Mountains. The vampires from Part One later congregate in the compound. Meanwhile, Akasha abducts Lestat and takes him as an unwilling consort to various locations in the world, inciting women to rise up and kill the men who have oppressed them.\nPart Three takes place at Maharet's compound, where Maharet tells the story of Akasha and the red-haired twins, Maharet and Mekare, to the other characters. Also present are Mael and Khayman, who already know the story.\nIn Part Four, Akasha confronts the gathered vampires, explaining that she plans to kill 90 percent of the world's human men and establish a new Eden in which women will worship Akasha as a goddess. If the assembled vampires refuse to follow her, she will destroy them. The vampires refuse, but Mekare enters and kills Akasha by severing her head and consuming her brain and heart. Amel passes into Mekare, thereby saving the lives of the remaining vampires. She becomes the new Queen of the Damned.\nIn Part Five, the vampires leave the compound and assemble at Armand's island resort in Florida to recover. They eventually go their separate ways. Lestat takes Louis to see David Talbot in London. After their brief visit with Talbot they depart into the night, an incensed Louis and his angry words filling Lestat with glee.\nOrigin of vampires.\n\"The Queen of the Damned\" deals with the origins of vampires themselves. The mother of all vampires, Akasha, begins as a pre-Egyptian queen, in a land called Kemet (which will become Egypt), many thousands of years ago. During this time two powerful witches (twins Maharet and Mekare) live in the mountains close to Nineveh. The witches are able to communicate with invisible spirits and gain simple favors from them. During this period there is a bloodthirsty, invisible spirit known as Amel who continually asks the two witches if they need his assistance, although they prudently decline the offer. The witches' village is destroyed and they are incarcerated by the king and queen, who desire their knowledge. When the witches offend Akasha, the queen condemns the twins. Enkil then orders his chief steward (who is Khayman as a mortal man) to rape the twins in his stead, which would prove their lack of power, before the eyes of the court. Afterward the witches are cast out into the desert. While making her way back home with a pregnant Maharet, Mekare curses the king and queen secretly with Amel. Eventually Amel inflicts such torment on Akasha and Enkil that they demand advice and help from the two witches.\nUnhappy with the young king's policies, conspirators attempt to assassinate the royal couple in Khayman's house while they are attempting to exorcise Amel, who had also been tormenting Khayman. While the king and queen lie dying, the evil spirit sees its chance to ensnare the soul of the dying queen and pulls it back into her body. The spirit combines itself with the flesh and blood of the queen, transforming her into a vampire. Akasha allows the king to drink her blood, which saves his life. In desperation, she orders Khayman to find the witches and bring them back to Egypt, hoping the twins will use their knowledge of spirits to help the couple, as they are overwhelmed by their thirst for blood. However, when the witches admit that they cannot help the monarchs, Akasha orders the mutilation of the witches: Maharet loses her eyes and Mekare her tongue. Afterward, Khayman, who had been turned into a vampire by Akasha, comes to the witches' cell and turns them too. The three flee together, but are caught by Akasha's soldiers. Khayman escapes, but Maharet and Mekare are further punished. The witches are put into two separate coffins which are then set afloat on two separate bodies of water. They are only reunited near the end of the novel \"Queen of the Damned\".\nIn Mekare's absence, Maharet returns to watch over her daughter and her descendants. Maharet's descendants become what she calls the Great Family. A maternal line, the Great Family includes every culture, religion, ethnicity, and race. The Great Family represents all humanity and shows the vampires what Akasha would destroy with the creation of her New World Order.\nAs the source of all vampires, Akasha is connected to all vampires by the blood and spirit they collectively share. In an experiment by the first Keeper, Akasha and Enkil are exposed to sunlight when they are several thousand years old. This merely darkens their skin. However, the result on all other vampires is extreme, and many of the weakest vampires die, thus confirming the legend that anything that harms Akasha will also directly affect all of her progeny.\nReception.\n\"The New York Times\" praised the entertaining, rich worldbuilding in the historical segments but criticized the contemporary sections for their melodramatic dialogue and cliche-riddled prose. \"Kirkus Reviews\" called the novel \"thin, unconvincing, and a grave disappointment\". \"Publishers Weekly\" said that excessive philosophical musings slow down the otherwise well-crafted storyline.\n\"The Queen of the Damned\" made its debut at number two on The New York Times Best Seller list. It ascended to the top spot in its second week and remained on the list for a total of 17 weeks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42909", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42909", "title": "Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff", "text": "Dutch physical and organic chemist (1852\u20131911)\nJacobus Henricus van 't Hoff Jr. (; 30 August 1852 \u2013 1 March 1911) was a Dutch physical chemist. A highly influential theoretical chemist of his time, Van\u00a0't Hoff was the first winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. His pioneering work helped found the modern theory of chemical affinity, chemical equilibrium, chemical kinetics, and chemical thermodynamics. In his 1874 pamphlet, Van 't Hoff formulated the theory of the tetrahedral carbon atom and laid the foundations of stereochemistry. In 1875, he predicted the correct structures of allenes and cumulenes as well as their axial chirality. He is also widely considered one of the founders of physical chemistry as the discipline is known today.\nBiography.\nThe third of seven children, Van\u00a0't Hoff was born in Rotterdam, Netherlands, 30 August 1852. His father was Jacobus Henricus van\u00a0't Hoff Sr., a physician, and his mother was Alida Kolff van 't Hoff. From a young age, he was interested in science and nature, and frequently took part in botanical excursions. In his early school years, he showed a strong interest in poetry and philosophy. He considered Lord Byron to be his idol.\nAgainst the wishes of his father, Van\u00a0't Hoff chose to study chemistry. First, he enrolled at Delft University of Technology in September 1869, and studied until 1871, when he passed his final exam on 8 July and obtained a degree of chemical technologist. He passed all his courses in two years, although the time assigned to study was three years. Then he enrolled at University of Leiden to study chemistry. He then studied in Bonn, Germany, with August Kekul\u00e9 and in Paris with Adolphe Wurtz. He received his doctorate under Eduard Mulder at the University of Utrecht in 1874.\nIn 1878, Van\u00a0't Hoff married Johanna Francina Mees. They had two daughters, Johanna Francina (1880\u20131964) and Aleida Jacoba (1882\u20131971), and two sons, Jacobus Henricus van\u00a0't Hoff III (1883\u20131943) and Govert Jacob (1889\u20131918). Van\u00a0't Hoff died at the age of 58, on 1 March 1911, at Steglitz, near Berlin, of tuberculosis.\nCareer.\nOrganic chemistry.\nVan 't Hoff earned his earliest reputation in the field of organic chemistry. In 1874, he accounted for the phenomenon of optical activity by assuming that the chemical bonds between carbon atoms and their neighbors were directed towards the corners of a regular tetrahedron. This three-dimensional structure accounted for the isomers found in nature. He shares credit for this with the French chemist Joseph Le Bel, who independently came up with the same idea.\nThree months before his doctoral degree was awarded, Van\u00a0't Hoff published this theory, which today is regarded as the foundation of stereochemistry, first in a Dutch pamphlet in the fall of 1874, and then in the following May in a small French book entitled \"La chimie dans l'espace\". A German translation appeared in 1877, at a time when the only job Van\u00a0't Hoff could find was at the Veterinary School in Utrecht. In these early years his theory was largely ignored by the scientific community, and was sharply criticized by one prominent chemist, Hermann Kolbe. Kolbe wrote:\n\"A Dr. J. H. van 't Hoff of the Veterinary School at Utrecht has no liking, apparently, for exact chemical investigation. He has considered it more convenient to mount Pegasus (apparently borrowed from the Veterinary School) and to proclaim in his \"\u2018La chimie dans l\u2019espace\u2019\" how, in his bold flight to the top of the chemical Parnassus, the atoms appeared to him to be arranged in cosmic space.\" However, by about 1880, support for Van\u00a0't Hoff's theory by such important chemists as Johannes Wislicenus and Viktor Meyer brought recognition.\nPhysical chemistry.\nIn 1884, Van 't Hoff published his research on chemical kinetics, titled \"\u00c9tudes de Dynamique chimique\" (\"Studies in Chemical Dynamics\"), in which he described a new method for determining the order of a reaction using graphics and applied the laws of thermodynamics to chemical equilibria. He also introduced the modern concept of chemical affinity. In 1886, he showed a similarity between the behaviour of dilute solutions and gases. In 1887, he and German chemist Wilhelm Ostwald founded an influential scientific magazine named \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr physikalische Chemie\" (\"Journal of Physical Chemistry\"). He worked on Svante Arrhenius's theory of the dissociation of electrolytes and in 1889 provided physical justification for the Arrhenius equation. In 1896, he became a professor at the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin. His studies of the salt deposits at Stassfurt were an important contribution to Prussia's chemical industry.\nVan 't Hoff became a lecturer in chemistry and physics at the Veterinary College in Utrecht. He then worked as a professor of chemistry, mineralogy, and geology at the University of Amsterdam for almost 18 years before eventually becoming the chairman of the chemistry department. In 1896, van\u00a0't Hoff moved to Germany, where he finished his career at the University of Berlin in 1911. In 1901, he received the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work with solutions. His work showed that very dilute solutions follow mathematical laws that closely resemble the laws describing the behavior of gases.\nHonours and awards.\nIn 1885, Van 't Hoff was appointed as a Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He was elected to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in1892. In 1904, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society. Other distinctions include honorary doctorates from Harvard and Yale (1901), Victoria University, the University of Manchester (1903), and University of Heidelberg (1908). He was awarded the Davy Medal of the Royal Society in 1893 (along with Le Bel), and elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1897. He was awarded the Helmholtz Medal of the Prussian Academy of Sciences (1911), and appointed Knight of the French Legion of Honour (1894) and Senator in the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft (1911). Van\u00a0't Hoff became an Honorary Member of the British Chemical Society in London, the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (1892), American Chemical Society (1898), the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences in Paris (1905), and the Netherlands Chemical Society (1908). Of his numerous distinctions, Van\u00a0't Hoff regarded winning the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry as the culmination of his career. The following are named after him:\nOn 14 May 2021, asteroid 34978 van 't Hoff, discovered by astronomers with the Palomar\u2013Leiden survey in 1977, was in his memory."}
{"id": "42910", "revid": "1308804962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42910", "title": "Jakarta Server Pages", "text": "Jakarta EE dynamic web page technology\nJakarta Server Pages (JSP; formerly JavaServer Pages) is a collection of technologies that helps software developers create dynamically generated web pages based on HTML, XML, SOAP, or other document types. Released in 1999 by Sun Microsystems, JSP is similar to PHP and ASP, but uses the Java programming language.\nTo deploy and run Jakarta Server Pages, a compatible web server with a servlet container, such as Apache Tomcat or Jetty, is required.\nOverview.\nArchitecturally, JSP may be viewed as a high-level abstraction of Jakarta Servlets. JSPs are translated into servlets at runtime, therefore JSP is a Servlet; each JSP servlet is cached and re-used until the original JSP is modified.\nJakarta Server Pages can be used independently or as the view component of a server-side model\u2013view\u2013controller design, normally with JavaBeans as the model and Java servlets (or a framework such as Apache Struts) as the controller. This is a type of Model 2 architecture.\nJSP allows Java code and certain predefined actions to be interleaved with static web markup content, such as HTML. The resulting page is compiled and executed on the server to deliver a document. The compiled pages, as well as any dependent Java libraries, contain Java bytecode rather than machine code. Like any other .jar or Java program, code must be executed within a Java virtual machine (JVM) that interacts with the server's host operating system to provide an abstract, platform-neutral environment.\nJSPs are usually used to deliver HTML and XML documents, but through the use of OutputStream, they can deliver other types of data as well.\nThe Web container creates JSP implicit objects like request, response, session, application, config, page, pageContext, out and exception. JSP Engine creates these objects during translation phase.\nSyntax.\nDirectives, scriptlets, and expressions, declaration.\nJSPs use several delimiters for scripting functions. \nThe most basic is codice_1, which encloses a JSP \"scriptlet.\" A scriptlet is a fragment of Java code that runs when the user requests the page.\nOther common delimiters include codice_2 for \"expressions,\" where the scriptlet and delimiters are replaced with the result of evaluating the expression, and \"directives\", denoted with codice_3.\nJava code is not required to be complete or self-contained within a single scriptlet block. It can straddle markup content, provided that the page as a whole is syntactically correct. For example, any Java \"if/for/while\" blocks opened in one scriptlet must be correctly closed in a later scriptlet for the page to successfully compile. This allows code to be intermingled and can result in poor programming practices.\nContent that falls inside a split block of Java code (spanning multiple scriptlets) is subject to that code. Content inside an \"if\" block will only appear in the output when the \"if\" condition evaluates to true. Likewise, content inside a loop construct may appear multiple times in the output, depending upon how many times the loop body runs.\nExample.\nThe following would be a valid for loop in a JSP page:\n&lt;p&gt;Counting to three:&lt;/p&gt;\n&lt;% for (int i = 1; i &lt; 4; i++) { %&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;This number is &lt;%= i %&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;\n&lt;p&gt;OK.&lt;/p&gt;\nThe output displayed in the user's web browser would be:\nStandard JSP Tags.\nThe useBean Tag.\nThe JSP codice_4 tag enables the developer to access and create a Javabean.\nAlthough using the codice_4 tag looks similar to an HTML tag, all JSP tags for JavaBeans use XML syntax. Therefore the code containing the codice_4 tag is case-sensitive.\nThe codice_4 tag contains several attributes. The codice_8 attribute declares the name that is used for gaining access to the bean. The codice_9 attribute declares the package and class for the bean. The codice_10 declares the object responsible for storing the bean. The value for the scope defines the duration for which the bean is available for the rest of the java application to use. The scope can be one of the following four values: \nThe getProperty and setProperty Tags.\nAfter a bean has been created using the codice_4 tag, the codice_12 and codice_13 tags can be used for getting and setting the properties of the bean.\nThe JSP codice_12 is used to get the property of created bean.\nThe JSP codice_13 tag is used to set the properties for a bean.\nFor the codice_12 and codice_13 tags, the name attribute is used to specify the bean's name. So the name attribute must match the id attribute provided by the codice_4 tag.\nExpression Language.\nVersion 2.0 of the JSP specification added support for the Expression Language (EL), used to access data and functions in Java objects. In JSP 2.1, it was folded into the Unified Expression Language, which is also used in JavaServer Faces.\nThe JSP Expression Language uses a compact syntax which enables the developer to get attributes and JavaBean properties from a given request object. When using EL, a dollar sign (\"$\") must be added at the beginning of the code. The dollar symbol is followed by an opening brace (\"{\"), as well as a closing brace (\"}\"). The code is then written between the opening and closing braces.\nExample.\nThe following is an example of EL syntax:\nThe value of codice_19 in the object codice_20 is codice_21.\nAdditional tags.\nThe JSP syntax add additional tags, called JSP actions, to invoke built-in functionality. Additionally, the technology allows for the creation of custom JSP \"tag libraries\" that act as extensions to the standard JSP syntax. One such library is the JSTL.\nJakarta Standard Tag Library.\nJakarta Standard Tag Library (JSTL) supports common tasks that must be performed in JSPs. Examples includes iteration and conditionals (the equivalent of \"for\" and \"if\" statements in Java).\nOut of all the libraries in JSTL, the JSTL core library is most commonly used. A taglib directive must be used to specify the URI of the JSTL core library using a prefix. Although there are many different choices for the prefix, the \"c\" prefix is commonly used for this library.\nXML-compliant JSP.\nJSP pages may also be written in fully valid XML syntax. Such JSP files commonly use the alternative codice_22 file extension, which usually causes the application server to validate the XML syntax.\nSince the usual JSP syntax codice_23 is not valid in XML, a developer must use alternative tags provided by JSP. For example, the common codice_24 directive may instead be written as a codice_25 tag, and tag libraries are imported using XML namespaces, instead of the usual codice_26 tag.\nCompiler.\nA JavaServer Pages compiler is a program that parses JSPs and transforms them into executable Java Servlets. A program of this type is usually embedded into the application server and run automatically the first time a JSP is accessed, but pages may also be precompiled for better performance, or compiled as a part of the build process to test for errors.\nSome JSP containers support configuring how often the container checks JSP file timestamps to see whether the page has changed. Typically, this timestamp would be set to a short interval (perhaps seconds) during software development, and a longer interval (perhaps minutes, or even never) for a deployed Web application.\nCriticism.\nAccording to Joel Murach and Michael Urban, authors of the book \"Murach's Java Servlets and JSP\", embedding Java code in JSP is generally bad practice. A better approach would be to migrate the back-end logic embedded in the JSP to the Java code in the . In this scenario, the is responsible for processing, and the JSP is responsible for displaying the HTML, maintaining a clear separation of concerns.\nIn 2000, Jason Hunter, author of \"Java Servlet Programming\" described a number of \"problems\" with JavaServer Pages. Nevertheless, he wrote that while JSP may not be the \"best solution for the Java Platform\" it was the \"Java solution that is most like the non-Java solution,\" by which he meant Microsoft's Active Server Pages. Later, he added a note to his site saying that JSP had improved since 2000, but also cited its competitors, Apache Velocity and Tea (template language). Today, several alternatives and a number of JSP-oriented pages in larger web apps are considered to be technical debt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42914", "revid": "50446224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42914", "title": "Concordia University", "text": "University in Montreal, Quebec, Canada\nConcordia University () is a public English-language research university located in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Founded in 1974 following the merger of Loyola College and Sir George Williams University, Concordia is one of the three universities in Quebec where English is the primary language of instruction (the others being McGill and Bishop's). As of the 2024-2025 academic year, there were 48,657 students enrolled in credit and non-credit courses at Concordia, making the university among the largest in Canada by enrolment. The university has two campuses, set approximately apart: Sir George Williams Campus is the main campus, located in the Quartier Concordia neighbourhood of Downtown Montreal in the borough of Ville Marie; and Loyola Campus in the residential district of Notre-Dame-de-Gr\u00e2ce. With four faculties, a school of graduate studies and numerous colleges, centres and institutes, Concordia offers over 400 undergraduate and over 120 graduate programs and courses.\nConcordia is a non-sectarian and coeducational institution, with more than 254,000 alumni.\nThe university is a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, International Association of Universities, Canadian Association of Research Libraries, Canadian University Society for Intercollegiate Debate, Canadian Bureau for International Education and Canadian University Press. The university's varsity teams, known as the Stingers, compete in the Quebec Student Sport Federation of U Sports.\nHistory.\nThe roots of Concordia University\u2019s founding institutions go back more than 120 years with the establishment of Loyola College in 1896 and Sir George Williams University in 1926.\nLoyola College.\nLoyola College traces its history to an English-language program at the Coll\u00e8ge Sainte-Marie de Montr\u00e9al (today part of the Universit\u00e9 du Qu\u00e9bec \u00e0 Montr\u00e9al) at the Jesuit Sacred Heart Convent. In 1896, Loyola College was established at the corner of Bleury Street and Saint Catherine Street, and it was named in honour of Ignatius of Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus. On March 10, 1898, the institution was incorporated by the Government of Quebec and became a full-fledged college. The same year, following a fire, the college was relocated further west on Drummond Street, south of Saint Catherine Street. Although founded as a \"coll\u00e8ge classique\" (the forerunners of Quebec's college system), Loyola began granting university degrees through Universit\u00e9 Laval in 1903.\nThe college moved into the present west-end campus on Sherbrooke Street West in Notre-Dame-de-Gr\u00e2ce in 1916. The School of Sociology opened in 1918. Since Loyola College never became a chartered university, it did not have the ability to grant its own university degrees. In 1920, the institution became affiliated with Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al, which began granting its degrees instead of Universit\u00e9 Laval.\nMemorial bronze honour roll plaques in the entrance hall near the administrative offices are dedicated to those from Loyola College who fought in the First World War, Second World War and Korean War.\nThe inter-war period was marked by the shift of education in the institution, the \"coll\u00e8ge classique\" education was replaced by humanistic education (Liberal Arts College) in 1940, and Loyola became a four-year institution. Theology and philosophy were taught to all students until 1972.\nIn 1940, the Faculty of Science and the Department of Engineering were created. In addition to providing the same undergraduate programs as other colleges, the institution also offered innovative fields of study at the time, such as exercise science and communication studies. Students could enrol in academic majors starting in 1953 and honours programs in 1958. Students graduating from Loyola could afterwards pursue graduate-level education in other universities, with a few earning Rhodes Scholarships.\nStarting in 1958, Loyola also began offering its first evening courses for students who were not able to go to school full-time. New courses were given in library science and faith community nursing. Since its creation, Loyola College had welcomed almost exclusively young English-speaking Catholic men as students. It became co-ed in 1959 and became less homogeneous with the ever-increasing number of foreign students.\nObtaining a university charter was an important issue in the 1960s. Although many wanted Loyola College to become Loyola University, the Government of Quebec preferred to annex it to Sir George Williams University. Negotiations began in 1968 and ended with the creation of Concordia University on August 24, 1974.\nSir George Williams University.\nIn 1851, the first YMCA in North America was established on Ste. Helene Street in Old Montreal. Beginning in 1873, the YMCA offered evening classes to allow working people in the English-speaking community to pursue their education while working during the day. Sixty years later, the Montreal YMCA relocated to its current location on Stanley Street in Downtown Montreal. In 1926, the education program at the YMCA was reorganized as Sir George Williams College, named after George Williams, founder of the original YMCA in London, England, upon which the Montreal YMCA was based. In 1934, Sir George Williams College offered the first undergraduate credit course in adult education in Canada.\nSir George Williams College received its university charter from the provincial government in 1948, though it remained the education arm of the Montreal YMCA. Sir George Williams expanded into its first standalone building, the Norris Building, in 1956. In 1959, the college requested that the Quebec legislature amend its university charter, changing its name to Sir George Williams University. It established a Centre for Human Relations and Community Studies in 1963. Sir George Williams continued to hold classes in the YMCA building until the construction of the Henry F. Hall Building in 1966.\nThe university gained international attention in 1969 for what is known as the \"Computer Centre Incident.\" Notably in spring 1968, six black West Indian students at Sir George Williams University accused a biology lecturer (later assistant professor) of racism. The complaint was lodged to the dean of students, Magnus Flynn. Dissatisfied with how the administration was handling their complaint, the students decided to make it a public issue in fall 1968. The students occupied and destroyed the Hall Building's ninth floor computer lab after threatening to do so should the riot squad be called. The events forced the university to re-evaluate its policies, leading to the creation of the Ombuds Office and establishment of the University Regulations on Rights and Responsibilities in April 1971. (See Sir George Williams Affair).\nFollowing several years of discussions and planning, Sir George Williams University merged with Loyola College to create Concordia University in 1974. Concordia provided students with representative student organizations and greater power over administrative decisions at the university.\nMerger.\nIn 1968, in the wake of the Parent Commission Report, which recommended the secularization of Quebec's educational system, the Government of Quebec asked Loyola College and Sir George Williams University to consider some form of union. The proposed merger was discussed by the Loyola-Sir George Williams Joint Steering Committee, a committee created to analyze all forms of possible mergers of the two institutions. It was proposed, in 1969, to create a university federation that allowed students to take courses at both campuses without paying additional fees. There was also mention of a shuttle bus service linking the remote facilities apart.\nCriticized for the difficulties encountered by the cohesion of the various departments and faculties, this option was set aside, but not totally rejected by the Joint Steering Committee. The Joint Committee of Representatives of the Board of Trustees of Loyola College and the Board of Governors of Sir George Williams University was formed in December 1971 and in fall 1972 produced a document outlining the basis of a university with two campuses. While the committee considered a number of possible models, including that of a loose federation, the solution finally adopted was that of an integrated institution, Concordia University, operating under the existing charter of Sir George Williams University. Following several revisions in November 1972, the document became the main plan of the proposed merger. It was accepted by both institutions, which began the process of consolidating their operations.\nIn early 1973, the two institutions announced the merger would take place that fall. However, legal and administrative procedures delayed the merger for another year. On August 24, 1974, the Government of Quebec recognized the merger, thus creating Concordia University. The name was taken from the motto of the city of Montreal, \"Concordia salus\" (meaning \"well-being through harmony\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"When you join together two lively institutions, each with its own philosophies and ways of doing things, each firmly dedicated to freedom of thought and speech, you must expect a measure of friction. We look forward now to a new period of creative friction.\"\u2014\u200a\nPost-merger.\nThe legal existence of Concordia dates from August 24, 1974. The integration of the various faculties of the two institutions into a coherent whole took several years. The five faculties of the new university were a combination of existing faculties and departments prior to the merger. There was a Faculty of Commerce, Faculty of Science and Faculty of Arts at Sir George Williams University. Additionally, there was a Faculty of Arts and Science at Loyola College. The Faculty of Engineering of both institutions had previously been combined.\nThe Faculty of Fine Arts was created in 1976.\nThe first phase of the combination of the Faculties of Arts and Science began in 1977 and ended in 1985.\nIn the late 1980s, the Georges P. Vanier Library on the Loyola Campus was enlarged, while in 1992, the library on the Sir George Williams Campus moved to the new J.W. McConnell Building. The Norris Building was closed the same year.\nOn August 24, 1992, Valery Fabrikant, a mechanical engineering professor, shot five colleagues, killing four, on the ninth floor of the Hall Building. Fabrikant was convicted of the murders and sentenced to life imprisonment. The university erected a memorial to the slain professors (four granite tables) in the Hall Building lobby.\nStarting in 1998, the university entered a major phase of expansion to meet its growing student enrolment. In August 2003, Concordia inaugurated the Richard J. Renaud Science Complex on the Loyola Campus.\nIn 2005, the university launched a major urban redevelopment project in the neighbourhood surrounding the Sir George Williams Campus, known as the Quartier Concordia. That same year, the Engineering, Computer Science and Visual Arts Integrated Complex opened its doors on Saint Catherine Street West between Guy Street and Mackay Street.\nIn September 2009, the university marked the opening of the new building for the John Molson School of Business.\nIn September 2015, the university held a ribbon cutting for the District 3 Innovation Center's new space on the sixth floor of Concordia's Faubourg Building.\nThe university opened its interdisciplinary Applied Science Hub in 2020.\nCampuses.\nThe university has two campuses, set approximately 7\u00a0km (4 miles) apart: Sir George Williams Campus in the downtown core of Montreal, in an area known as Quartier Concordia (around the Guy\u2013Concordia Metro station), and Loyola Campus in the residential west-end district of Notre-Dame-de-Gr\u00e2ce. They are connected by free shuttle-bus service for students, faculty and staff.\nLibraries, archives and galleries.\nConcordia University has three main library locations. The R. Howard Webster Library is located in the J.W. McConnell Building on the Sir George Williams Campus and the Georges P. Vanier Library is located on the Loyola Campus. On September 2, 2014, the Library opened the Grey Nuns Reading Room, a silent study space for Concordia students located in the former Chapel of the Invention of the Holy Cross. The Concordia Library houses several special and unique collections including the Azrieli Holocaust Collection and the Irving Layton Collection. Most special collections are located in the Vanier Library. The Library also maintains the university's institutional repository, Spectrum. The Library is a member of the Canadian Association of Research Libraries. The Library also has partnerships with the Canadian Research Knowledge Network and the Data Liberation Initiative.\nConcordia's Henry F. Hall Building houses the Leonard and Bina Ellen Art Gallery. Samuel Schecter, an art enthusiast and businessman, set up two funds in 1962 to be used for the purchase of Canadian art at Sir George Williams University and at Loyola College (Montreal). When Sir George Williams University and Loyola College merged to form Concordia in 1974, their respective art collections were also combined. The collection of the Leonard and Bina Ellen Gallery consists of 1,800 paintings, sculptures, prints, photographs and videos, many of the works by 20th-century Canadian artists.\nConcordia's Engineering, Computer Science and Visual Arts Complex houses the FOFA Gallery, a primary venue for exhibiting works by faculty, students and alumni of the Faculty of Fine Arts.\nConcordia's Visual Arts Building on Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque Boulevard houses the VAV Gallery, a student-run exhibition space seeking to highlight the work of undergraduate students in the Fine Arts department.\nConcordia's Records Management and Archives stores official records of, or relating to, or people/activities connected with Concordia University and its two founding institutions. The collection consists of manuscripts, texts, photographs, audio-visual material and artifacts.\nNew buildings.\nIn 2001, Concordia embarked on a mission to develop and expand the quality of the downtown campus, and to revive the west end in Montreal.\nThe university also acquired the historic Grey Nuns Mother House near its Sir George Williams Campus, for $18\u00a0million. Built in 1871, it would alone double the size of the current downtown campus. From 2007 to 2022, the university moved into the building in four separate phases. Concordia Residence Life currently houses nearly 250 students each year in the Grey Nuns Building. The dorm rooms are among the largest in the country, as many of the rooms have been transformed from when the section of the Grey Nuns Building was occupied by the Grey Nuns. The site was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 2011.\nThe Engineering, Computer Science and Visual Arts Integrated Complex (EV Building) at Saint Catherine Street and Guy Street was opened in September 2005. The building is directly connected to the Guy\u2013Concordia Metro station and also houses Le Gym, a facility of Concordia's Department of Recreation and Athletics. Across the street, the 100-year-old TD Canada Trust building was donated to Concordia in 2005 by the Toronto-Dominion Bank.\nConstruction of the new John Molson Building (MB), the home of the John Molson School of Business located on the corner of Guy Street and De Maisonneuve Boulevard West, began in February 2007. At a ceremony at Concordia on October 30, 2006, the Quebec Minister of Education, Recreation and Sports, Jean-Marc Fournier, announced an investment of $60 million towards the construction of the new building. The government's $60 million represented about half of the total construction costs. Construction started on January 22, 2006, and the building was completed and opened in September 2009. The 15-story building now houses the John Molson School's about 9,100 full- and part-time students under the same roof for the first time. The departments of contemporary dance, theatre and music also moved into the new MB Building. It is connected to the EV Building by a tunnel under Guy Street.\nIn April 2010, a 120-metre tunnel completed the underground connections of the Guy-Concordia Metro station with the Henry F. Hall Building and the J.W. McConnell Building.\nConcordia opened the Applied Science Hub on the Loyola Campus in December 2020. The $63.1-million state-of-the-art facility \u2014 built thanks to $36.7 million in support from the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec \u2014 was strategically designed to enable interdisciplinary collaboration and research between faculty and students in the Faculty of Arts and Science, Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science as well as the District 3 Innovation Centre.\nQuartier Concordia.\nQuartier Concordia is a neighbourhood redevelopment project centred around Concordia University's Sir George Williams Campus in downtown Montreal. Bordered by Sherbrooke Street to the north, Saint Mathieu Street to the west, Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque Boulevard to the south and Bishop Street to the east, the district is designed to be a green urban campus that will improve the use and quality of public places and spaces, student life on campus and transportation.\nAs part of the redesign, the small Norman Bethune Square was redesigned and enlarged. Sidewalks in the area were also widened, with additional trees.\nSince 2010, a tunnel links the university's Henry F. Hall and J.W. McConnell buildings with the Guy-Concordia Metro station. However, a project to create a green space on Mackay Street was put on hold.\nAdministration and governance.\nGovernance.\nConcordia is led by its president and vice-chancellor (referred to as the president), provost and vice-presidents. The Board of Governors and the Senate manage the university's affairs and academic integrity. The president and the senior leadership ensure transparency and accountability of the administration. The administration is supervised by the Board of Governors and Senate. Under the Charter of Concordia University, the university's highest governing body is the Board of Governors, which has final authority over the affairs of the university. The Senate derives its authority from the Board of Governors.\nAcademic units.\nThe university has four faculties \u2014 Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Fine Arts, Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science and John Molson School of Business \u2014 as well as the School of Graduate Studies. The respective faculties supervise the academic departments/institutes. For example, the Faculty of Art and Science oversees the Department of Applied Human Sciences and Simone de Beauvoir Institute.\nFinances.\nIn the 2021\u201322 year, Concordia received $586.5 million in revenue. Fifty-two per cent of the university's revenue comes from grants of the Government of Quebec, which are given based on the student population. As of 2022, the university's foundation has $358.451 million in its endowment. In November 2017, Concordia launched the Campaign for Concordia. The campaign's original target was $250 million, since raised to $350 million. Its goal is to support the university's nine strategic directions that will advance Concordia's position as \"Canada's next-generation university.\" In January 2018, Concordia President Alan Shepard reported that the university had already reached \"more than halfway\" of its goal. As of 2023, the campaign is still ongoing.\nAcademics.\nStudents begin their university studies in September or, in some cases, in January or May. An undergraduate degree normally requires three or four years of full-time study, a master's one to three years, and a PhD at least four years. Diplomas and certificates usually take no longer than a year and a half to complete.\nConcordia has more than 400 undergraduate programs under the Faculty of Arts and Science, the Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science, the Faculty of Fine Arts and the John Molson School of Business. Students are normally enrolled in one of these faculties but may take courses from any of the others as part of their studies. Class sizes vary from 30 to 400 students.\nThe School of Graduate Studies offers about 120 programs leading to master's and doctoral degrees, and graduate diplomas and certificates for professionals seeking to upgrade their knowledge and skills.\nConcordia Continuing Education offers university-level studies and training to those from diverse backgrounds and stages of life.\nThe Institute for Co-operative Education administers more than 70 bachelor's and master's programs in an alternating co-op work-study format. Concordia's co-op programs enable students to enrich their learning by participating in career-relevant 12\u201317-week full-time, paid work terms. Depending on their faculty and major, co-op students will usually graduate with a minimum of 12 months of academically relevant work experience. There are also Industrial Experience and Professional Experience options in certain disciplines that enable students to participate in a summer-only work term. Concordia is a member of the Canadian Association for Co-operative Education (CAFCE).\nDuring the 2023\u20132024 academic year, there were 35,795 undergraduate students, 9,650 graduate students and 4,269 continuing education students enrolled at Concordia.\nFaculty of Arts and Science.\nConcordia's Faculty of Arts and Science consists of 21 departments and seven colleges, schools and institutes in the humanities, sciences and social sciences at the undergraduate and graduate levels. There are 257 programs, offering more than 2,400 courses. There are 869 full-time and part-time faculty members. During the 2022-23 academic year, there were 18,502 undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in the faculty.\nIn addition to regular academic programs, the Faculty of Arts and Science also includes three colleges, two schools and two institutes. These are the Liberal Arts College, the Loyola College for Diversity and Sustainability, the School of Community and Public Affairs, the School of Irish Studies, the Science College, the Simone de Beauvoir Institute and the Concordia Institute for Canadian Jewish Studies.\nThe Loyola College for Diversity and Sustainability (formerly Loyola International College) is an interdisciplinary college on the Loyola Campus, the original site of Loyola College. It offers minor programs in Diversity and the Contemporary World and Sustainability Studies.\nAt the undergraduate level, the Faculty of Arts and Science offers both Bachelor of Arts (BA) and Bachelor of Science (BSc) programs with majors ranging from economics, political science and sociology to actuarial mathematics, biology and ecology.\nGina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science.\nThe Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science, formerly known as Faculty of Engineering and Computer Science, is named after Concordia alumna Gina Cody, who donated $15\u00a0million to the university in 2018. In response, the university renamed its faculty of engineering and computer science in her honour, making it the first engineering school to be named after a woman in Canada and globally. In 2018, \"Maclean's\" ranked its programs as one of the best in Canada. The faculty offers more than 50 undergraduate and graduate-level programs in the following departments: Building, Civil and Environmental Engineering; Centre for Engineering in Society; Computer Science and Software Engineering; Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering; Chemical and Materials Engineering; Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering. The engineering programs are all accredited by the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board (CEAB). During the 2022-23 academic year, there were 11,848 undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in the faculty.\nTroitsky Bridge Building Competition\nThe Troitsky Bridge Building Competition brings together engineering students from across Canada and parts of the United States. Teams of students representing their universities must build a 1-metre-long bridge using only regular popsicle sticks, toothpicks, dental floss, and white glue. A panel of judges grades the bridges based on originality and presentation while a hydraulic loading device is used to determine the maximum load and performance.\nFaculty of Fine Arts.\nThe Faculty of Fine Arts offers 26 undergraduate programs and 17 graduate programs. It includes nine departments and four research institutes. During the 2022-23 academic year, there were 3,982 undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in the faculty. Among the departments is The Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema. It is informally identified as MHSoC, and offers study in the fields of film animation, film production and film studies. It is the largest, university-based centre for the study of film animation, film production and film studies in Canada.\nJohn Molson School of Business.\nThe John Molson School of Business (formerly the Faculty of Commerce and Administration) offers 18 different programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels from five different departments. The departments are Accountancy, Finance, Marketing, Management and Supply Chain and Business Technology Management. During the 2022-23 academic year there were 9,097 undergraduate students and graduate students enrolled, and John Molson School has 61,000 alumni. The John Molson School is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). The business school is located in a LEED silver-certified building.\nRankings and reputation.\nConcordia University has placed well in postsecondary school rankings. The 2024 \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked the university 387 in the world. In the 2023 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" rankings, the university ranked 501\u2013600 in the world. The 2024 \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" placed Concordia 501\u2013600 in the world. In \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" 2022\u201323 global university rankings, the university placed 653rd in the world. The university was also ranked by \"Maclean's\" Canadian university rankings. In October 2023, \"Maclean's\" ranked Concordia 9th in Canada under its comprehensive universities category.\nThe university's John Molson School of Business was ranked among the top 10 Canadian business schools and the top 100 worldwide by \"The Economist\" in 2022. Moreover, Concordia was ranked seventh in Canada and 229th among world universities in the International Professional Classification of Higher Education Institutions, a worldwide ranking compiled by the \u00c9cole des Mines de Paris that uses as its sole criterion the number of graduates occupying the rank of chief executive officer at Fortune 500 companies.\nStudent life.\nStudent housing.\nFour residence buildings are available for students who wish to live on campus: Grey Nuns Residence, Jesuit Residence, Hingston Hall (HA) and Hingston Hall (HB).\nFor students who choose to live off campus, the Concordia Student Union's Off-Campus Housing and Job Bank (HoJo) offers classified ads, legal advice and safety resources.\nSustainability.\nConcordia's \"sustainability hub\" promotes sustainable development.\nIn February 2019, Concordia became the first university in Canada to issue a sustainable bond. According to the university webpage the bond will \"generate environmental and social benefits as defined by the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals\". According to Denis Cossette, the university's chief financial officer, \"the $25-million senior unsecured bond offers investors a 3.626 per cent yield and has a duration of 20 years.\" Because of this bond, Concordia would be able to issue sustainable bonds instead of green bonds.\nAthletics.\nConcordia University's athletic teams are called the Concordia Stingers. They compete with other schools in Canadian Interuniversity Sport, and more specifically, in the Quebec Student Sports Federation and the Quebec University Football League. The university has 10 varsity teams. In the fall, teams compete in Canadian football, men's and women's soccer, men's and women's rugby union and college wrestling. There are female and male wrestlers on the team from year to year, and they compete as one team. In the winter, teams compete in men's and women's ice hockey and men's and women's basketball.\nThe Concordia Stingers women's ice hockey team won the Canadian national championships in 1998, 1999 and 2022. The Stingers baseball club beat Cape Breton University Capers 12\u20132 to win the 2009 National Baseball Crown.\nStudent organizations.\nThe Concordia Student Union (CSU) represents undergraduate students. Its membership totals more than 35,000 students. Concordia students voted in favour of accreditation of their student union in a referendum in December 2000. As a result, the CSU is now legally accountable only to its student constituents.\nConcordia University is home to local and international fraternities and sororities.\nStudent media.\nConcordia University has a campus radio station, CJLO, and television station, CUTV. Concordia also has three student-run newspapers, \"The Link\", \"The Concordian\" and French-language \"L'Organe\". \"The Concordian\" and \"L'Organe\" are members of Canadian University Press (CUP); \"The Link\" left the CUP network in 2012. The university also assists in the publishing of the only student-run, bilingual literary/arts magazine, \"The Void\", founded in 2002, as well as arts magazine \"Interfold\".\nStudent activism.\nSir George Williams affair.\nThe Sir George Williams affair (also referred to as \"The Sir George Williams Computer Centre Incident\") was a 1969 event at Sir George Williams University, now a part of Concordia University. It was the largest student occupation in Canadian history, and resulted (in 1969 currency) in $2 million of property damage. Among those arrested and convicted were Roosevelt Douglas, who later became Prime Minister of Dominica, and who was a son of one of the richest men in Dominica. Also arrested was Anne Cools, who later became a Canadian Senator. Deeply involved also was student Cheddi \"Joey\" Jagan Jr., who was of Indo-Guyanese and Ashkenazi Jewish descent, and the son of Cheddi Jagan, an American-educated dentist and former Premier and Chief Minister of British Guiana at the time, and his American wife Janet Jagan.\nStrike of 1999.\nAs the 1990s progressed, student activism began growing, coming to a head in 1999 with the election of the first in a series of radical slates to the Concordia Student Union. Under the presidency of Rob Green, a referendum regarding a strike garnered 2,284 votes of support. This was an unusually strong show of support, as student governments at Concordia are often elected on the basis of less than 1,000 votes in their favour. The strike lasted from November 3 to 5 and targeted a range of issues, including student representation in the university senate, corporate presence and advertising on campus, and government. There were several demonstrations, where both protesters and police were reported to be injured.\nAnti-Netanyahu riot.\nOn September 9, 2002, a scheduled speech from the former (and later subsequent) Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was cancelled following violent pro-Palestinian riots inside the Henry F. Hall Building. Protestors raised concerns about Israeli human rights abuses in the Palestinian territories, namely in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Netanyahu accused protestors of being supporters of terrorism. The event is depicted in a documentary named \"Confrontation at Concordia\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42916", "revid": "85019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42916", "title": "Java 2 SDK", "text": ""}
{"id": "42918", "revid": "50010770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42918", "title": "JSP", "text": "JSP may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42922", "revid": "1316162756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42922", "title": "Comparison of Java and C++", "text": "Comparison between two programming languages\nJava and C++ are two prominent object-oriented programming languages. By many language popularity metrics, the two languages have dominated object-oriented and high-performance software development for much of the 21st century, and are often directly compared and contrasted. Java's syntax was based on C/C++.\nDesign aims.\nThe differences between the programming languages C++ and Java can be traced to their heritage, as they have different design goals.\nC++ was designed for systems and applications programming (i.e., infrastructure programming), extending the procedural programming language C, which was designed for efficient execution. To C, C++ added support for object-oriented programming, exception handling, lifetime-based resource management (Resource Acquisition Is Initialization (RAII)), generic programming, template metaprogramming, and the C++ Standard Library which includes generic containers and algorithms (the Standard Template Library or STL), and many other general purpose facilities.\nJava is a general-purpose, concurrent, class-based, object-oriented programming language that is designed to minimize implementation dependencies. It relies on a Java virtual machine to be secure and highly portable. It is bundled with an extensive library designed to provide abstraction of the underlying platform. Java is a statically typed object-oriented language that uses a syntax similar to (but incompatible with) C++. It includes a documentation system called Javadoc.\nThe different goals in the development of C++ and Java resulted in different principles and design trade-offs between the languages. The differences are as follows:\nLanguage features.\nResource management.\n The solution to this is to null out object references. A second common reason for memory leak is the use of cache that has become no longer relevant. The solution to memory leaks due to using old cache is to represent the cache using a codice_21.\nTemplates vs. generics.\nBoth C++ and Java provide facilities for generic programming, templates and generics, respectively. Although they were created to solve similar kinds of problems, and have similar syntax, they are quite different.\nMiscellaneous.\nAn example comparing and exists in Wikibooks.\nPerformance.\nIn addition to running a compiled Java program, computers running Java applications generally must also run the Java virtual machine (JVM), while compiled C++ programs can be run without external applications. Early versions of Java were significantly outperformed by statically compiled languages such as C++. This is because the program statements of these two closely related languages may compile to a few machine instructions with C++, while compiling into several byte codes involving several machine instructions each when interpreted by a JVM. For example:\nSince performance optimization is a very complex issue, it is very difficult to quantify the performance difference between C++ and Java in general terms, and most benchmarks are unreliable and biased. Given the very different natures of the languages, definitive qualitative differences are also difficult to draw. In a nutshell, there are inherent inefficiencies and hard limits on optimizing in Java, given that it heavily relies on flexible high-level abstractions, however, the use of a powerful JIT compiler (as in modern JVM implementations) can mitigate some issues. In any case, if the inefficiencies of Java are too great, compiled C or C++ code can be called from Java via the JNI.\nSome inefficiencies that are inherent to the Java language include, mainly:\nHowever, there are a number of benefits to Java's design, some realized, some only theorized:\nAlso, some performance problems occur in C++:\nOfficial standard and reference of the language.\nLanguage specification.\nThe C++ language is defined by \"ISO/IEC 14882\", an ISO standard, which is published by the \"ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG21\" committee. The latest, post-standardization draft of C++17 is available as well.\nThe C++ language evolves via an open steering committee called the C++ Standards Committee. The committee is composed of the creator of C++ Bjarne Stroustrup, the convener Herb Sutter, and other prominent figures, including many representatives of industries and user-groups (i.e., the stake-holders). Being an open committee, anyone is free to join, participate, and contribute proposals for upcoming releases of the standard and technical specifications. The committee now aims to release a new standard every few years, although in the past strict review processes and discussions have meant longer delays between publication of new standards (1998, 2003, and 2011).\nThe Java language is defined by the \"Java Language Specification\", a book which is published by Oracle.\nThe Java language continuously evolves via a process called the Java Community Process, and the world's programming community is represented by a group of people and organizations - the Java Community members\u2014which is actively engaged into the enhancement of the language, by sending public requests - the Java Specification Requests - which must pass formal and public reviews before they get integrated into the language.\nThe lack of a firm standard for Java and the somewhat more volatile nature of its specifications have been a constant source of criticism by stake-holders wanting more stability and conservatism in the addition of new language and library features. In contrast, the C++ committee also receives constant criticism, for the opposite reason, i.e., being too strict and conservative, and taking too long to release new versions.\nTrademarks.\n\"C++\" is not a trademark of any company or organization and is not owned by any individual.\n\"Java\" is a trademark of Oracle Corporation.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42925", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42925", "title": "Pine (email client)", "text": "Email and newsgroups client\nPine is a freeware, text-based email client which was developed at the University of Washington. The first version was written in 1989, and announced to the public in March 1992. Source code was available for only the Unix version under a license written by the University of Washington. Pine is no longer under development, and has been replaced by the Alpine client, which is available under the Apache License.\nSupported platforms.\nThere are Unix, Windows, and Linux versions of Pine. The Unix/Linux version is text user interface based\u2014its message editor inspired the text editor Pico. The Windows (and formerly DOS) version is called PC-Pine. WebPine was available to individuals associated with the University of Washington (students, faculty, etc.)\u2014a version of Pine implemented as a web application.\nEtymology.\nMany people believe that Pine stands for \"Pine Is Not Elm\". One of its original authors, Laurence Lundblade, insists this was never the case and that it started off simply as a word and not an acronym, and that his first choice of a backronym for pine would be \"Pine Is Nearly Elm\". Over time, it was changed by the university to mean \"Program for Internet News and E-mail\". The original announcement said: \"Pine was originally based on Elm, but it has evolved much since, ('Pine Is No-longer Elm').\"\nLicensing and clones.\nUp to version 3.91, the Pine license was similar to BSD, and it stated that\n\"Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee to the University of Washington is hereby granted \u2026\"\nThe university registered a trademark for the Pine name with respect to \"computer programs used in communication and electronic mail applications\" in March 1995.\nFrom version 3.92, the holder of the copyright, the University of Washington, changed the license so that even if the source code was still available, they did \"not\" allow modifications and changes to Pine to be distributed by anyone other than themselves. They also claimed that even the old license never allowed distribution of modified versions.\nThe trademark for the Pine name was part of their position in this matter.\nIn reaction, some developers forked version 3.91 under the name MANA (for \"Mail And News Agent\") to avoid the trademark issue and the GNU Project adopted it as GNU Mana. Richard Stallman claims that the University of Washington threatened to sue the Free Software Foundation for distributing the modified Pine program, resulting in the development of MANA ceasing and no versions being released.\nThe Pico clone GNU nano was also written due to the change in licensing terms of Pine and Pico, as explained by nano's author in a blog post criticizing the license in 2001.\nThe University of Washington later modified their license somewhat to allow unmodified distribution of Pine alongside collections of free software, but the license still does not conform to the Open Source and the Free Software Guidelines so it is source-available software.\nAlpine.\nIn 2006, the University of Washington announced that it stopped development of Pine with Pine 4.64, although Pine continues to be supported.\nIn its place is a new family of email tools based upon Pine, called Alpine and licensed under the Apache License, version 2. November 29, 2006 saw the first public alpha release, which forms a new approach, since the alpha test of Pine was always non-public.\nAlpine 1.0 was publicly released on December 20, 2007. The most recent version 2.26 was released on June 3, 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42927", "revid": "29789165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42927", "title": "John of Damascus", "text": "Christian monk, priest, hymnographer and apologist (675/6\u2013749)\nJohn of Damascus or John Damascene, born Y\u016b\u1e25ana ibn Man\u1e63\u016br ibn Sarj\u016bn, was a Christian monk, priest, hymnographer, and apologist. He was born and raised in Damascus c.\u2009AD 675 or AD 676; the precise date and place of his death is not known, though tradition places it at his monastery, Mar Saba, near Jerusalem, on 4 December AD 749. A polymath whose fields of interest and contribution included law, theology, philosophy, and music, he was given the by-name of Chrysorroas (\u03a7\u03c1\u03c5\u03c3\u03bf\u03c1\u03c1\u03cc\u03b1\u03c2, literally \"streaming with gold\", i.e. \"the golden speaker\"). He wrote works expounding the Christian faith, and composed hymns which are still used both liturgically in Eastern Christian practice throughout the world as well as in western Lutheranism at Easter.\nHe is one of the Fathers of the Eastern Orthodox Church and is best known for his strong defence of icons. The Catholic Church regards him as a Doctor of the Church, often referred to as the \"Doctor of the Assumption\" due to his writings on the Assumption of Mary. He was also a prominent exponent of \"perichoresis\", and employed the concept as a technical term to describe both the interpenetration of the divine and human natures of Christ and the relationship between the hypostases of the Trinity. John is at the end of the Patristic period of dogmatic development, and his contributions are the last ones in the series of theological developments before the medieval period. In Catholic theology, he is therefore known as the \"last of the Greek Fathers\".\nThe main source of information for the life of John of Damascus is a work attributed to one John of Jerusalem, identified therein as the Patriarch of Jerusalem. This is an excerpted translation into Greek of an earlier Arabic text. The Arabic original contains a prologue not found in most other translations, and was written by an Arab monk, Michael, who explained that he decided to write his biography in 1084 because none was available in his day. However, the main Arabic text seems to have been written by an unknown earlier author sometime between the early 9th and late 10th century. \nWritten from a hagiographical point of view and prone to exaggeration and some legendary details, it is not the best historical source for his life, but is widely reproduced and considered to contain elements of some value. The hagiographic novel \"Barlaam and Josaphat\" is a work of the 10th century attributed to a monk named John. It was only considerably later that the tradition arose that this was John of Damascus, but most scholars no longer accept this attribution. Instead much evidence points to Euthymius of Athos, a Georgian who died in 1028.\nFamily background.\nJohn was born in Damascus, in 675 or 676, to a prominent Damascene Syrian Christian family.\nHis father, Sarjun ibn Mansur, served as an official of the early Umayyad Caliphate. His grandfather, Mansur ibn Sarjun, was a prominent Byzantine official of Damascus, who had been responsible for the taxes of the region during the reign of Emperor Heraclius and also served under Emperor Maurice. \nMansur seems to have played a role in the capitulation of Damascus to the troops of Khalid ibn al-Walid in 635 after securing favorable conditions of surrender. Eutychius, a 10th-century Melkite patriarch, mentions him as one high-ranking official involved in the surrender of the city to the Muslims.\nThe name John was very common among Christians in Syria, and Eutychius noted that the governor of Damascus, who was likely Mansur ibn Sarjun, was a Syrian. The tribal background of Mansur ibn Sarjun, John's grandfather, is unknown, but biographer Daniel Sahas has speculated that the name Mansur could have implied descent from the Arab Christian tribes of Kalb or Taghlib. \nThe name was common among Syrian Christians of Arab origins, and Eutychius noted that the governor of Damascus, who was likely Mansur ibn Sarjun, was an Arab Syrian. However, Sahas also asserts that the name does not necessarily imply an Arab background and could have been used by non-Arab, Semitic Syrians. While Sahas and biographers F. H. Chase and Andrew Louth assert that \"Mans\u016br\" was an Arabic name, Raymond le Coz asserts that the \"family was without doubt of Syrian origin\"; indeed, according to historian Daniel J. Janosik, \"Both aspects could be true, for if his family ancestry were indeed Syrian, his grandfather [Mansur] could have been given an Arabic name when the Arabs took over the government.\" \nWhen Syria was conquered by the Muslim Arabs in the 630s, the court at Damascus retained its large complement of Christian civil servants, John's grandfather among them. John's father, Sarjun (Sergius), went on to serve the Umayyad caliphs. John of Jerusalem claims that he also served as a senior official in the fiscal administration of the Umayyad Caliphate under Abd al-Malik before leaving Damascus and his position around 705 to go to Jerusalem and become a monk. However, this point is debated within the academic community as there is no trace of him in the Umayyad archives, unlike his father and grandfather. Some researchers, such as Robert G. Hoyland, deny such an affiliation, while others, like Daniel Sahas or the Orthodox historian Jean Meyendorff, suppose that he might have been a lower-level tax administrator, a local tax collector who would not have needed to be mentioned in the archives, but who might not have necessarily been part of the court either. In addition, John's own writings never refer to any experience in a Muslim court. It is believed that John became a monk at Mar Saba, and that he was ordained as a priest in 735.\nBiography.\nJohn was raised in Damascus, and Christian folklore holds that during his adolescence, John associated with the future Umayyad caliph Yazid I and the Taghlibi Christian court poet al-Akhtal.\nOne of the \"vitae\" describes his father's desire for him to \"learn not only the books of the Muslims, but those of the Greeks as well.\" From this it has been suggested that John may have grown up bilingual. John does indeed show some knowledge of the Quran, which he criticizes harshly.\nOther sources describe his education in Damascus as having been conducted in accordance with the principles of Hellenic education, termed \"secular\" by one source and \"classical Christian\" by another. One account identifies his tutor as a monk by the name of Cosmas, who had been kidnapped by Arabs from his home in Sicily, and for whom John's father paid a great price. As a refugee from Italy, Cosmas brought with him the scholarly traditions of Latin Christianity. Cosmas was said to have rivaled Pythagoras in arithmetic and Euclid in geometry. He also taught John's orphan friend, Cosmas of Maiuma. \nJohn possibly had a career as a civil servant for the Caliph in Damascus before his ordination.\nHe then became a priest and monk at the Mar Saba monastery near Jerusalem. \nOne source suggests John left Damascus to become a monk around 706, when al-Walid I increased the Islamicisation of the Caliphate's administration. \nThis is uncertain, as Muslim sources only mention that his father Sarjun (Sergius) left the administration around this time, and fail to name John at all. \nDuring the next two decades, culminating in the Siege of Constantinople (717\u2013718), the Umayyad Caliphate progressively occupied the borderlands of the Byzantine Empire. An editor of John's works, Father Le Quien, has shown that John was already a monk at Mar Saba before the dispute over iconoclasm, explained below.\nIn the early 8th century, iconoclasm, a movement opposed to the veneration of icons, gained acceptance in the Byzantine court. In 726, despite the protests of Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople, Emperor Leo III (who had forced his predecessor, Theodosius III, to abdicate and himself assumed the throne in 717 immediately before the great siege) issued his first edict against the veneration of images and their exhibition in public places.\nAll agree that John of Damascus undertook a spirited defence of holy images in three separate publications. The earliest of these works, his \"Apologetic Treatises against those Decrying the Holy Images\", secured his reputation. He not only attacked the Byzantine emperor, but adopted a simplified style that allowed the controversy to be followed by the common people, stirring rebellion among the iconoclasts. Decades after his death, John's writings would play an important role during the Second Council of Nicaea (787), which convened to settle the icon dispute.\nLeo III reportedly sent forged documents to the caliph which implicated John in a plot to attack Damascus. The caliph then ordered John's right hand be cut off and hung up in public view. Some days afterwards, John asked for the restitution of his hand, and prayed fervently to the \"Theotokos\" before her icon: thereupon, his hand is said to have been miraculously restored. In gratitude for this miraculous healing, he attached a silver hand to the icon, which thereafter became known as the \"Three-handed\", or \"Tricherousa\". That icon is now located in the Hilandar monastery of the Holy Mountain.\nDue to his commitment to iconodulism, he was condemned by anathema by the iconoclastic Council of Hieria in 754. He was later rehabilitated by the Second Council of Nicaea in 787.\nVeneration.\nWhen the name of John of Damascus was inserted in the General Roman Calendar in 1890, it was assigned to 27 March. The feast day was moved in 1969 to the day of John's death, 4 December, the day on which his feast day is celebrated also in the Byzantine Rite calendar, Lutheran Commemorations, and the Anglican Communion and Episcopal Church.\nJohn of Damascus is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 4 December.\nIn 1890, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Leo XIII.\nList of works.\nBesides his purely textual works, many of which are listed below, John of Damascus also composed hymns, perfecting the canon, a structured hymn form used in Byzantine Rite liturgies.\nTeachings and dogmatic works.\nViews on Islam.\nNear the final chapters (Chapter 101) of \"Concerning Heresy\", John mentions Islam as \"the Heresy of the Ishmaelites\". He is one of the first known Christian critics of Islam. John claims that Muslims were once worshipers of Aphrodite who followed after Muhammad because of his \"seeming show of piety,\" and that Muhammad himself read the Bible and, \"likewise, it seems,\" spoke to an Arian monk that taught him Arianism instead of Christianity. John also had read the Quran, as he criticizes it for saying that the Virgin Mary was the sister of Moses and Aaron, according to Surah Maryam (Chapter 19), Verse 28 where it reads: \u201cO sister of Aaron! Your father was not a man of evil, nor was your mother unchaste!\u201d and that Jesus was not crucified but brought alive into heaven according to Surah An-Nisa (Chapter 4), Verse 157\u2013158 where it reads: \u201cAnd [for] their saying, \u2018Indeed, we have killed the Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of Allah.\u2019\nBut they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him \u2014 but [it was] made to appear to them.\nAnd indeed, those who differ over it are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it except the following of assumption.\nAnd they did not kill him, for certain.\nRather, Allah raised him to Himself. And ever is Allah Exalted in Might and Wise.\"\nJohn further states to have spoken to Muslims about Muhammad. He uses the plural \"we\", whether in reference to himself, or to a group of Christians that he belonged to who spoke to the Muslims, or in reference to Christians in general.\nRegardless, John claims that he asked the Muslims what witnesses can testify that Muhammad received the Quran from God \u2013 since, John says, Moses received the Torah from God in the presence of the Israelites, and since Islamic law mandates that a Muslim can only marry and do trade in the presence of witnesses \u2013 and what biblical prophets and verses foretold Muhammad's coming \u2013 since, John says, Jesus was foretold by the prophets and whole Old Testament. John claims that the Muslims answered that Muhammad received the Quran in his sleep. John replied \"Then we jokingly say to them that, as long as he\u00a0received the book in his sleep and did not actually sense the operation\" claims that he jokingly answered, \"You're spinning me dreams.\"\nSome of the Muslims, John says, claimed that the Old Testament that Christians believe foretells Jesus' coming is misinterpreted, while other Muslims claimed that the Jews edited the Old Testament so as to deceive Christians (possibly into believing Jesus is God, but John does not say).\nWhile recounting his dialogue with Muslims, John claims that they have accused him of idol worship for venerating the Cross and worshipping Jesus. John claims that he told the Muslims that the black stone in Mecca was the head of a statue of Aphrodite. Moreover, he claims, the Muslims would be better off to associate Jesus with God if they say Jesus is the Word of God and Spirit. John claims that the word and the spirit are inseparable from that in which they exist and if the Word of God has always existed in God, then the Word must be God.\nJohn ends the chapter by claiming that Islam permits polygamy, that Muhammad committed adultery with a companion's wife before outlawing adultery, and that the Quran is filled with stories, such as the She-Camel of God and God giving Jesus an \"incorruptible table.\"\nArabic translation.\nIt is believed that the homily on the Annunciation was the first work to be translated into Arabic. Much of this text is found in Manuscript 4226 of the Library of Strasbourg (France), dating to AD 885.\nLater in the 10th century, Antony, superior of the monastery of St. Simon (near Antioch) translated a corpus of John Damascene. In his introduction to John's work, Sylvestre patriarch of Antioch (1724\u20131766) said that Antony was monk at Saint Saba. This could be a misunderstanding of the title Superior of Saint Simon probably because Saint Simon's monastery was in ruins in the 18th century.\nMost manuscripts give the text of the letter to Cosmas, the philosophical chapters, the theological chapters and five other small works.\nIn 1085, Mikhael, a monk from Antioch, wrote the Arabic life of the Chrysorrhoas. This work was first edited by Bacha in 1912 and then translated into many languages (German, Russian and English).\nModern English translations.\nTwo translations exist of the 10th-century hagiographic novel \"Barlaam and Josaphat\", traditionally attributed to John:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42932", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42932", "title": "Ikhthis", "text": ""}
{"id": "42934", "revid": "37195583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42934", "title": "Cryostasis (clathrate hydrates)", "text": "The term cryostasis was introduced to name the reversible preservation technology for live biological objects which is based on using clathrate-forming gaseous substances under increased hydrostatic pressure and hypothermic temperatures.\nLiving tissues cooled below the freezing point of water are damaged by the dehydration of the cells as ice is formed between the cells. The mechanism of freezing damage in living biological tissues has been elucidated by Renfret.\nThe vapor pressure of the ice is lower than the vapor pressure of the solute water in the surrounding cells and as heat is removed at the freezing point of the solutions, the ice crystals grow between the cells, extracting water from them. As the ice crystals grow, the volume of the cells shrinks, and the cells are crushed between the ice crystals. Additionally, as the cells shrink, the solutes inside the cells are concentrated in the remaining water, increasing the intracellular ionic strength and interfering with the organization of the proteins and other organized intercellular structures. Eventually, the solute concentration inside the cells reaches the eutectic and freezes. The final state of frozen tissues is pure ice in the former extracellular spaces, and inside the cell membranes a mixture of concentrated cellular components in ice and bound water. In general, this process is not reversible to the point of restoring the tissues to life.\nCryostasis utilizes clathrate-forming gases that penetrate and saturate the biological tissues causing clathrate hydrates formation (under specific pressure-temperature conditions) inside the cells and in the extracellular matrix. Clathrate hydrates are a class of solids in which gas molecules occupy \"cages\" made up of hydrogen-bonded water molecules. These \"cages\" are unstable when empty, collapsing into conventional ice crystal structure, but they are stabilised by the inclusion of the gas molecule within them. Most low molecular weight gases (including CH4, H2S, Ar, Kr, and Xe) will form a hydrate under some pressure-temperature conditions.\nClathrates formation will prevent the biological tissues from dehydration which will cause irreversible inactivation of intracellular enzymes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42935", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42935", "title": "Detection", "text": "Being seen by someone or something\nIn general, detection is the action of accessing information without specific cooperation from or with the sender; it is \"the fact of noticing or discovering something\".\nIn the history of radio communications, the term \"detector\" was first used for a device that detected the simple presence or absence of a radio signal, since all communications were in Morse code. The term is still in use today to describe a component that extracts a particular signal from all of the electromagnetic waves present. Detection is usually based on the frequency of the carrier signal, as in the familiar frequencies of radio broadcasting, but it may also involve filtering a faint signal from noise, as in radio astronomy, or reconstructing a hidden signal, as in steganography.\nIn optoelectronics, \"detection\" means converting a received optical input to an electrical output. For example, the light signal received through an optical fiber is converted to an electrical signal in a detector such as a photodiode.\nIn steganography, attempts to detect hidden signals in suspected carrier material is referred to as steganalysis. Steganalysis has an interesting difference from most other types of detection, in that it can often only determine the probability that a hidden message exists; this is in contrast to the detection of signals which are simply encrypted, as the ciphertext can often be identified with certainty, even if it cannot be decoded. \nIn the military, detection refers to the special discipline of reconnaissance with the aim to recognize the presence of an object in a location or ambiance, either literally (for example, enemy forces massing on the border) or by extension (as in a defense system or computer system).\nIn medicine, medical devices can provide detection for medical conditions, such as heart conditions by a stethoscope, or the detection of seizures in premature babies.\nFinally, the art of detection, also known as \"following clues\", is the work of a detective in attempting to reconstruct a sequence of events by identifying the relevant information in a situation. In law enforcement, it is \"the fact of the police discovering information about crimes\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42936", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42936", "title": "Heisman trophy", "text": ""}
{"id": "42937", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42937", "title": "Photodiode", "text": "Converts light into current\nA photodiode is a semiconductor diode sensitive to photon radiation, such as visible light, infrared or ultraviolet radiation, X-rays and gamma rays. It produces an electrical current when it absorbs photons. This can be used for detection and measurement applications, or for the generation of electrical power in solar cells. Photodiodes are used in a wide range of applications throughout the electromagnetic spectrum from visible light photocells to gamma ray spectrometers.\nPrinciple of operation.\nA photodiode is a PIN structure or p\u2013n junction. When a photon of sufficient energy strikes the diode, it creates an electron\u2013hole pair. This mechanism is also known as the inner photoelectric effect. If the absorption occurs in the junction's depletion region, or one diffusion length away from it, these carriers are swept from the junction by the built-in electric field of the depletion region. Thus holes move toward the anode, and electrons toward the cathode, and a photocurrent is produced. The total current through the photodiode is the sum of the dark current (current that is passed in the absence of light) and the photocurrent, so the dark current must be minimized to maximize the sensitivity of the device. Therefore, photodiodes operate most ideally in reverse bias.\nTo first order, for a given spectral distribution, the photocurrent is linearly proportional to the irradiance.\nPhotovoltaic mode.\nIn photovoltaic mode (zero bias), photocurrent flows into the anode through a short circuit to the cathode. If the circuit is opened or has a load impedance, restricting the photocurrent out of the device, a voltage builds up in the direction that forward biases the diode, that is, anode positive with respect to cathode. If the circuit is shorted or the impedance is low, a forward current will consume all or some of the photocurrent. This mode exploits the photovoltaic effect, which is the basis for solar cells \u2013 a traditional solar cell is just a large area photodiode. For optimum power output, the photovoltaic cell will be operated at a voltage that causes only a small forward current compared to the photocurrent.\nPhotoconductive mode.\nIn photoconductive mode the diode is reverse biased, that is, with the cathode driven positive with respect to the anode. This reduces the response time because the additional reverse bias increases the width of the depletion layer, which decreases the junction's capacitance and increases the region with an electric field that will cause electrons to be quickly collected. The reverse bias also creates dark current without much change in the photocurrent.\nAlthough this mode is faster, the photoconductive mode can exhibit more electronic noise due to dark current or avalanche effects. The leakage current of a good PIN diode is so low (&lt;1 nA) that the Johnson\u2013Nyquist noise of the load resistance in a typical circuit often dominates.\nRelated devices.\nAvalanche photodiodes are photodiodes with structure optimized for operating with high reverse bias, approaching the reverse breakdown voltage. This allows each \"photo-generated\" carrier to be multiplied by avalanche breakdown, resulting in internal gain within the photodiode, which increases the effective \"responsivity\" of the device.\nA phototransistor is a light-sensitive transistor. A common type of phototransistor, the \"bipolar phototransistor\", is in essence a bipolar transistor encased in a transparent case so that light can reach the \"base\u2013collector junction\". It was invented by John N. Shive at Bell Labs in 1948 but it was not announced until 1950. The electrons that are generated by photons in the base\u2013collector junction are injected into the base, and this photodiode current is amplified by the transistor's current gain \u03b2 (or hfe). If the base and collector leads are used and the emitter is left unconnected, the phototransistor becomes a photodiode. While phototransistors have a higher responsivity for light they are not able to detect low levels of light any better than photodiodes. Phototransistors also have significantly longer response times. Another type of phototransistor, the \"field-effect phototransistor\" (also known as photoFET), is a light-sensitive field-effect transistor. Unlike photobipolar transistors, photoFETs control drain-source current by creating a gate voltage.\nA solaristor is a two-terminal gate-less phototransistor. A compact class of such solaristors was demonstrated in 2018 by ICN2 researchers. The novel concept is a two-in-one power source plus transistor device that runs on solar energy by exploiting a memresistive effect in the flow of photogenerated carriers.\nMaterials.\nThe material used to make a photodiode is critical to defining its properties, because only photons with sufficient energy to excite electrons across the material's bandgap will produce significant photocurrents.\nMaterials commonly used to produce photodiodes are listed in the table below.\nBecause of their greater bandgap, silicon-based photodiodes generate less noise than germanium-based photodiodes.\nBinary materials, such as MoS2, and graphene emerged as new materials for the production of photodiodes.\nUnwanted and wanted photodiode effects.\nAny p\u2013n junction, if illuminated, is potentially a photodiode. Semiconductor devices such as diodes, transistors and ICs contain p\u2013n junctions, and will not function correctly if they are illuminated by unwanted light. This is avoided by encapsulating devices in opaque housings. If these housings are not completely opaque to high-energy radiation (ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma rays), diodes, transistors and ICs can malfunction due to induced photo-currents. Background radiation from the packaging is also significant. Radiation hardening mitigates these effects.\nIn some cases, the effect is actually wanted, for example to use LEDs as light-sensitive devices (see LED as light sensor) or even for energy harvesting, then sometimes called \"light-emitting and light-absorbing diodes\" (LEADs).\nFeatures.\nCritical performance parameters of a photodiode include spectral responsivity, dark current, response time and noise-equivalent power.\nWhen a photodiode is used in an optical communication system, all these parameters contribute to the \"sensitivity\" of the optical receiver which is the minimum input power required for the receiver to achieve a specified \"bit error rate\".\nApplications.\nP\u2013n photodiodes are used in similar applications to other photodetectors, such as photoconductors, charge-coupled devices (CCD), and photomultiplier tubes. They may be used to generate an output which is dependent upon the illumination (analog for measurement), or to change the state of circuitry (digital, either for control and switching or for digital signal processing).\nPhotodiodes are used in consumer electronics devices such as compact disc players, smoke detectors, medical devices and the receivers for infrared remote control devices used to control equipment from televisions to air conditioners. For many applications either photodiodes or photoconductors may be used. Either type of photosensor may be used for light measurement, as in camera light meters, or to respond to light levels, as in switching on street lighting after dark.\nPhotosensors of all types may be used to respond to incident light or to a source of light which is part of the same circuit or system. A photodiode is often combined into a single component with an emitter of light, usually a light-emitting diode (LED), either to detect the presence of a mechanical obstruction to the beam (slotted optical switch) or to couple two digital or analog circuits while maintaining extremely high electrical isolation between them, often for safety (optocoupler). The combination of LED and photodiode is also used in many sensor systems to characterize different types of products based on their optical absorbance.\nPhotodiodes are often used for accurate measurement of light intensity in science and industry. They generally have a more linear response than photoconductors.\nThey are also widely used in various medical applications, such as detectors for computed tomography (coupled with scintillators), instruments to analyze samples (immunoassay), and pulse oximeters.\nPIN diodes are much faster and more sensitive than p\u2013n junction diodes, and hence are often used for optical communications and in lighting regulation.\nP\u2013n photodiodes are not used to measure extremely low light intensities. Instead, if high sensitivity is needed, avalanche photodiodes, intensified charge-coupled devices or photomultiplier tubes are used for applications such as astronomy, spectroscopy, night vision equipment and laser rangefinding.\nComparison with photomultipliers.\nAdvantages compared to photomultipliers:\nDisadvantages compared to photomultipliers:\nPinned photodiode.\nThe pinned photodiode (PPD) has a shallow implant (P+ or N+) in N-type or P-type diffusion layer, respectively, over a P-type or N-type (respectively) substrate layer, such that the intermediate diffusion layer can be fully depleted of majority carriers, like the base region of a bipolar junction transistor. The PPD (usually PNP) is used in CMOS active-pixel sensors; a precursor NPNP triple junction variant with the MOS buffer capacitor and the back-light illumination scheme with complete charge transfer and no image lag was invented by Sony in 1975. This scheme was widely used in many applications of charge transfer devices.\nEarly charge-coupled device image sensors suffered from shutter lag. This was largely explained with the re-invention of the pinned photodiode. It was developed by Nobukazu Teranishi, Hiromitsu Shiraki and Yasuo Ishihara at NEC in 1980. Sony in 1975 recognized that lag can be eliminated if the signal carriers could be transferred from the photodiode to the CCD. This led to their invention of the pinned photodiode, a photodetector structure with low lag, low noise, high quantum efficiency and low dark current. It was first publicly reported by Teranishi and Ishihara with A. Kohono, E. Oda and K. Arai in 1982, with the addition of an anti-blooming structure. The new photodetector structure invented by Sony in 1975, developed by NEC in 1982 by Kodak in 1984 was given the name \"pinned photodiode\" (PPD) by B.C. Burkey at Kodak in 1984. In 1987, the PPD began to be incorporated into most CCD sensors, becoming a fixture in consumer electronic video cameras and then digital still cameras.\nA CMOS image sensor with a low-voltage-PPD technology was first fabricated in 1995 by a joint JPL and Kodak team. The CMOS sensor with PPD technology was further advanced and refined by R.M. Guidash in 1997, K. Yonemoto and H. Sumi in 2000, and I. Inoue in 2003. This led to CMOS sensors achieve imaging performance on par with CCD sensors, and later exceeding CCD sensors.\nPhotodiode array.\nA one-dimensional array of hundreds or thousands of photodiodes can be used as a position sensor, for example as part of an angle sensor. A two-dimensional array is used in image sensors and optical mice.\nIn some applications, photodiode arrays allow for high-speed parallel readout, as opposed to integrating scanning electronics as in a charge-coupled device (CCD) or CMOS sensor. The optical mouse chip shown in the photo has parallel (not multiplexed) access to all 16 photodiodes in its 4 \u00d7 4 array.\nPassive-pixel image sensor.\nThe passive-pixel sensor (PPS) is a type of photodiode array. It was the precursor to the active-pixel sensor (APS). A passive-pixel sensor consists of passive pixels which are read out without amplification, with each pixel consisting of a photodiode and a MOSFET switch. In a photodiode array, pixels contain a p\u2013n junction, integrated capacitor, and MOSFETs as selection transistors. A photodiode array was proposed by G. Weckler in 1968, predating the CCD. This was the basis for the PPS.\nThe noise of photodiode arrays is sometimes a limitation to performance. It was not possible to fabricate active pixel sensors with a practical pixel size in the 1970s, due to limited microlithography technology at the time.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42939", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42939", "title": "Autolysin", "text": "Class of enzymes\nAutolysins are endogenous lytic enzymes that break down the peptidoglycan components of biological cells which enables the separation of daughter cells following cell division. They are involved in cell growth, cell wall metabolism, cell division and separation, as well as peptidoglycan turnover and have similar functions to lysozymes.\nAutolysin is formed from the precursor gene, Atl. Amidases (EC 3.5.1.28), gametolysin (EC 3.4.24.38), and glucosaminidase are considered as types of autolysins.\nFunction and mechanisms.\nAutolysins exist in all bacteria containing peptidoglycan and are potentially considered as lethal enzymes when uncontrolled. They target the glycosidic bonds as well as the cross-linked peptides of the peptidoglycan matrix. The peptidoglycan matrix functions for cell wall stability to protect from turgor changes and carries out function for immunological defense. These enzymes break down the peptidoglycan matrix in small sections to allow for peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Autolysins breaks down old peptidoglycan which allows for the formation of newer peptidoglycan for cell growth and elongation. This is called cell wall turnover. Autolysins do this by hydrolyzing the \u03b2-(1,4) glycosidic bond of the peptidoglycan cell wall and the linkage between N-acetylmuramoyl residues and L-amino acid residues of certain cell-wall glycopeptides. This enzyme catalyses the following chemical reaction:\n Cleavage of the proline- and hydroxyproline-rich proteins of the \"Chlamydomonas\" cell wall; also cleaves azocasein, gelatin and Leu-Trp-Met-Arg-Phe-Ala\nThis glycoprotein is present in \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\" gametes.\nGram-positive bacteria regulate autolysins with teichoic acid molecules attached to the tetrapeptide of the peptidoglycan matrix.\nThe antibiotics complestatin and corbomycin prevent autolysin from remodeling the cell wall by binding to peptidoglycan, therefore stopping bacterial growth. The amide linkages between stem peptide and lactyl moiety of muramoyl residue are cleaved by N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidases and partakes in cell separation and the dissociation of the cell septum. There are 5 types of autolysins that contribute to cell separation of daughter cells, LytC, LytD, LytE, and LytF.\nIn a study conducted with mice, those that were immunized with autolysin were able to survive longer than the infected mice. This study was able to support as evidence autolysin's contribution in virulence and potential for vaccine antigen.\nLysis of mother cell.\nLytC and CwlC are two amidases from the LytC family that hydrolyze the peptidoglycan of the mother cell wall to allow for the release of the mature endospore. CwlC is directly found in the mother cell wall.\nMotility.\nExpression of lytC, lytD, and lytF genes together leads to flagellar motility and is controlled by the activity of the chemotaxis sigma factor, \u00a0\u03c3D. The activity of this sigma factor peaks at the start of the stationary phase.\nPotential lethality.\nAutolysins are naturally produced by peptidoglycan containing bacteria, but excessive amounts will degrade the peptidoglycan matrix and cause the cell to burst due to osmotic pressure. Previous studies have found that the byproducts of autolysin during cell wall breakdown are highly immunogenic. When observed in the bacteria, \"Bacillus subtilis\", there were potentially lethal amounts of autolysin found in the cell walls. In \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" it was found that N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase, a cell wall autolysin, could assist in pathogenesis due to its ability to break down the wall or lyse a portion of the invading pneumococci and release potentially lethal toxins into the cell. Researchers studied the function, structure, and cloning ability through \"Escherichia coli\" and also determined its nucleotide sequence.\nFamilies.\nLytC amidase family.\nLytC.\nLytC as well as LytD are considered as two major autolysins that contribute to vegetative cell wall growth and account for 95% of the autolytic activity in B. subtilis. LytC is found in the cell wall. LytB, a non-autolysin, was found to enhance LytC activity. LytC and LytA interact and function together for lysis and cell death.\nCwlC.\nCwlC is found in the mother cell wall and functions for the lysis of the mother cell wall. CwlC does not have a signal sequence but participates in late sporulation and is present in the cell wall. It was found in B. subtilis that CwlC is able to hydrolyze both vegetative cell walls and spore peptidoglycan.\nLytD glucosaminidase family.\nThis family of autolysin consist of only LytD itself. LytD functions for vegetative growth. Autolytic activity is found within the C-terminal region with catalytic domain homologous to the glucosaminidase domain. LytD is found in the cell wall. LytD activity was studied in B. subtilis and glucosaminidase activity was found in mature glycan strands due to the presence of MurNAc at the nonreducing ends.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42940", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42940", "title": "Biostasis", "text": "Coping with environmental changes without adapting\nBiostasis is the ability of an organism to tolerate environmental changes without having to actively adapt to them. Biostasis is found in organisms that live in habitats that likely encounter unfavorable living conditions, such as drought, freezing temperatures, change in pH levels, pressure, or temperature. Insects undergo a type of dormancy to survive these conditions, called diapause. Diapause may be obligatory for these insects to survive. The insect may also be able to undergo change prior to the arrival of the initiating event.\nMicroorganisms.\nBiostasis in this context is also synonymous for viable but nonculturable state. In the past when bacteria were no longer growing on culture media it was assumed that they were dead. Now we can understand that there are many instances where bacteria cells may go into biostasis or suspended animation, fail to grow on media, and on resuscitation are again culturable. VBNC state differs from 'starvation survival state' (where a cell just reduces metabolism significantly). Bacteria cells may enter the VBNC state as a result of some outside stressor such as \"starvation, incubation outside the temperature range of growth, elevated osmotic concentrations (seawater), oxygen concentrations, or exposure to white light\". Any of these instances could very easily mean death for the bacteria if it was not able to enter this state of dormancy. It has also been observed that in may instances where it was thought that bacteria had been destroyed (pasteurization of milk) and later caused spoilage or harmful effects to consumers because the bacteria had entered the VBNC state.\nEffects on cells entering the VBNC state include \"dwarfing, changes in metabolic activity, reduced nutrient transport, respiration rates and macromolecular synthesis\". Yet biosynthesis continues, and shock proteins are made. Most importantly has been observed that ATP levels and generation remain high, completely contrary to dying cells which show rapid decreases in generation and retention. Changes to the cell walls of bacteria in the VBNC state have also been observed. In Escherichia coli a large amount of cross-linking was observed in the peptidoglycan. The autolytic capability was also observed to be much higher in VBNC cells than those who were in the growth state.\nIt is far easier to induce bacteria to the VBNC state and once bacteria cells have entered the VBNC state it is very hard to return them to a culturable state. \"They examined nonculturability and resuscitation in Legionella pneumophila and while entry into this state was easily induced by nutrient starvation, resuscitation could only be demonstrated following co-incubation of the VBNC cells with the amoeba, \"Acanthamoeba Castellani\"\"\nFungistasis or mycostasis a naturally occurring VBNC (viable but nonculturable) state found in fungi in soil. Watson and Ford defined fungistasis as \"when viable fungal propagules, which are not subject to endogenous or constitutive dormancy do not germinate in soil at their favorable temperature or moisture conditions or growth of fungal hyphae is retarded or terminated by conditions of the soil environment other than temperature or moisture\". Essentially (and mostly observed naturally occurring in soil) several types of fungi have been found to enter the VBNC state resulting from outside stressors (temperature, available nutrients, oxygen availability etc.) or from no observable stressors at all.\nCurrent research.\nOn March 1, 2018, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) announced their new Biostasis program under the direction of Dr. Tristan McClure-Begley. The aim of the Biostasis program is to develop new possibilities for extending the golden hour in patients who suffered a traumatic injury by slowing down the human body at the cellular level, addressing the need for additional time in continuously operating biological systems faced with catastrophic, life-threatening events. By leveraging molecular biology, the program aims to control the speed at which living systems operate and figure out a way to \"slow life to save life.\"\nOn March 20, 2018, the Biostasis team held a Webinar which, along with a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA), solicited five-year research proposals from outside organizations. The full proposals were due on May 22, 2018.\nPossible approaches.\nIn their Webinar, DARPA outlined a number of possible research approaches for the Biostasis project. These approaches are based on research into diapause in tardigrades and wood frogs which suggests that selective stabilization of intracellular machinery occurs at the protein level.\nProtein chaperoning.\nIn molecular biology, molecular chaperones are proteins that assist in the folding, unfolding, assembly, or disassembly of other macromolecular structures. Under typical conditions, molecular chaperones facilitate changes in shape (conformational change) of macromolecules in response to changes in environmental factors like temperature, pH, and voltage. By reducing conformational flexibility, scientists can constrain the function of certain proteins. Recent research has shown that proteins are promiscuous, or able to do jobs in addition to the ones they evolved to carry out. Additionally, protein promiscuity plays a key role in the adaptation of species to new environments. It is possible that finding a way to control conformational change in promiscuous proteins could allow scientists to induce biostasis in living organisms.\nIntracellular crowding.\nThe crowdedness of cells is a critical aspect of biological systems. Intracellular crowding refers to the fact that protein function and interaction with water is constrained when the interior of the cell is overcrowded. Intracellular organelles are either membrane-bound vesicles or membrane-less compartments that compartmentalize the cell and enable spatiotemporal control of biological reactions. By introducing these intracellular polymers to a biological system and manipulating the crowdedness of a cell, scientists may be able to slow down the rate of biological reactions in the system.\nTardigrade-disordered proteins.\nTardigrades are microscopic animals that are able to enter a state of diapause and survive a remarkable array of environmental stressors, including freezing and desiccation. Research has shown that intrinsically disordered proteins in these organisms may work to stabilize cell function and protect against these extreme environmental stressors. By using peptide engineering, it is possible that scientists may be able to introduce intrinsically disordered proteins to the biological systems of larger animal organisms. This could allow larger animals to enter a state of biostasis similar to that of tardigrades under extreme biological stress.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42942", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42942", "title": "Chitinase", "text": "Enzymes which degrade or break chitin\nChitinases (EC https://, chitodextrinase, 1,4-\u03b2-poly-N-acetylglucosaminidase, poly-\u03b2-glucosaminidase, \u03b2-1,4-poly-N-acetyl glucosamidinase, poly[1,4-(N-acetyl-\u03b2--glucosaminide)] glycanohydrolase, (1\u21924)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-\u03b2--glucan glycanohydrolase; systematic name (1\u21924)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-\u03b2--glucan glycanohydrolase) are hydrolytic enzymes that break down glycosidic bonds in chitin. They catalyse the following reaction:\n Random endo-hydrolysis of \"N\"-acetyl-\u03b2--glucosaminide (1\u21924)-\u03b2-linkages in chitin and chitodextrins\nAs chitin is a component of the cell walls of fungi and exoskeletal elements of some animals (including mollusks and arthropods), chitinases are generally found in organisms that either need to reshape their own chitin or dissolve and digest the chitin of fungi or animals.\nSpecies distribution.\nChitinivorous organisms include many bacteria (Aeromonads, \"Bacillus\", \"Vibrio\", among others), which may be pathogenic or detritivorous. They attack living arthropods, zooplankton or fungi or they may degrade the remains of these organisms.\nFungi, such as \"Coccidioides immitis\", also possess degradative chitinases related to their role as detritivores and also to their potential as arthropod pathogens.\nChitinases are also present in plants \u2013 for example barley seed chitinase: PDB: https://\u200b, EC https://. Barley seeds are found to produce clone 10 in Ignatius et al 1994(a). They find clone 10, a Class I chitinase, in the seed aleurone during development. Leaves produce several isozymes (as well as several of \u03b2-1,3-glucanase). Ignatius et al 1994(b) find these in the leaves, induced by powdery mildew. Ignatius et al also find these (seed and leaf isozymes) to differ from each other. Some of these are pathogenesis related (PR) proteins that are induced as part of systemic acquired resistance. Expression is mediated by the NPR1 gene and the salicylic acid pathway, both involved in resistance to fungal and insect attack. Other plant chitinases may be required for creating fungal symbioses.\nAlthough mammals do not produce chitin, they have two functional chitinases, Chitotriosidase (CHIT1) and acidic mammalian chitinase (AMCase), as well as chitinase-like proteins (such as YKL-40) that have high sequence similarity but lack chitinase activity.\nClassification.\nChitinases were also classified based on the amino acid sequences, as that would be more helpful in understanding the evolutionary relationships of these enzymes to each other. Therefore, the chitinases were grouped into three families: 18, 19, and 20. Both families 18 and 19 consists of endochitinases from a variety of different organisms, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, insect, and plants. However, family 19 mainly comprises plant chitinases. Family 20 includes \"N-\"acetylglucosaminidase and a similar enzyme, \"N\"-acetylhexosaminidase.\nAnd as the gene sequences of the chitinases were known, they were further classified into six classes based on their sequences. Characteristics that determined the classes of chitinases were the \"N\"-terminal sequence, localization of the enzyme, isoelectric pH, signal peptide, and inducers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class I chitinases had a cysteine-rich \"N\"-terminal, leucine- or valine-rich signal peptide, and vacuolar localization. And then, Class I chitinases were further subdivided based on their acidic or basic nature into &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class Ia and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class Ib, respectively. Class 1 chitinases were found to comprise only plant chitinases and mostly endochitinases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class II chitinases did not have the cysteine-rich \"N\"-terminal but had a similar sequence to Class I chitinases. Class II chitinases were found in plants, fungi, and bacteria and mostly consisted of exochitinases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class III chitinases did not have similar sequences to chitinases in Class I or Class II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class IV chitinases had similar characteristics, including the immunological properties, as Class I chitinases. However, Class IV chitinases were significantly smaller in size compared to Class I chitinases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class V and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Class VI chitinases are not well characterized. However, one example of a Class V chitinase showed two chitin binding domains in tandem, and based on the gene sequence, the cysteine-rich \"N\"-terminal seemed to have been lost during evolution, probably due to less selection pressure that caused the catalytic domain to lose its function.\nFunction.\nLike cellulose, chitin is an abundant biopolymer that is relatively resistant to degradation. Many mammals can digest chitin and the specific chitinase levels in vertebrate species are adapted to their feeding behaviours. Certain fish are able to digest chitin. Chitinases have been isolated from the stomachs of mammals, including humans.\nChitinase activity can also be detected in human blood and possibly cartilage. As in plant chitinases this may be related to pathogen resistance.\nClinical significance.\nChitinases production in the human body (known as \"human chitinases\") may be in response to allergies, and asthma has been linked to enhanced chitinase expression levels.\nHuman chitinases may explain the link between some of the most common allergies (dust mites, mold spores\u2014both of which contain chitin) and worm (helminth) infections, as part of one version of the hygiene hypothesis (worms have chitinous mouthparts to hold the intestinal wall). Finally, the link between chitinases and salicylic acid in plants is well established\u2014but there is a hypothetical link between salicylic acid and allergies in humans.\nMay be used to monitor enzymotherapy supplementation in Gaucher's disease.https://\nRegulation in fungi.\nRegulation varies from species to species, and within an organism, chitinases with different physiological functions would be under different regulation mechanisms. For example, chitinases that are involved in maintenance, such as remodeling the cell wall, are constitutively expressed. However, chitinases that have specialized functions, such as degrading exogenous chitin or participating in cell division, need spatio-temporal regulation of the chitinase activity.\nThe regulation of an endochitinase in \"Trichoderma atroviride\" is dependent on a \"N-\"acetylglucosaminidase, and the data indicates a feedback-loop where the break down of chitin produces \"N-\"acetylglucosamine, which would be possibly taken up and triggers up-regulation of the chitinbiosidases.\nIn \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" and the regulation of ScCts1p (\"S. cerevisiae\" chitinase 1), one of the chitinases involved in cell separation after cytokinesis by degrading the chitin of the primary septum. As these types of chitinases are important in cell division, there must be tight regulation and activation. Specifically, \"Cts1\" expression has to be activated in daughter cells during late mitosis and the protein has to localize at the daughter site of the septum. And to do this, there must be coordination with other networks controlling the different phases of the cell, such as Cdc14 Early Anaphase Release (FEAR), mitotic exit network (MEN), and regulation of Ace2p (transcription factor) and cellular morphogenesis (RAM) signalling networks. Overall, the integration of the different regulatory networks allows for the cell wall degrading chitinase to function dependent on the cell's stage in the cell cycle and at specific locations among the daughter cells.\nPresence in food.\nChitinases occur naturally in many common foods. \"Phaseolus vulgaris\", bananas, chestnuts, kiwifruit, avocados, papaya, and tomatoes, for example, all contain significant levels of chitinase, as defense against fungal and invertebrate attack. Stress, or environmental signals like ethylene gas, may stimulate increased production of chitinase.\nSome parts of chitinase molecules, almost identical in structure to hevein or other proteins in rubber latex due to their similar function in plant defense, may trigger an allergic cross-reaction known as latex-fruit syndrome.\nApplications.\nChitinases have a wealth of applications, some of which have already been realized by industry. This includes bio-conversion of chitin to useful products such as fertilizer, the production of non-allergenic, non-toxic, biocompatible, and biodegradable materials (contact lenses, artificial skin and sutures with these qualities are already being produced) and enhancement of insecticides and fungicides. \"Phaseolus vulgaris\" chitinase - bean chitinase, BCH - has been transgenically inserted as a pest deterrent into entirely unrelated crops.\nPossible future applications of chitinases are as food additives to increase shelf life, therapeutic agent for asthma and chronic rhinosinusitis, as an anti-fungal remedy, an anti-tumor drug and as a general ingredient to be used in protein engineering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42946", "revid": "10747469", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42946", "title": "Encyclopedia Astronautica", "text": "Website on space topics up to 2019\nThe Encyclopedia Astronautica is a reference web site on space travel. The encyclopedia includes 79,433 articles with 13,741 illustrations, a comprehensive catalog of missiles, spacecraft, space technology, astronauts, and spaceflight from most countries that have had an active rocket research program. It provides biographies of important pioneers of spaceflight such as Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Hermann Oberth Robert Goddard. It outlines various concepts of space stations including the NASA Space Shuttle and the Soviet Buran programme.\nArticles.\nIn addition, the encyclopedia contains many comprehensive review articles on specific space topics, among them:\nSince 2019, the site is no longer updated or maintained. Although it contains a great deal of information, not all of it is correct.\nHistory.\nFounded in 1994 and maintained for most of its existence by space enthusiast and author Mark Wade. He has been collecting such information for most of his life. Between 1996 and 2000 the site was hosted by \"Friends and Partners in Space\".\nReception and accolades.\nThe American Astronautical Society gave the site the \"Ordway Award for Sustained Excellence in Spaceflight History\", which \"recognizes exceptional, sustained efforts to inform and educate on spaceflight and its history through one or more media\", in 2015, the award's initial year. The award is named for U.S. space engineer and author Frederick I. Ordway III (1927\u20132014).\n\"Telepolis\" journalist Marcus Hammerschmitt warmly recommended the \"Encyclopedia Astronautic\" to anyone interested in space flight, and speculated that its articles might become valued material for future researcher of cultural history.\nIn 2006, the American space historian Stephen B. Johnson stated that Encyplopedia Astronautica \"has become a popular Internet source for space history. Unfortunately, while it contains a great deal of information, not all of it is correct. Space historians have noticed a variety of factual problems, and unfortunately these problems have not been consistently repaired. Since this is not a peer-reviewed source and historical errors have not always been fixed, this cannot be considered a reliable source, despite its impressive appearance. Many other online sources have the same problem.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42947", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42947", "title": "Porn", "text": ""}
{"id": "42948", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42948", "title": "Lip piercing", "text": "Type of body piercing\nA lip piercing is a type of body piercing that penetrates the lips or the area surrounding the lips, which can be pierced in a variety of ways.\nProcedure and healing.\nApproximate healing time for most lip piercings is between 1 and 3 months; however, there is a possibility of serious infection if the piercing is not properly taken care of. After healing is complete, other jewelry may be used. After this time, some scar tissue may be present, but the fistula is normally fully developed and mostly healed. Aftercare consists of hot saline soaks two to three times daily. Soaking the wound for three to five minutes with a weak saline solution softens any blood and lymph discharge attached to the jewelry. Afterwards, taking a hot shower and using clean hands and a small amount of a mild soap such as castile soap removes excess matter from the site. Turning or otherwise moving jewelry on a fresh piercing is not advised, as it can irritate and lengthen swelling and healing time. Diluted mouthwash or salt water solution can also be used after meals along with toothbrushing to help remove debris and flush the piercing and is recommended by practitioners.\nInitial jewelry is usually a labret stud or a captive bead ring, manufactured from implant-grade titanium or similar lightweight and inert metal. No matter which type of jewelry is used, the jewelry's diameter and length will be intentionally oversized to allow room for initial swelling. After healing, the jewelry can be replaced with a closer-fitting piece.\nA home-made saline solution made from non-iodized sea salt and hot distilled or filtered water is a common way to heal a lip piercing and avoid infection. This solution can be used to rinse out the mouth after eating (or the mouth can be rinsed with non-alcoholic, non-antimicrobial mouth wash) and to soak the outside of the piercing. Anything with alcohol, peroxide, iodine, or any strong soaps should be avoided because they may irritate the fresh piercing, and cause additional swelling and trauma during the healing process. Using peroxide, iodine, teatree oil, conventional antibacterial soap, or dish soap can damage or kill the skin in and around the piercing, extending the healing process. The use of Hydrogen peroxide can damage the piercing site more, resulting in irritation of the piercing. The ornament should be periodically cleansed to prevent bacterial plaque accumulation.\nTypes.\nLip piercings can be placed anywhere around the mouth, but the surface of the lip is not typically pierced itself, except for horizontal lip piercings and canine bites. Piercings in specific positions have certain names. Monroe piercings, for example, are labret studs worn on the upper lip where Marilyn Monroe had her famous beauty mark. Medusa piercings go through the center of the upper lip (the philtrum), perpendicular to the tissue. Labret piercings are pierced with a labret stud and can pierced in the center or off-center. A variation of this is the lowbret, a lower labret. Vertical labret piercings go through the center of the bottom lip, parallel to the tissue. The variation is called the vertical lowbret, which starts inside the mouth between the lower lip and the teeth and travels straight down, exiting on the lower edge of the jawline. Horizontal lip piercings are very rare, and include a horizontal bar on the lower lip that goes through the lip surface. Another variation of the labret is known as the dahlia piercing. The piercings, placed at or very near the corners of the mouth, are named in reference to the murder of Black Dahlia, in which the victim's mouth was cut along the same horizontal line along which these piercings are placed. (See Glasgow smile.)\nHistory and culture.\nPrecolumbian cultures of South America historically used lip piercing called Tembet\u00e1. Lip piercing continues to be practiced by many people, the most well-known of which are certain African tribes, who wear large decorative lip plates or discs, usually in the lower lip.\nIn contemporary society, lip piercings are relatively common. In a study among Israeli young-adults, 4.3% had present or past body piercing (not included earlobe, lip or intra-oral piercing), and 5.7%, 6.2% and 15.7% had present or past lip piercing, body tattooing and intra-oral piercing, respectively.\nHealth risks and complications.\nStudies have found people with lip piercings to have 4 to 7 times higher risk of gingival recession than people without piercing. Studies also found a higher percentage of dental trauma in people with lip piercings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42949", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42949", "title": "John Damascene", "text": ""}
{"id": "42950", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42950", "title": "301", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 301 (CCCI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Postumius and Nepotianus (or, less frequently, year 1054 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 301 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42951", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42951", "title": "302", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 302 (CCCII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Valerius or, less frequently, year 1055 \"Ab urbe condita\". The denomination 302 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42952", "revid": "46115515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42952", "title": "303", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 303 (CCCIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. It was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and Maximian (or, less frequently, year 1056 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 303 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42953", "revid": "262716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42953", "title": "Irish Free State", "text": "State in north-west Europe from 1922 to 1937\nThe Irish Free State (6 December 1922\u00a0\u2013 29 December 1937), also known by its Irish name ( , ), was a state established in December 1922 under the Anglo-Irish Treaty of December 1921. The treaty ended the three-year Irish War of Independence between the forces of the Irish Republic\u2014the Irish Republican Army (IRA)\u2014and British Crown forces.\nThe Free State was established as a dominion of the British Empire. It comprised 26 of the 32 counties of Ireland. Northern Ireland, which was made up of the remaining six counties, exercised its right under the Treaty to opt out of the new state. The Irish Free State government consisted of the governor-general\u2014the viceregal representative of the King\u2014and the Executive Council (cabinet), which replaced both the revolutionary D\u00e1il Government and the Provisional Government set up under the Treaty. W. T. Cosgrave, who had led both of these administrations since August 1922, became the first president of the Executive Council (prime minister). The Oireachtas or legislature consisted of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann (the lower house) and Seanad \u00c9ireann (the upper house), also known as the Senate. Members of the D\u00e1il were required to take an Oath of Allegiance to the Constitution of the Free State and to declare fidelity to the King. The oath was a key issue for opponents of the Treaty, who refused to take it and therefore did not take their seats. Pro-Treaty members, who formed Cumann na nGaedheal in 1923, held an effective majority in the D\u00e1il from 1922 to 1927 and thereafter ruled as a minority government until 1932.\nIn 1931, with the passage of the Statute of Westminster, the Parliament of the United Kingdom relinquished nearly all of its remaining authority to legislate for the Irish Free State and the other dominions. This granted the Free State internationally recognised independence.\nIn the first months of the Irish Free State, the Irish Civil War was waged between the newly established National Army and the Anti-Treaty IRA, which refused to recognise the state. The Civil War ended in victory for the government forces, with its opponents dumping their arms in May 1923. The Anti-Treaty political party, Sinn F\u00e9in, refused to take its seats in the D\u00e1il, leaving the relatively small Labour Party as the only opposition party. In 1926, when Sinn F\u00e9in president \u00c9amon de Valera failed to have this policy reversed, he resigned from Sinn F\u00e9in and led most of its membership into a new party, Fianna F\u00e1il, which entered the D\u00e1il following the 1927 general election. It formed the government after the 1932 general election, when it became the largest party.\nDe Valera abolished the oath of allegiance and embarked on an economic war with the UK. In 1937, he drafted a new constitution, which was adopted by a plebiscite in July of that year. The Irish Free State came to an end with the coming into force of the new constitution on 29 December 1937, when the state took the name \"Ireland\".\nBackground.\nThe Easter Rising of 1916 and its aftermath caused a profound shift in public opinion towards the republican cause in Ireland. In the December 1918 General Election, the republican Sinn F\u00e9in party won a large majority of the Irish seats in the British parliament: 73 of the 105 constituencies returned Sinn F\u00e9in members (25 uncontested). The elected Sinn F\u00e9in MPs, rather than take their seats at Westminster, set up their own assembly, known as D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann (Assembly of Ireland). It affirmed the formation of an Irish Republic and passed a Declaration of Independence. The subsequent War of Independence, fought between the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and British security forces, continued until July 1921 when a truce came into force. By this time the Parliament of Northern Ireland had opened, established under the Government of Ireland Act 1920, presenting the republican movement with a \"fait accompli\" and guaranteeing the British presence in Ireland. In October negotiations opened in London between members of the British government and members of the D\u00e1il, culminating in the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty on 6 December 1921.\n The Treaty allowed for the creation of a separate state to be known as the Irish Free State, with dominion status, within the then British Empire \u2014 a status equivalent to Canada. The Parliament of Northern Ireland could, by presenting an address to the King, opt not to be included in the Irish Free State, in which case a Boundary Commission would be established to determine where the boundary between them should lie. Members of the parliament of the Free State would be required to take an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of the Free State and to declare that they would be \"faithful\" to the king (a modification of the oath taken in other dominions).\nThe D\u00e1il ratified the Treaty on 7 January 1922, causing a split in the republican movement. A Provisional Government was formed, with Michael Collins as chairman.\nThe Irish Free State was established on 6 December 1922, and the Provisional Government became the Executive Council of the Irish Free State, headed by W. T. Cosgrave as President of the Executive Council. The following day, the Commons and the Senate of Northern Ireland passed resolutions \"for the express purpose of opting out of the Free State\".\nGovernmental and constitutional structures.\nThe Treaty established that the new state would be a constitutional monarchy, with the Governor-General of the Irish Free State as the viceregal representative of the Crown. The \"Constitution of the Irish Free State\" made more detailed provision for the state's system of government, with a three-tier parliament, called the Oireachtas, made up of the King and two houses, D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann and Seanad \u00c9ireann (the Irish Senate).\nExecutive authority was vested in the King, with the Governor-General as his viceregal representative. He appointed a cabinet called the Executive Council to \"aid and advise\" him. The Executive Council was presided over by a prime minister called the President of the Executive Council. In practice, most of the real power was exercised by the Executive Council, as the Governor-General was almost always bound to act on the advice of the Executive Council.\nRepresentative of the Crown.\nThe office of Governor-General of the Irish Free State replaced the previous Lord Lieutenant, who had headed English and British administrations in Ireland since the Middle Ages. Governors-General were appointed by the King initially on the advice of the British Government, but with the consent of the Irish Government. From 1927, the Irish Government alone had the power to advise the King whom to appoint.\nOath of Allegiance.\nAs with all dominions, provision was made for an Oath of Allegiance. Within dominions, such oaths were taken by parliamentarians personally towards the monarch. The Irish Oath of Allegiance was fundamentally different. It had two elements; the first, an \"oath to the Free State, as by law established\", the second part a promise of \"fidelity, to His Majesty, King George V, his heirs and successors\". That second fidelity element, however, was qualified in two ways. It was to the King \"in\" Ireland, not specifically to the King of the United Kingdom. Secondly, it was to the King explicitly in his role as part of the Treaty settlement, not in terms of pre-1922 British rule. The Oath itself came from a combination of three sources, and was largely the work of Michael Collins in the Treaty negotiations. It came in part from a draft oath suggested prior to the negotiations by President de Valera. Other sections were taken by Collins directly from the Oath of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), of which he was the secret head. In its structure, it was also partially based on the form and structure used for 'Dominion status'. \nAlthough 'a new departure', and notably indirect in its reference to the monarchy, it was criticised by nationalists and republicans for making any reference to the Crown, the claim being that it \"was\" a direct oath to the Crown, a fact arguably incorrect by an examination of its wording, but in 1922 Ireland and beyond, many argued that the fact remained that as a dominion the King (and therefore the British) was still head of state and that was the practical reality that influenced public debate on the issue. The Free State was not a republic. The Oath became a key issue in the resulting Irish Civil War that divided the pro and anti-treaty sides in 1922\u201323.\nIrish Civil War.\nThe compromises contained in the agreement caused the civil war in the 26 counties in June 1922 \u2013 April 1923, in which the pro-Treaty Provisional Government defeated the anti-Treaty Republican forces. The latter were led, nominally, by \u00c9amon de Valera, who had resigned as President of the Republic on the treaty's ratification. His resignation outraged some of his own supporters, notably Se\u00e1n T. O'Kelly, the main Sinn F\u00e9in organiser. On resigning, he then sought re-election but was defeated two days later on a vote of 60\u201358. The pro-Treaty Arthur Griffith followed as President of the Irish Republic. Michael Collins was chosen at a meeting of the members elected to sit in the House of Commons of Southern Ireland (a body set up under the Government of Ireland Act 1920) to become Chairman of the Provisional Government of the Irish Free State in accordance with the Treaty. The general election in June gave overwhelming support for the pro-Treaty parties. W. T. Cosgrave's Crown-appointed Provisional Government effectively subsumed Griffith's republican administration with the death of both Collins and Griffith in August 1922.\n\"Freedom to achieve freedom\".\nGovernance.\nThe following were the principal parties of government of the Free State between 1922 and 1937:\nConstitutional evolution.\nMichael Collins described the Treaty as \"the freedom to achieve freedom\". In practice, the Treaty offered most of the symbols and powers of independence. These included a functioning, if disputed, parliamentary democracy with its own executive, judiciary and written constitution which could be changed by the Oireachtas. Although an Irish republic had not been on offer, the Treaty still afforded Ireland more internal independence than it had possessed in over 400 years, and far more autonomy than had ever been hoped for by those who had advocated for Home Rule.\nHowever, a number of conditions existed:\nThe Statute of Westminster of 1931, embodying a decision of an Imperial Conference, enabled each dominion to enact new legislation and change any extant legislation, without resorting to the U.K. Parliament (or any Crown intermediary). Extant legislation includes any and all Dominion legislation enacted prior to the Statute of Westminster. It also removed Westminster's authority to legislate for the Dominions, except by the express request and consent of the relevant Dominion's parliament. This change made the dominions, including the Irish Free State, \"de jure\" independent nations\u2014thus fulfilling Collins' vision of having \"the freedom to achieve freedom\".\nThe Free State symbolically marked these changes in two mould-breaking moves soon after winning internationally recognised independence:\nWhen \u00c9amon de Valera became President of the Executive Council (prime minister) in 1932 he described Cosgrave's ministers' achievements simply. Having read the files, he told his son, Vivion, \"they were magnificent, son\".\nThe Statute of Westminster allowed de Valera, on becoming President of the Executive Council (February 1932), to go even further. With no ensuing restrictions on his policies, he abolished the Oath of Allegiance (which Cosgrave intended to do had he won the 1932 general election), the Seanad, university representation in the D\u00e1il, and appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\nOne major policy error occurred in 1936 when he attempted to use the abdication of King Edward VIII to abolish the Crown and Governor-General in the Free State with the \"Constitution (Amendment No. 27) Act\". He was advised by senior law officers and other constitutional experts that, as the Crown and Governor-Generalship existed separately from the constitution in a vast number of acts, charters, orders-in-council, and letters patent, they both still existed. A second bill, the \"Executive Powers (Consequential Provisions) Act, 1937\" was quickly introduced to repeal the necessary elements. De Valera retroactively dated the second act back to December 1936.\nCurrency.\nThe new state continued to use the Pound sterling from its inception; there is no reference in the Treaty or in either of the enabling Acts to currency. Nonetheless, and within a few years, the D\u00e1il passed the Coinage Act, 1926 (which provided for a \"Saorst\u00e1t\" [Free State] coinage) and the Currency Act, 1927 (which provided \"inter alia\" for banknotes of the Saorst\u00e1t pound). The new Saorst\u00e1t pound was defined by the 1927 Act to have exactly the same weight and fineness of gold as was the sovereign at the time, making the new currency pegged at 1:1 with sterling. The State circulated its new national coinage in December 1928, marked \"Saorst\u00e1t \u00c9ireann\" and a national series of banknotes. British coinage remained acceptable in the Free State at an equal rate. In 1937, when the Free State was superseded by Ireland (\"\u00c9ire\"), the pound became known as the \"Irish pound\" and the coins were marked \"\u00c9ire\" as from 1939.\nNo coins dated 1938 were struck for circulation in Ireland, but the 1938 1 Penny and Half Crown exists as pattern coins.\nForeign policy.\nIreland joined the League of Nations on 10 September 1923. It would also participate in the Olympics sending its first team to the 1924 Summer Olympics held in Paris. They would send further teams to the 1928 Summer Olympics and the 1932 Summer Olympics.\nAccording to Gerard Keown, by 1932 much had been achieved in the quest for an independent foreign policy. The Irish Free State was an established element in the European system and a member of the League of Nations. It had blazed a trail in asserting the rights of the dominions to their own foreign policy, in the process establishing full diplomatic relations with the United States, France, Belgium, Germany, and the Holy See. It was concluding its own political and commercial treaties and using the apparatus of international relations to pursue its interests. It had received the accolade of election to a non-permanent seat on the council of the League of Nations and asserted its full equality with Britain and the other dominions within the Commonwealth.\nBy contrast, the military was drastically reduced in size and scope, with its budget cut by 82% from 1924 to 1929. The active duty forces were reduced from 28,000 men to 7,000. Co-operation with London was minimal.\nDemographics.\nBirth rate.\nAccording to one report, in 1924, shortly after the Free State's establishment, the new dominion had the \"lowest birth-rate in the world\". The report noted that amongst countries for which statistics were available (Ceylon, Chile, Japan, Spain, South Africa, the Netherlands, Canada, Germany, Australia, the United States, Britain, New Zealand, Finland, and the Irish Free State), Ceylon had the highest birth rate at 40.8 per 1,000 while the Irish Free State had a birth rate of just 18.6 per 1,000.\nCultural outlook.\nIrish society during this period was extremely Roman Catholic, with Roman Catholic thinkers promoting anti-capitalist, anti-communist, anti-Protestant, anti-Masonic, and antisemitic views in Irish society. Through the works of priests such as Edward Cahill, Richard Devane, and Denis Fahey, Irish society saw capitalism, individualism, communism, private banking, the promotion of alcohol, contraceptives, divorce, and abortion as the pursuits of the old 'Protestant-elite' and Jews, with their efforts combined through the Freemasons. Denis Fahey described Ireland as \"the third most Masonic country in the world\" and saw this alleged order as contrary to the creation of an independent Irish State.\nAfter the Irish Free State.\n1937 Constitution.\nIn 1937, the Fianna F\u00e1il government presented a draft of an entirely new Constitution to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. An amended version of the draft document was subsequently approved by the D\u00e1il. A plebiscite was held on 1 July 1937, which was the same day as the 1937 general election, when a relatively narrow majority approved it. The new Constitution of Ireland (\"Bunreacht na h\u00c9ireann\") repealed the 1922 Constitution, and came into effect on 29 December 1937.\nThe state was named Ireland (\u00c9ire in the Irish language), and a new office of President of Ireland was instituted in place of the Governor-General of the Irish Free State. The new constitution claimed jurisdiction over all of Ireland while recognising that legislation would not apply in Northern Ireland (see Articles 2 and 3). Articles 2 and 3 were reworded in 1998 to remove jurisdictional claim over the entire island and to recognise that \"a united Ireland shall be brought about only by peaceful means with the consent of a majority of the people, democratically expressed, in both jurisdictions in the island\".\nWith regard to religion, a section of Article 44 included the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The State recognises the special position of the Holy Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church as the guardian of the Faith professed by the great majority of the citizens. The State also recognises the Church of Ireland, the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the Methodist Church in Ireland, the Religious Society of Friends in Ireland, as well as the Jewish Congregations and the other religious denominations existing in Ireland at the date of the coming into operation of this Constitution. Following a referendum, this section was removed in 1973. After the setting up of the Free State in 1923, unionism in the south largely came to an end.\nThe 1937 Constitution saw a notable ideological slant to the changes in the framework of the State in such a way as to create one that appeared to be distinctly Irish. This was done by implementing corporatist policies (based on the concepts of the Roman Catholic Church, as Catholicism was perceived to be deeply embedded with the perception of Irish identity). A clear example of this is the model of the reconstituted Seanad \u00c9ireann (the Senate), which operates based on a system of vocational panels, along with a list of appointed nominating industry bodies, a corporatist concept (seen in Pope Pius XI's 1931 encyclical Quadragesimo anno). Furthermore, Ireland's main political parties, Fine Gael, Fianna F\u00e1il and Labour, all had an inherently corporatist outlook. The government was the subject of intense lobbying by leading Church figures throughout the 1930s in calling for reform of the State's framework. Much of this was reflected in the new 1937 Constitution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42954", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42954", "title": "304", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 304 (CCCIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. It was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and Maximian (or, less frequently, year 1057 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 304 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nDeaths.\n\"Note: Not all particulars of the Christian martyrs are supported by reliable historical evidence.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42957", "revid": "19531195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42957", "title": "Endospore", "text": "Protective structure formed by bacteria\nAn endospore is a dormant, tough, and non-reproductive structure produced by some bacteria in the phylum Bacillota. The name \"endospore\" is suggestive of a spore or seed-like form (\"endo\" means 'within'), but it is not a true spore (i.e., not an offspring). It is a stripped-down, dormant form to which the bacterium can reduce itself. Endospore formation is usually triggered by a lack of nutrients, and usually occurs in Gram-positive bacteria. In endospore formation, the bacterium divides within its cell wall, and one side then engulfs the other. Endospores enable bacteria to lie dormant for extended periods, even centuries. There are many reports of spores remaining viable over 10,000 years, and revival of spores millions of years old has been claimed. There is one report of viable spores of \"Bacillus marismortui\" in salt crystals approximately 25 million years old. When the environment becomes more favorable, the endospore can reactivate itself into a vegetative state. Most types of bacteria cannot change to the endospore form. Examples of bacterial species that can form endospores include \"Bacillus cereus\", \"Bacillus anthracis\", \"Bacillus thuringiensis\", \"Clostridium botulinum\", and \"Clostridium tetani\". Endospore formation does not occur within the \"Archaea\" or \"Eukaryota\".\nThe endospore consists of the bacterium's DNA, ribosomes and large amounts of dipicolinic acid. Dipicolinic acid is a spore-specific chemical that appears to help in the ability for endospores to maintain dormancy. This chemical accounts for up to 10% of the spore's dry weight.\nEndospores can survive without nutrients. They are resistant to ultraviolet radiation, desiccation, high temperature, extreme freezing and chemical disinfectants. Thermo-resistant endospores were first hypothesized by Ferdinand Cohn after studying \"Bacillus subtilis\" growth on cheese after boiling the cheese. His notion of spores being the reproductive mechanism for the growth was a large blow to the previous suggestions of spontaneous generation. Astrophysicist Steinn Sigurdsson said \"There are viable bacterial spores that have been found that are 40 million years old on Earth\u2014and we know they're very hardened to radiation.\" Common antibacterial agents that work by destroying vegetative cell walls do not affect endospores. Endospores are commonly found in soil and water, where they may survive for long periods of time. A variety of different microorganisms form \"spores\" or \"cysts\", but the endospores of low G+C gram-positive bacteria are by far the most resistant to harsh conditions.\nSome classes of bacteria can turn into exospores, also known as microbial cysts, instead of endospores. Exospores and endospores are two kinds of \"hibernating\" or dormant stages seen in some classes of microorganisms.\nLife cycle of bacteria.\nThe bacterial life cycle does not necessarily include sporulation. Sporulation is usually triggered by adverse environmental conditions, so as to help the survival of the bacterium. Endospores exhibit no signs of life and can thus be described as cryptobiotic. Endospores retain viability indefinitely and they can germinate into vegetative cells under the appropriate conditions. Endospores have survived thousands of years until environmental stimuli trigger germination. They have been characterized as the most durable cells produced in nature.\nStructure.\nBacteria produce a single endospore internally. The spore is sometimes surrounded by a thin covering known as the exosporium, which overlies the \"spore coat\". The spore coat, which acts like a sieve that excludes large toxic molecules like lysozyme, is resistant to many toxic molecules and may also contain enzymes that are involved in germination. In \"Bacillus subtilus\" endospores, the spore coat is estimated to contain more than 70 coat proteins, which are organized into an inner and an outer coat layer. The X-ray diffraction pattern of purified \"B. subtilis\" endospores indicates the presence of a component with a regular periodic structure, which Kadota and Iijima speculated might be formed from a keratin-like protein. However, after further studies this group concluded that the structure of the spore coat protein was different from keratin. When the \"B. subtilis\" genome was sequenced, no ortholog of human keratin was detected. The \"cortex\" lies beneath the spore coat and consists of peptidoglycan. The \"core wall\" lies beneath the cortex and surrounds the protoplast or \"core\" of the endospore. The core contains the spore chromosomal DNA which is encased in chromatin-like proteins known as SASPs (small acid-soluble spore proteins), that protect the spore DNA from UV radiation and heat. The core also contains normal cell structures, such as ribosomes and other enzymes, but is not metabolically active.\nUp to 20% of the dry weight of the endospore consists of calcium dipicolinate within the core, which is thought to stabilize the DNA. Dipicolinic acid could be responsible for the heat resistance of the spore, and calcium may aid in resistance to heat and oxidizing agents. However, mutants resistant to heat but lacking dipicolinic acid have been isolated, suggesting other mechanisms contributing to heat resistance are also at work. Small acid-soluble proteins (SASPs) are found in endospores. These proteins tightly bind and condense the DNA, and are in part responsible for resistance to UV light and DNA-damaging chemicals.\nVisualising endospores under light microscopy can be difficult due to the impermeability of the endospore wall to dyes and stains. While the rest of a bacterial cell may stain, the endospore is left colourless. To combat this, a special stain technique called a Moeller stain is used. That allows the endospore to show up as red, while the rest of the cell stains blue. Another staining technique for endospores is the Schaeffer-Fulton stain, which stains endospores green and bacterial bodies red. The arrangement of spore layers is as follows:\nLocation.\nThe position of the endospore differs among bacterial species and is useful in identification. The main types within the cell are terminal, subterminal, and centrally placed endospores. Terminal endospores are seen at the poles of cells, whereas central endospores are more or less in the middle. Subterminal endospores are those between these two extremes, usually seen far enough towards the poles but close enough to the center so as not to be considered either terminal or central. Lateral endospores are seen occasionally.\nExamples of bacteria having terminal endospores include \"Clostridium tetani\", the pathogen that causes the disease tetanus. Bacteria having a centrally placed endospore include \"Bacillus cereus\". Sometimes the endospore can be so large the cell can be distended around the endospore. This is typical of \"Clostridium tetani\".\nFormation and destruction.\nUnder conditions of starvation, especially the lack of carbon and nitrogen sources, a single endospore forms within some of the bacteria through a process called sporulation.\nWhen a bacterium detects environmental conditions are becoming unfavourable it may start the process of endosporulation, which takes about eight hours. The DNA is replicated and a membrane wall known as a \"spore septum\" begins to form between it and the rest of the cell. The plasma membrane of the cell surrounds this wall and pinches off to leave a double membrane around the DNA, and the developing structure is now known as a forespore. Calcium dipicolinate, the calcium salt of dipicolinic acid, is incorporated into the forespore during this time. The dipicolinic acid helps stabilize the proteins and DNA in the endospore. Next the peptidoglycan cortex forms between the two layers and the bacterium adds a spore coat to the outside of the forespore. In the final stages of endospore formation the newly forming endospore is dehydrated and allowed to mature before being released from the mother cell. The cortex is what makes the endospore so resistant to temperature. The cortex contains an inner membrane known as the core. The inner membrane that surrounds this core leads to the endospore's resistance against UV light and harsh chemicals that would normally destroy microbes. Sporulation is now complete, and the mature endospore will be released when the surrounding vegetative cell is degraded.\nEndospores are resistant to most agents that would normally kill the vegetative cells they formed from. Unlike persister cells, endospores are the result of a morphological differentiation process triggered by nutrient limitation (starvation) in the environment; endosporulation is initiated by quorum sensing within the \"starving\" population.Most disinfectants such as household cleaning products, alcohols, quaternary ammonium compounds and detergents have little effect on endospores. However, sterilant alkylating agents such as ethylene oxide (ETO), and 10% bleach are effective against endospores. To kill most anthrax spores, standard household bleach (with 10% sodium hypochlorite) must be in contact with the spores for at least several minutes; a very small proportion of spores can survive longer than 10 minutes in such a solution. Higher concentrations of bleach are not more effective, and can cause some types of bacteria to aggregate and thus survive.\nWhile significantly resistant to heat and radiation, endospores can be destroyed by burning or by autoclaving at a temperature exceeding the boiling point of water, 100\u00a0\u00b0C. Endospores are able to survive at 100\u00a0\u00b0C for hours, although the larger the number of hours the fewer that will survive. An indirect way to destroy them is to place them in an environment that reactivates them to their vegetative state. They will germinate within a day or two with the right environmental conditions, and then the vegetative cells, not as hardy as endospores, can be straightforwardly destroyed. This indirect method is called Tyndallization. It was the usual method for a while in the late 19th century before the introduction of inexpensive autoclaves. Prolonged exposure to ionising radiation, such as x-rays and gamma rays, will also kill most endospores.\nThe endospores of certain types of (typically non-pathogenic) bacteria, such as \"Geobacillus stearothermophilus\", are used as probes to verify that an autoclaved item has been rendered truly sterile: a small capsule containing the spores is put into the autoclave with the items; after the cycle the content of the capsule is cultured to check if anything will grow from it. If nothing will grow, then the spores were destroyed and the sterilization was successful.\nIn hospitals, endospores on delicate invasive instruments such as endoscopes are killed by low-temperature, and non-corrosive, ethylene oxide sterilizers. Ethylene oxide is the only low-temperature sterilant to stop outbreaks on these instruments. In contrast, \"high level disinfection\" does not kill endospores but is used for instruments such as a colonoscope that do not enter sterile bodily cavities. This latter method uses only warm water, enzymes, and detergents.\nBacterial endospores are resistant to antibiotics, most disinfectants, and physical agents such as radiation, boiling, and drying. The impermeability of the spore coat is thought to be responsible for the endospore's resistance to chemicals. The heat resistance of endospores is due to a variety of factors:\nReactivation.\nReactivation of the endospore occurs when conditions are more favourable and involves \"activation\", \"germination\", and \"outgrowth\". Even if an endospore is located in plentiful nutrients, it may fail to germinate unless activation has taken place. This may be triggered by heating the endospore. Germination involves the dormant endospore starting metabolic activity and thus breaking hibernation. It is commonly characterised by rupture or absorption of the spore coat, swelling of the endospore, an increase in metabolic activity, and loss of resistance to environmental stress.\nOutgrowth follows germination and involves the core of the endospore manufacturing new chemical components and exiting the old spore coat to develop into a fully functional vegetative bacterial cell, which can divide to produce more cells.\nEndospores possess five times more sulfur than vegetative cells. This excess sulfur is concentrated in spore coats as an amino acid, cysteine. It is believed that the macromolecule accountable for maintaining the dormant state has a protein coat rich in cystine, stabilized by S-S linkages. A reduction in these linkages has the potential to change the tertiary structure, causing the protein to unfold. This conformational change in the protein is thought to be responsible for exposing active enzymatic sites necessary for endospore germination.\nEndospores can stay dormant for a very long time. For instance, endospores were found in the tombs of the Egyptian pharaohs. When placed in appropriate medium, under appropriate conditions, they were able to be reactivated. In 1995, Raul Cano of California Polytechnic State University found bacterial spores in the gut of a fossilized bee trapped in amber from a tree in the Dominican Republic. The bee fossilized in amber was dated to being about 25 million years old. The spores germinated when the amber was cracked open and the material from the gut of the bee was extracted and placed in nutrient medium. After the spores were analyzed by microscopy, it was determined that the cells were very similar to \"Lysinibacillus sphaericus\" which is found in bees in the Dominican Republic today.\nImportance.\nAs a simplified model for cellular differentiation, the molecular details of endospore formation have been extensively studied, specifically in the model organism \"Bacillus subtilis\". These studies have contributed much to our understanding of the regulation of gene expression, transcription factors, and the sigma factor subunits of RNA polymerase.\nEndospores of the bacterium \"Bacillus anthracis\" were used in the 2001 anthrax attacks. The powder found in contaminated postal letters consisted of anthrax endospores. This intentional distribution led to 22 known cases of anthrax (11 inhalation and 11 cutaneous). The case fatality rate among those patients with inhalation anthrax was 45% (5/11). The six other individuals with inhalation anthrax and all the individuals with cutaneous anthrax recovered. Had it not been for antibiotic therapy, this number would likely have been higher.\nSporulation requires the presence of free oxygen. In the natural situation, this means the vegetative cycles occur within the low oxygen environment of the infected host and, within the host, the organism is exclusively in the vegetative form. Once outside the host, sporulation commences upon exposure to the air and the spore forms are essentially the exclusive phase in the environment.\nBiotechnology.\n\"Bacillus subtilis\" spores are useful for the expression of recombinant proteins and in particular for the surface display of peptides and proteins as a tool for fundamental and applied research in the fields of microbiology, biotechnology and vaccination.\nEndospore-forming bacteria.\nExamples of endospore-forming bacteria include the genera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42958", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42958", "title": "Theodore the Studite", "text": "Byzantine monk, abbot, and scholar\nTheodore the Studite (; 759\u2013826), also known as Theodorus Studita and Saint Theodore of Stoudios/Studium, was a Byzantine Greek monk and abbot of the Stoudios Monastery in Constantinople. He played a major role in the revivals both of Byzantine monasticism and of classical literary genres in Byzantium. He is known as a zealous opponent of iconoclasm, one of several conflicts that set him at odds with both emperor and patriarch. Throughout his life he maintained letter correspondences with many important political and cultural figures of the Byzantine empire; this included many women, such as the composer and nun Kassia, who was much influenced by his teachings.\nBiography.\nFamily and childhood.\nTheodore was born in Constantinople in 759. He was the oldest son of Photios or Photeinos, an important financial official in the palace bureaucracy, and Theoktiste, herself the offspring of a distinguished Constantinopolitan family. The brother of Theoktiste, Theodore's uncle Plato, was an important official in the imperial financial administration. The family therefore controlled a significant portion, if not all, of the imperial financial administration during the reign of Constantine V (r. 741\u2013775). Theodore had two younger brothers (Joseph, later Archbishop of Thessalonica, and Euthymios) and one sister, whose name we do not know.\nIt has often been assumed that Theodore's family belonged to the iconodule party during the first period of Byzantine Iconoclasm. There is however no evidence to support this, and their high position in the imperial bureaucracy of the time renders any openly iconodule position highly unlikely. Furthermore, when Platon left his office and entered the priesthood in 759, he was ordained by an abbot who, if he was not actively iconoclastic himself, at the very least offered no resistance to the iconoclastic policies of Constantine V. The family as a whole was most likely indifferent to the question of icons during this period.\nAccording to the later hagiographical literature, Theodore received an education befitting his family's station and from the age of seven was instructed by a private tutor, eventually concentrating in particular on theology. It is however not clear that these opportunities were available to even the most well-placed Byzantine families of the eighth century, and it is possible that Theodore was at least partially an autodidact.\nEarly monastic career.\nFollowing the death of Emperor Leo IV (r. 775\u2013780) in 780, Theodore's uncle Platon, who had lived as a monk in the Symbola Monastery in Bithynia since 759, visited Constantinople, and persuaded the entire family of his sister, Theoktiste, to likewise take monastic vows. Theodore, together with his father and brothers, sailed back to Bithynia with Platon in 781, where they set about transforming the family estate into a religious establishment, which became known as the Sakkudion Monastery. Platon became abbot of the new foundation, and Theodore was his \"right hand.\" The two sought to order the monastery according to the writings of Basil of Caesarea.\nDuring the period of the regency of Eirene, Abbot Platon emerged as a supporter of the Patriarch Tarasios, and was a member of Tarasios's iconodule party at the Second Council of Nicaea, where the veneration of icons was declared orthodox. Shortly thereafter Tarasios himself ordained Theodore as a priest. In 794, Theodore became abbot of the Sakkudion Monastery, while Platon withdrew from the daily operation of the monastery and dedicated himself to silence.\nConflict with Constantine VI.\nAlso in 794, Emperor Constantine VI (r. 776\u2013797) decided to separate from his first wife, Maria of Amnia, and to marry Maria's \"kubikularia\" (Lady-in-waiting), Theodote, a cousin of Theodore the Studite. Although the Patriarch may initially have resisted this development, as a divorce without proof of adultery on the part of the wife could be construed as illegal, he ultimately gave way. The marriage of Constantine and Theodote was celebrated in 795, although not by the patriarch, as was normal, but by a certain Joseph, a priest of Hagia Sophia.\nA somewhat obscure chain of events followed (the so-called \"Moechian controversy,\" from the Greek \"moichos\", \"adulterer\"), in which Theodore initiated a protest against the marriage from the Sakkudion Monastery, and appears to have demanded the excommunication, not only of the priest Joseph, but also of all who had received communion from him, which, as Joseph was a priest of the imperial church, included implicitly the emperor and his court. This demand had no official weight, however, and Constantine appears to have attempted to make peace with Theodore and Platon (who, on account of his marriage, were now his relatives), inviting them to visit him during a sojourn at the imperial baths of Prusa in Bithynia. In the event neither appeared.\nAs a result, imperial troops were sent to the Sakkudion Monastery, and the community was dispersed. Theodore was flogged, and, together with ten other monks, banished to Thessaloniki, while Platon was imprisoned in Constantinople. The monks arrived in Thessaloniki in March 797, but did not remain for long; in August of the same year Constantine VI was blinded and overthrown, and his mother Irene, the new empress, lifted the exile.\nAbbot of the Studites.\nFollowing the accession of Irene, the priest Joseph was stripped of his office, and Theodoros was received in the imperial palace. The monks then returned to the Sakkudion Monastery, but were forced back to the capital in either 797 or 798 on account of an Arab raid on Bithynia. At this time, Irene offered Theodore the leadership of the ancient Stoudios Monastery in Constantinople, which he accepted. Theodore then set about building various workshops within the monastery to guarantee autarky, constructing a library and a scriptorium, and restoring and decorating the church. He also composed a series of poems on the duties of the various members of the community, which were likely inscribed and displayed within the monastery. He furthermore composed a rule for the governance of the monastery, and made the Studios community the center of an extensive congregation of dependent monasteries, including the Sakkudion. He maintained contact with these other monasteries above all through his prodigious literary output (letters as well as catechisms), which reached a quantitative peak at this time, and developed a system of messengers that was so elaborate as to resemble a private postal service.\nTo this period may also date the so-called iconodule epigrams, iambic acrostics composed by Theodore that replaced the \"iconoclastic epigrams\" which were previously exhibited on the Chalke gate of the Great Palace. It has been suggested that these were commissioned by Irene, as another sign of her good favor toward Theodore, although a commission under Michael I Rangabe (r. 811\u2013813) is also possible; in any case, they were removed in 815 by Leo V the Armenian (r. 813\u2013820) and replaced by new \"iconoclastic\" verses.\nIn 806, the Patriarch Tarasios died, and Emperor Nikephoros I (r. 802\u2013811) set about seeking his replacement. It appears likely that Platon at this time put forth Theodore's name, but Nikephoros, a layman who held the rank of \"asekretis\" in the imperial bureaucracy, was chosen instead. The selection of Nikephoros gave rise to an immediate protest on the part of the Studites, and in particular Theodore and Platon, who objected to the elevation of a layman to the patriarchal throne. Theodore and Platon were jailed for 24 days before the Emperor Nikephoros allowed them to return to their congregations.\nConflict with Nikephoros.\nEmperor Nikephoros soon requested that his new patriarch rehabilitate the priest Joseph, who had officiated at the wedding of Constantine and Theodote, possibly because Joseph had aided in the peaceful resolution of the revolt of Bardanes Tourkos. In 806, the Patriarch Nikephoros convened a synod to address the case, at which Theodore was present. The Synod decided to readmit Joseph to the priesthood, a decision to which Theodore did not at the time object.\nTherefore, relations between the Studite Abbot and the Patriarch appear to have been initially untroubled, an impression which is reinforced by the choice (806/807) of Theodore's brother, Joseph, as Archbishop of Thessaloniki. However, soon after this ordination, perhaps in 808, Theodore began to express his unwillingness to associate with the rehabilitated priest Joseph, or for that matter with anyone else who knowingly associated with him, as he held the rehabilitation to be uncanonical. As in the first dispute over the priest Joseph, the extension of this refusal beyond Joseph to those who associated with him included implicitly the patriarch and the emperor himself.\nEarly in 808, Theodoros offered in a series of letters to explain his position to the emperor, and furthermore to perform the customary proskynesis at his feet, which offer Nikephoros declined, instead setting off for the summer military campaign. In the winter of the same year, Theodore's brother Joseph visited him in Constantinople, but refused to attend the Christmas mass in Hagia Sophia, at which the emperor, the patriarch, and the priest Joseph would have been present. As a result, he was stripped of his archbishopric. At around the same time a small military division was dispatched to the Stoudios Monastery to arrest Theodore, Joseph, and Platon. A synod was then held in January of 809, at which Theodore and his followers were anathematized as schismatic. Theodore, Joseph, and Platon were thereafter banished to the Princes' Islands: Theodore to Chalke, Joseph to Prote, and Platon to Oxeia.\nTheodore maintained an extensive literary activity in exile, writing numerous letters to correspondents including his brother, various Studite monks, influential family members, and even Pope Leo III. He also continued to compose catechisms for the Studite congregation, as well as a number of poems.\nRehabilitation under Michael I.\nIn 811, the new emperor Michael I Rangabe called the Studites back from exile. The priest Joseph was once more defrocked, and Theodore was, at least superficially, reconciled with the Patriarch Nikephoros.\nThere are, however, indications that a certain rivalry between the Studite Abbot and the Patriarch persisted. In 812, Michael I resolved to persecute certain heretics in Phrygia and Lycaonia, namely the Paulicians and the \"Athinganoi\" (sometimes identified with the Roma). Theodore and Nikephoros were called before the emperor to debate the legality of punishing heresy by death, Theodore arguing against and Nikephoros for. Theodore is said to have won the day.\nThe second affair concerned a peace treaty proposed by Krum of Bulgaria (r. 803\u2013814), also in 812, according to which the Byzantine and Bulgarian states should exchange refugees. It is likely that Krum sought the return of certain Bulgarians who had betrayed him to the Byzantines. In this instance Theodore argued against the exchange, as it would require that Christians be cast to barbarians, while Nikephoros urged the emperor to accept the treaty. Once more Theodore's opinion prevailed, although this time with serious consequences; Krum attacked and took Mesembria in November the same year. Michael led a military campaign against the Bulgarians in 813, which ended in defeat, and as a result he abdicated in July and Leo V was crowned emperor.\nOn 4 April 814 Theodore's uncle Platon died in the Stoudios Monastery after a long illness. Theodore composed a long funeral oration, the \"Laudatio Platonis\", which remains one of the most important sources for the history of the family.\nSecond Iconoclasm.\nAt the very beginning of his reign, the emperor Leo V faced a new Bulgarian offensive that reached the walls of Constantinople and ravaged large sections of Thrace. This came to an end with the death of Krum on April 13, 814, and the internal power struggles that followed. However, as the previous 30 years since the approval of icon-veneration at the Synod of 787 had represented for the Byzantines a string of military catastrophes, Leo resolved to reach back to the policies of the more successful Isaurian dynasty. He renamed his son Constantine, thus drawing a parallel to Leo III (r. 717\u2013741) and Constantine V, and beginning in 814 began to discuss with various clerics and senators the possibility of reviving the iconoclastic policy of the Isaurians. This movement met with strong opposition from the Patriarch Nikephoros, who himself gathered a group of bishops and abbots about him and swore them to uphold the veneration of images. The dispute came to a head in a debate between the two parties before the emperor in the Great Palace in early 815, at which Theodore and his brother Joseph were present and took the side of the iconodules. Theodore told the emperor: \"Know that though an angel came from heaven itself to pervert us we would not obey him. Far less would we obey you.\"\nLeo held fast by his plan to revive iconoclasm, and in March 815 the Patrarch Nikephoros was stripped of his office and exiled to Bithynia. At this point Theodore remained in Constantinople, and assumed a leading role in the iconodule opposition. On March 25, Palm Sunday, he commanded his monks to process through the monastery's vineyard, holding up icons so that they could be seen over the walls by the neighbors. This provocation elicited only a rebuke from the emperor.\nA new patriarch, Theodotos, was selected, and in April a synod was convened in Hagia Sophia, at which iconoclasm was re-introduced as dogma. Theodore composed a series of letters in which he called on \"all, near and far,\" to revolt against the decision of the synod. Not long thereafter he was exiled by imperial command to a Metopa, a fortress on the eastern shore of Lake Apollonia in Bithynia. Shortly thereafter Leo had Theodore's poems removed from the Chalke Gate and replaced by a new set of \"iconoclastic\" epigrams.\nWhile Theodore was in exile, the leadership of the Studite congregation was assumed by the Abbot Leontios, who for a time adopted the iconoclast position and won over many individual monks to his party. He was, however, eventually won back to the iconodule party. The Studite situation mirrored a general trend, with a number of bishops and abbots at first willing to reach a compromise with the iconoclasts, but then in the years between 816 and 819 renouncing the iconoclast position, a movement that was perhaps motivated by the martyrdom of the Studite monk Thaddaios. It was during this upswell in icondule sentiment that Theodore began to compose his own polemic against the iconoclasts, the \"Refutatio\", concentrating in particular on refuting the arguments and criticizing the literary merits of the new iconoclastic epigrams on the Chalke.\nTheodore exercised a wide influence during the first year of his exile, primarily through a massive letter-writing campaign. Accordingly, he was transferred in 816 to Boneta, a fortress in the more remote Anatolic theme, whence he nevertheless remained abreast of developments in the capital and maintained a regular correspondence. This continued activity led to an imperial order that Theodore be whipped, which his captors however refused to carry out. In 817, Theodore wrote two letters to Pope Paschal I, which were co-signed by several fellow iconodule abbots, in the first requesting that he summon an anti-iconoclastic Synod; letters to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem, among other \"foreign\" clerics, followed. As a result, the emperor ordered at least once more that Theodore be flogged, and the command was this time carried out, with the result that Theodore became quite ill. After his recovery Theodore was moved to Smyrna. Early in 821, however, Leo V fell victim to a grisly murder at the altar of the Church of St. Stephen in the imperial palace; Theodore was released from exile shortly thereafter.\nFinal years.\nFollowing his release, Theodore made his way back to Constantinople, travelling through north-western Anatolia and meeting with numerous monks and abbots on the way. At the time he appears to have believed that the new emperor, Michael II (r. 820\u2013829), would adopt a pro-icons policy, and he expressed this hope in two letters to Michael. An imperial audience was arranged for a group of iconodule clerics, including Theodore, at which however Michael expressed his intention to \"leave the church as he had found it.\" The abbots were to be allowed to venerate images if they so wished, as long as they remained outside of Constantinople. Theodore returned to Anatolia, in what seems to have been a sort of self-imposed exile.\nTheodore's activities in his final years are somewhat difficult to trace. He continued to write numerous letters supporting the use of icons, and appears to have remained an important leader of the opposition to imperial iconoclasm. He was present at a meeting of \"more than a hundred\" iconodule clerics in 823 or 824, which ended in an argument between the Studites and the host, one Ioannikos, which may have represented a power struggle within the movement. Theodore also spoke against the second marriage of Michael II to the nun Euphrosyne, a daughter of Constantine VI, although in a very moderate fashion, and with none of the passion or effect of the Moechian controversy.\nTheodore's years of exile, regular fasting, and exceptional exertions had taken their toll, and in 826 he became quite ill. In this year, he dictated his \"Testament\", a form of spiritual guidance for the future abbots of the Stoudios monastery, to his disciple Naukratios. He died on 11 November that year, while celebrating mass, apparently in the monastery of Hagios Tryphon on Cape Akritas in Bithynia. Eighteen years later, his remains, along with those of his brother Joseph, were brought back to the Stoudios Monastery, where they were interred beside the grave of their uncle Platon.\nLegacy.\nTheodore's revival of the Stoudios monastery had a major effect on the later history of Byzantine monasticism. His disciple, Naukratios, recovered control of the monastery after the end of iconoclasm in 842, and throughout the remainder of the ninth century the Studite abbots continued Theodore's tradition of opposition to patriarchal and imperial authority. Elements of Theodore's \"Testament\" were incorporated verbatim in the typika of certain early Athonite monasteries. The most important elements of his reform were its emphases on cenobitic (communal) life, manual labor, and a carefully defined administrative hierarchy.\nTheodore also built the Stoudios monastery into a major scholarly center, in particular through its library and scriptorium, which certainly surpassed all other contemporary Byzantine ecclesiastical institutions in this regard. Theodore himself was a pivotal figure in the revival of classical literary forms, in particular iambic verse, in Byzantium, and his criticisms of the iconoclastic epigrams drew a connection between literary skill and orthodox faith. After his death the Stoudios monastery continued to be a vital center for Byzantine hymnography and hagiography, as well as for the copying of manuscripts.\nFollowing the \"triumph of Orthodoxy\" (i.e. the reintroduction of icons) in 843, Theodore became one of the great heroes of the iconodule opposition. There was no formal process of canonization in Byzantium, but Theodore was soon recognized as a saint. In the Latin West, Theodore\u2019s recognition of papal primacy on the basis of his letters to Pope Paschal I was part of what caused him to be formally canonized by the Catholic Church. His feast day is 11 November in the East and 12 November in the West.\nWorks.\nTheodore was an immensely prolific author; among his most important works are:\nCommentary on Theodore.\nAs also mentioned by Kirby Page in \"Jesus or Christianity\", Charles Loring Brace tells us in \"Gesta Christi\" that it was not until the 9th century that the first recorded stand against slavery itself was taken by Theodore:\nNo direct word against slavery, however, came forth from the great Teacher [Jesus Christ]. It was not until the ninth century after, that one of his humble followers, Saint Theodore of Studium (Constantinople), ventured to put forth the command \"Thou shalt possess no slave, neither for domestic service nor for the labor of the fields, for man is made in the image of God.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStudies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42959", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42959", "title": "\u00c7aro", "text": "\u00c7aro (; ) is a commune in the Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Atlantiques department in south-western France.\nIt is located in the former province of Lower Navarre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42960", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42960", "title": "Fractal transform", "text": "Image compression technique\nThe fractal transform is a technique invented by Michael Barnsley \"et al.\" to perform lossy image compression.\nIt is a fractal compression system for digital images which resembles a vector quantization system using the image itself as the codebook.\nFractal transform compression.\nStart with a digital image A1.\nDownsample it by a factor of 2 to produce image A2.\nNow, for each block B1 of 4x4 pixels in A1, find the corresponding block B2 in A2 most similar to B1, and then find the grayscale or RGB offset and gain from A2 to B2.\nFor each destination block, output the positions of the source blocks and the color offsets and gains.\nFractal transform decompression.\nStarting with an empty destination image A1, repeat the following algorithm several times:\nDownsample A1 down by a factor of 2 to produce image A2. Then copy blocks from A2 to A1 as directed by the compressed data, multiplying by the respective gains and adding the respective color offsets.\nThis algorithm is guaranteed to converge to an image, and it should appear similar to the original image.\nIn fact, a slight modification of the decompressor to run at block sizes larger than 4x4 pixels produces a method of stretching images without causing the blockiness or blurriness of traditional linear resampling algorithms.\nPatents.\nThe basic patents covering Fractal Image Compression, U.S. Patents 4,941,193, 5,065,447, 5,384,867, 5,416,856, and 5,430,812 appear to be expired.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42964", "revid": "50852611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42964", "title": "Snell's law", "text": "Formula for refraction angles\nSnell's law (also known as the Snell\u2013Descartes law, and the law of refraction) is a formula used to describe the relationship between the angles of incidence and refraction, when referring to light or other waves passing through a boundary between two different isotropic media, such as water, glass, or air.\nIn optics, the law is used in ray tracing to compute the angles of transmission or refraction, and in experimental optics to find the refractive index of a material. The law is also satisfied in meta-materials, which allow light to be bent \"backward\" at a negative angle of refraction with a negative refractive index. (When light travels from a denser to a rarer medium, the formula is reciprocated (sin r divided by sin i) to find out refractive index)\nThe law states that, for a given pair of media, the ratio of the sines of angle of incidence formula_1 and angle of refraction formula_2 is equal to the refractive index of the second medium with regard to the first (formula_3) which is equal to the ratio of the refractive indices formula_4 of the two media, or equivalently, to the ratio of the phase velocities formula_5 in the two media.\nformula_6\nThe law follows from Fermat's principle of least time, which in turn follows from the propagation of light as waves.\nHistory.\nPtolemy, in Alexandria, Egypt, had found a relationship regarding refraction angles, but it was inaccurate for angles that were not small. Ptolemy was confident he had found an accurate empirical law, partially as a result of slightly altering his data to fit theory (see: confirmation bias). \nThe law was eventually named after Snell, although it was first discovered by the Persian scientist Ibn Sahl, at Baghdad court in 984. In the manuscript \"On Burning Mirrors and Lenses\", Sahl used the law to derive lens shapes that focus light with no geometric aberration.\nAlhazen, in his \"Book of Optics\" (1021), came close to rediscovering the law of refraction, but he did not take this step.\nThe law was rediscovered by Thomas Harriot in 1602, who however did not publish his results although he had corresponded with Kepler on this very subject. In 1621, the Dutch astronomer Willebrord Snellius (1580\u20131626)\u2014Snell\u2014derived a mathematically equivalent form, that remained unpublished during his lifetime. Ren\u00e9 Descartes independently derived the law using heuristic momentum conservation arguments in terms of sines in his 1637 essay \"La Dioptrique\", and used it to solve a range of optical problems. Rejecting Descartes' solution, Pierre de Fermat arrived at the same solution based solely on his principle of least time. Descartes assumed the speed of light was infinite, yet in his derivation of Snell's law he also assumed the denser the medium, the greater the speed of light. Fermat supported the opposing assumptions, i.e., the speed of light is finite, and his derivation depended upon the speed of light being slower in a denser medium. Fermat's derivation also utilized his invention of adequality, a mathematical procedure equivalent to differential calculus, for finding maxima, minima, and tangents.\nIn his influential mathematics book \"Geometry\", Descartes solves a problem that was worked on by Apollonius of Perga and Pappus of Alexandria. Given n lines L and a point P(L) on each line, find the locus of points Q such that the lengths of the line segments QP(L) satisfy certain conditions. For example, when n = 4, given the lines a, b, c, and d and a point A on a, B on b, and so on, find the locus of points Q such that the product QA*QB equals the product QC*QD. When the lines are not all parallel, Pappus showed that the loci are conics, but when Descartes considered larger n, he obtained cubic and higher degree curves. To show that the cubic curves were interesting, he showed that they arose naturally in optics from Snell's law.\nAccording to Dijksterhuis, \"In \"De natura lucis et proprietate\" (1662) Isaac Vossius said that Descartes had seen Snell's paper and concocted his own proof. We now know this charge to be undeserved but it has been adopted many times since.\" Both Fermat and Huygens repeated this accusation that Descartes had copied Snell. In French, Snell's Law is sometimes called \"la loi de Descartes\" or more frequently \"\".\nIn his 1678 \"Trait\u00e9 de la Lumi\u00e8re\", Christiaan Huygens showed how Snell's law of sines could be explained by, or derived from, the wave nature of light, using what we have come to call the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle.\nWith the development of modern optical and electromagnetic theory, Snell's law was redefined. In 1962, Nicolaas Bloembergen showed that at the boundary of nonlinear medium, Snell's law could be written in a general form. In 2008 and 2011, plasmonic metasurfaces were also demonstrated to change the reflection and refraction directions of light beam.\nExplanation.\nSnell's law is used to determine the direction of light rays through refractive media with varying indices of refraction. The indices of refraction of the media, labeled formula_7, formula_8 and so on, are used to represent the factor by which a light ray's speed decreases when traveling through a refractive medium, such as glass or water, as opposed to its velocity in a vacuum.\nAs light passes the border between media, depending upon the relative refractive indices of the two media, the light will either be refracted to a lesser angle, or a greater one. These angles are measured with respect to the \"normal line\", represented perpendicular to the boundary. In the case of light traveling from air into water, light would be refracted towards the normal line, because the light is slowed down in water; light traveling from water to air would refract away from the normal line.\nRefraction between two surfaces is also referred to as \"reversible\" because if all conditions were identical, the angles would be the same for light propagating in the opposite direction.\nSnell's law is generally true only for isotropic or specular media (such as glass). In anisotropic media such as some crystals, birefringence may split the refracted ray into two rays, the \"ordinary\" or \"o\"-ray which follows Snell's law, and the other \"extraordinary\" or \"e\"-ray which may not be co-planar with the incident ray.\nWhen the light or other wave involved is monochromatic, that is, of a single frequency, Snell's law can also be expressed in terms of a ratio of wavelengths in the two media, formula_9 and formula_10:\nformula_11\nDerivations and formula.\nSnell's law can be derived in various ways.\nDerivation from Fermat's principle.\nSnell's law can be derived from Fermat's principle, which states that the light travels the path which takes the least time. By taking the derivative of the optical path length, the stationary point is found giving the path taken by the light. (There are situations of light violating Fermat's principle by not taking the least time path, as in reflection in a (spherical) mirror.) In a classic analogy, the area of lower refractive index is replaced by a beach, the area of higher refractive index by the sea, and the fastest way for a rescuer on the beach to get to a drowning person in the sea is to run along a path that follows Snell's law.\nAs shown in the figure to the right, assume the refractive index of medium 1 and medium 2 are formula_7 and formula_8 respectively. Light enters medium 2 from medium 1 via point O.\nformula_14 is the angle of incidence, formula_15 is the angle of refraction with respect to the normal.\nThe phase velocities of light in medium 1 and medium 2 are formula_16 and formula_17 respectively, where formula_18 is the speed of light in vacuum.\nLet \"T\" be the time required for the light to travel from point Q through point O to point P. \nformula_19\nwhere \"a\", \"b\", \"\u2113\", and \"x\" are as denoted in the right-hand figure, \"x\" being the varying parameter.\nTo minimize it, one can differentiate:\nformula_20\nand set it to 0 to find the stationary points.\nNote that\nformula_21\nand formula_22\nTherefore, \nformula_23formula_24\nDerivation from Huygens's principle.\nAlternatively, Snell's law can be derived using interference of all possible paths of light wave from source to observer\u2014it results in destructive interference.\nDerivation from Maxwell's equations.\nAnother way to derive Snell's Law involves an application of the general boundary conditions of Maxwell equations for electromagnetic radiation and induction.\nDerivation from conservation of energy and momentum.\nYet another way to derive Snell's law is based on translation symmetry considerations. For example, a homogeneous surface perpendicular to the z direction cannot change the transverse momentum. Since the propagation vector formula_25 is proportional to the photon's momentum, the transverse propagation direction formula_26 must remain the same in both regions. Assume without loss of generality a plane of incidence in the formula_27 plane formula_28. Using the well known dependence of the wavenumber on the refractive index of the medium, we derive Snell's law immediately.\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the wavenumber in vacuum. Although no surface is truly homogeneous at the atomic scale, full translational symmetry is an excellent approximation whenever the region is homogeneous on the scale of the light wavelength.\nVector form.\nGiven a normalized light vector formula_31 (pointing from the light source toward the surface) and a normalized plane normal vector formula_32, one can work out the normalized reflected and refracted rays, via the cosines of the angle of incidence formula_14 and angle of refraction formula_15, without explicitly using the sine values or any trigonometric functions or angles:\nformula_35\nNote: formula_36 must be positive, which it will be if formula_32 is the normal vector that points from the surface toward the side where the light is coming from, the region with index formula_7. If formula_36 is negative, then formula_32 points to the side without the light, so start over with formula_32 replaced by its negative.\nformula_42\nThis reflected direction vector points back toward the side of the surface where the light came from.\nNow apply Snell's law to the ratio of sines to derive the formula for the refracted ray's direction vector:\nformula_43\nformula_44\nformula_45\nThe formula may appear simpler in terms of renamed simple values formula_46 and formula_47, avoiding any appearance of trig function names or angle names:\nformula_48\nExample:\nformula_49\nformula_50\nformula_51\nThe cosine values may be saved and used in the Fresnel equations for working out the intensity of the resulting rays.\nTotal internal reflection is indicated by a negative radicand in the equation for formula_52, which can only happen for rays crossing into a less-dense medium (formula_53).\nTotal internal reflection and critical angle.\nWhen light travels from a medium with a higher refractive index to one with a lower refractive index, Snell's law seems to require in some cases (whenever the angle of incidence is large enough) that the sine of the angle of refraction be greater than one. This of course is impossible, and the light in such cases is completely reflected by the boundary, a phenomenon known as total internal reflection. The largest possible angle of incidence which still results in a refracted ray is called the critical angle; in this case the refracted ray travels along the boundary between the two media.\nFor example, consider a ray of light moving from water to air with an angle of incidence of 50\u00b0. The refractive indices of water and air are approximately 1.333 and 1, respectively, so Snell's law gives us the relation\nformula_54\nwhich is impossible to satisfy. The critical angle \"\u03b8\"crit is the value of \"\u03b8\"1 for which \"\u03b8\"2 equals 90\u00b0:\nformula_55\nDispersion.\nIn many wave-propagation media, wave velocity changes with frequency or wavelength of the waves; this is true of light propagation in most transparent substances other than a vacuum. These media are called dispersive. The result is that the angles determined by Snell's law also depend on frequency or wavelength, so that a ray of mixed wavelengths, such as white light, will spread or disperse. Such dispersion of light in glass or water underlies the origin of rainbows and other optical phenomena, in which different wavelengths appear as different colors.\nIn optical instruments, dispersion leads to chromatic aberration; a color-dependent blurring that sometimes is the resolution-limiting effect. This was especially true in refracting telescopes, before the invention of achromatic objective lenses.\nLossy, absorbing, or conducting media.\nIn a conducting medium, permittivity and index of refraction are complex-valued. Consequently, so are the angle of refraction and the wave-vector. This implies that, while the surfaces of constant real phase are planes whose normals make an angle equal to the angle of refraction with the interface normal, the surfaces of constant amplitude, in contrast, are planes parallel to the interface itself. Since these two planes do not in general coincide with each other, the wave is said to be inhomogeneous. The refracted wave is exponentially attenuated, with exponent proportional to the imaginary component of the index of refraction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42965", "revid": "44522647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42965", "title": "\u00c9ire", "text": "Irish name for Ireland\n ( , ) is the Irish language name for \"Ireland\". Like its English counterpart, the term is used for both the island of Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, the sovereign state that governs 85% of the island's landmass. The latter is distinct from Northern Ireland ( in the Irish language), which covers the remainder of the northeast of the island. The same name is also sometimes used in English, with or without the accent, though such use is considered controversial.\nEtymology.\nThe modern Irish \"\u00c9ire\" evolved from the Old Irish word \"\u00c9riu\", which was the name of Ireland and of a Gaelic goddess. \"\u00c9riu\" is generally believed to have been the matron goddess of Ireland, a goddess of sovereignty, or simply a goddess of the land. \"\u00c9riu\" has been derived from reconstructed Archaic Irish \"*\u012aweri\u016b\", and further from the Proto-Celtic *\"\u03a6\u012bwerjon-\" (nominative singular \"\u03a6\u012bwerj\u016b\"). This suggests descent from the Proto-Indo-European *\"piHwerjon-\" (\"fertile land\" or \"abundant land\"), from the adjective \"*piHwer-\" (\"fat\") \u2013 cognate with Ancient Greek \"p\u00edeira\" and Sanskrit \"p\u012bvar\u012b\", (\"fat, full, abounding\"). The Archaic Irish form was borrowed from Ancient Greek. During his exploration of northwest Europe (circa 320 BC), Pytheas of Massilia called the island \"Ierne\" (written ). \nThe Pseudo-Aristotelian text \"On the Universe\" (393b) has:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u1f18\u03bd \u03c4\u03bf\u03cd\u03c4\u1ff3 \u03b3\u03b5 \u03bc\u1f74\u03bd \u03bd\u1fc6\u03c3\u03bf\u03b9 \u03bc\u03ad\u03b3\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03c5\u03b3\u03c7\u03ac\u03bd\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd \u03bf\u1f56\u03c3\u03b1\u03b9 \u03b4\u03cd\u03bf, \u0392\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03bb\u03b5\u03b3\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9, \u1f08\u03bb\u03b2\u03af\u03c9\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u1f38\u03ad\u03c1\u03bd\u03b7. Translation: There are two very large islands in it, called the British Isles, Albion and Ierne. (modern Great Britain and Ireland).\nIn his book \"Geographia\" (c.\u2009150 AD), Claudius Ptolemaeus called the island \"Iouernia\" (written ; \"ou\" represented /w/) and named a tribal group called the (, \"\" or Iverni who lived in the southwest. This was borrowed into Latin as \"Hibernia\".\nThe evolution of the word would follow as such:\nAn Old Irish by-form of this placename was \"\u00edriu\", meaning \"land, earth\". In Irish mythology, \u00cdth is the first of the Milesians (Irish) to see Ireland from Iberia. Later, he is the first to step ashore and praises the island's abundance, saying to the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann: \"You dwell in a good land. Abundant are its mast and honey and wheat and fish\".\nA 19th-century proposal, which does not follow modern standards of etymology, derives the name from Scottish Gaelic: \"\u00ec\" (island) + \"thiar\" (west) + \"f\u00f3nn\" (land), which together give \"\u00ec-iar-fh\u00f3nn\", or \"westland isle\". The etymology fails in that \"tiar\" (the historical form) has no \"*t\u00e9ir\" forms which would allow the development of the \"*\u00e9\" of \"\u00c9ire\"; moreover, Old Irish \"\u00ed\" (\"island\") was a late loanword from Old Norse \"ey\" (\"island\"), and so did not exist in prehistoric Ireland.\nDifference between \"\u00c9ire\" and \"Erin\".\nWhile \"\u00c9ire\" is simply the name for the island of Ireland in the Irish language, and sometimes used in English, \"Erin\" is a common poetic name for Ireland, as in \"Erin go bragh\". The distinction between the two is one of the difference between cases of nouns in Irish. \"\u00c9ire\" is the nominative case, the case that is used for nouns that are the subject of a sentence, i.e., the noun that is \"doing\" something. \"Erin\" derives from \"\u00c9irinn\", the Irish dative case of \"\u00c9ire\", which has replaced the nominative case in D\u00e9ise Irish and some non-standard sub-dialects elsewhere, in Scottish Gaelic (where the usual word for Ireland is ) and Manx (like Irish and Scottish Gaelic, a Goidelic Celtic language), where the word is spelled \"Nerin,\" with the initial \"n-\" probably representing a fossilisation of the preposition \"in\"/\"an\" \"in\" (cf. Irish \"in \u00c9irinn\", Scottish \"an \u00c8irinn\"/\"ann an \u00c8irinn\" \"in Ireland\"). The genitive case, \"\u00c9ireann\" (e.g. \"stair na h\u00c9ireann\" \"the history of Ireland, Ireland's history\"), is found in the Gaelic forms of the titles of companies and institutions in Ireland e.g. \"Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann\" (\"Irish Rail\"), \"D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann\" (\"Irish Parliament\"), \"Poblacht na h\u00c9ireann\" (\"The Republic of Ireland\") or \"Tuaisceart \u00c9ireann\" (\"Northern Ireland\").\nAs a state name.\nArticle 4 of the Irish constitution adopted in 1937 by the government under \u00c9amon de Valera states \"\"\u00c9ire\" is the name of the state, or in the English language, \"Ireland\"\". The Constitution's English-language preamble also describes the population as \"We, the people of \u00c9ire\". Despite the fact that Article 8 designated Irish as the \"national\" and \"first official\" language, \"\u00c9ire\" has to some extent passed out of everyday conversation and literature, and the state is referred to as \"Ireland\" or its equivalent in all other languages.\nThe name \"\u00c9ire\" has been used on Irish postage stamps since 1922; on all Irish coinage (including Irish euro coins); and together with \"Ireland\" on passports and other official state documents issued since 1937. \"\u00c9ire\" is used on the seal of the president of Ireland.\nInitially, after 1937 the United Kingdom insisted on using only the name \"Eire\" and refused to accept the name \"Ireland\". It adopted the Eire (Confirmation of Agreements) Act 1938 putting in law that position. At the 1948 Summer Olympics in London the organisers insisted that the Irish team march under the banner \"Eire\" notwithstanding that every other team was marching according to what their name was in English. The UK Government generally avoided all reference to \"Ireland\" in connection with the state and used what Senator Thomas O'Connell described as \"sneering titles such as Eirish\". However, the term \"Eirish\" was also used by some writers in the US, who referred to \"the Eirish people\". Using the genitive form \"\u00c9ireann\" as an adjective, the UK media would refer to \"Eireann Ministers\" and the \"Eireann Army\". The Ireland Act 1949 changed this to \"Republic of Ireland\". It was not until after the 1998 Good Friday Agreement that the UK government accepted the preferred name of simply \"Ireland\", at the same time as the Republic of Ireland dropped its territorial claim over Northern Ireland.\nBefore the 1937 Constitution, \"Saorst\u00e1t \u00c9ireann\" (the Irish name of the Irish Free State) was generally used.\nDuring the Emergency (as the Second World War was known), Irish ships had \"EIRE\" (and the Irish tricolour) painted large on their sides and deck, to identify them as neutrals.\nIn the 1947 Sinn F\u00e9in Funds case, a co-defendant was cited as \"the Attorney General of Eire\" in the High and Supreme Court cases, and there were similar cases where \"Eire\" was used in the late 1940s as a descriptor of the state in English.\nIn 1922\u20131938 the international plate on Irish cars was \"SE\". From 1938 to 1962 it was marked \"EIR\", short for \u00c9ire. Bernard Commons, a Clann na Talmhan TD, suggested to the D\u00e1il in 1950 that the Government examine \"the tourist identification plate bearing the letters EIR ... with a view to the adoption of identification letters more readily associated with this country by foreigners\". \"EIR\" was indicated in the Road Traffic (Third Party Risks) (Visiting Motorists) Regulations 1952 and 1958. The Mechanically Propelled Vehicles (International Circulation) Order 1961 specified EIR but also permitted IRL. and by 1962 \"IRL\" had been adopted.\nUnder the 1947 Convention Irish-registered aircraft have carried a registration mark starting \"EI\" for \u00c9ire.\nFrom January 2007, the Irish Government nameplates at meetings of the European Union have borne both \"\u00c9ire\" and \"Ireland\", following the adoption of Irish as a working language of the European Union.\nSpelling \"Eire\" rather than \"\u00c9ire\".\nIn 1938 the British government provided in the Eire (Confirmation of Agreements) Act 1938 that British legislation would henceforth refer to the Irish Free State as \"Eire\" (but not as \"Ireland\"). This was altered by the Ireland Act 1949, where the English-law name of the state was changed to \"Republic of Ireland\". The 1938 Act was repealed in 1981, and in 1996 a British journalist described \"Eire\" as \"now an oddity rarely used, an out-of-date reference\".\nWithin Ireland however, the spelling \"Eire\" was incorrect. When Irish language texts were printed in Gaelic type, both capital and lower-case letters were printed with diacritics (written accents). From the later 1940s, in conjunction with other reforms, printing switched to the same Latin alphabet used in English. There was some uncertainty about whether the \"s\u00edneadh fada\" (acute accent) should be written on upper-case letters. While it was preserved in all-Irish texts, it was often omitted when short fragments of Irish appeared alone or in English texts. Noel Davern asked in the D\u00e1il in 1974 why Irish stamps had \"EIRE\" rather than \"\u00c9IRE\". The reply from the Minister for Posts and Telegraphs was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The accent has been omitted on most Irish stamps issued over the past ten years in the interests of artistic balance and in accordance with a common practice in the printing of Irish in Roman script for display purposes. This is a prevailing typographical convention and is common to several European languages, including French.\nDavern considered \"EIRE\" to be worse than a misspelling, because \"eire\" is a word in its own right, meaning \"a burden, load or encumbrance\". The minister stated, \"The word on the stamp ... does not mean 'eire' and it is not understood to mean 'eire' by anybody except Davern.\" Stamps later used a Gaelic type with the accent preserved.\nEnglish rarely uses diacritics for English words, and often omits them from written loanwords from any source language; the acute accent is often omitted when \"\u00c9IRE\" is written in English\u2014in that context, the omission or expression is regarded by non-Irish people as a negligible variation, reflecting two accepted spellings without further implication, in the same way as Mexico and M\u00e9xico are seen as being the same. But for an Irish-speaker the diacritic changes the pronunciation.\nOther uses.\n\"\u00c9ire\" has been incorporated into the names of Irish commercial and social entities, such as Eir (formerly Eircom and Telecom \u00c9ireann) and its former mobile phone network, Eircell. Ireland's postal code system is known as Eircode. In 2006 the Irish electricity network was devolved to EirGrid. The company \"BetEire Flow\" (eFlow), named as a pun on \"better\", is a French consortium running the electronic tolling system at the West-Link bridge west of Dublin. According to the Dublin Companies Registration Office in 2008, over 500 company names incorporate the word \u00c9ire in some form.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42966", "revid": "7291611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42966", "title": "Montreal Canadiens", "text": "National Hockey League team in Quebec\nThe Montreal Canadiens (), officially (lit.\u2009'Canadian hockey club') and colloquially known as the Habs, are a professional ice hockey team based in Montreal. The Canadiens compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference. Since 1996, the team has played its home games at the Bell Centre, originally known as the Molson Centre. The Canadiens previously played at the Montreal Forum, which housed the team for seven decades and all but their first two Stanley Cup championships.\nFounded in 1909, the Canadiens are the oldest continuously operating professional ice hockey team worldwide, and the only existing NHL club to predate the founding of the league. One of the earliest North American professional sports franchises, the Canadiens' history predates that of every other Canadian franchise outside the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts, as well as every American franchise outside baseball and the National Football League's Arizona Cardinals. The franchise is one of the \"Original Six\", the teams that made up the NHL from 1942 until the 1967 expansion. The team's championship season in 1992\u201393 marked the last time a Canadian team won the Stanley Cup.\nThe Canadiens have won the Stanley Cup 24 times, more times than any other franchise, having earned 23 victories since the founding of the NHL, and 22 since 1927, when NHL teams became the only ones to compete for the Stanley Cup. The Canadiens also had the most championships by a team of any of the major North American sports leagues until the New York Yankees won their 25th World Series title in 1999.\nHistory.\nThe Canadiens were founded by J. Ambrose O'Brien on December 4, 1909, as a charter member of the National Hockey Association (NHA), the forerunner to the National Hockey League. It was to be the team of the francophone community in Montreal, composed of francophone players, and under francophone ownership as soon as possible. The founders named the team \"Les Canadiens\", a term identified at the time with French speakers. The team's inaugural season was not a success, as they placed last in the league. After their first year, ownership was transferred to George Kennedy of Montreal and the team's record improved over the next seasons. The team won its first Stanley Cup championship in the 1915\u201316 season. In 1917, with four other NHA teams, the Canadiens formed the NHL, and they won their first NHL Stanley Cup during the 1923\u201324 season, led by Howie Morenz. The team moved from the Mount Royal Arena to the Montreal Forum for the 1926\u201327 season.\nThe club began the 1930s decade successfully, with back-to-back Stanley Cup wins in 1930 and 1931. However, the Canadiens, along with cross-town rivals the Montreal Maroons, declined both on the ice and economically during the Great Depression era. Losses grew to the point where team owners considered selling interest to Cleveland, Ohio, though local investors were ultimately found to finance the Canadiens. After the Maroons suspended operations following the 1937\u201338 season, several of their players joined the Canadiens.\nLed by the \"Punch Line\" of Maurice \"Rocket\" Richard, Toe Blake and Elmer Lach in the 1940s, the Canadiens enjoyed success again atop the NHL. From 1953 to 1960, the franchise won six Stanley Cups, including a record five straight from 1956 to 1960, with a new set of stars coming to prominence: Jean Beliveau, Dickie Moore, Doug Harvey, Bernie \"Boom Boom\" Geoffrion, Jacques Plante and Richard's younger brother, Henri.\nThe Canadiens added ten more championships in 15 seasons from 1965 to 1979, with another dynastic run of four-straight Cups from 1976 to 1979. In the 1976\u201377 season, the Canadiens set three still-standing team records \u2013 fewest losses (8) in an 80-game season, the longest home unbeaten streak (34), and best goal differential (+216) \u2013 with one additional record that lasted almost half a century for the most points (132) in an 80-game season until it was surpassed by the 2022\u201323 Boston Bruins. In the 1977\u201378 season, the team had a 28-game unbeaten streak, the second-longest in NHL history. The next generation of stars included Guy Lafleur, Yvan Cournoyer, Ken Dryden, Pete Mahovlich, Jacques Lemaire, Pierre Larouche, Steve Shutt, Bob Gainey, Serge Savard, Guy Lapointe and Larry Robinson. Scotty Bowman, who would later set a record for most NHL victories by a coach, was the team's head coach for its last five Stanley Cup victories in the 1970s.\nThe Canadiens won Stanley Cups in 1986, led by rookie star goaltender Patrick Roy, and in 1993, continuing their streak of winning at least one championship in every decade from the 1910s to the 1990s (this streak came to an end in the 2000s). In 1996, the Habs moved from the Montreal Forum, their home during 70 seasons and 22 Stanley Cups, to the Molson Centre (now called Bell Centre).\nFollowing Roy's departure in 1995, the Canadiens fell into an extended stretch of mediocrity, missing the playoffs in four of their next ten seasons and failing to advance past the second round of the playoffs until 2010. By the late 1990s, with both an ailing team and monetary losses exacerbated by a record-low value of the Canadian dollar, Montreal fans feared their team would end up relocated to the United States. Team owner Molson Brewery sold control of the franchise and the Molson Centre to American businessman George N. Gillett Jr. in 2001, with the right of first refusal for any future sale by Gillett and a condition that the NHL Board of Governors must unanimously approve any attempt to move to a new city. Led by club president Pierre Boivin, the Canadiens returned to being a lucrative enterprise, earning additional revenues from broadcasting and arena events. In 2009, Gillett sold the franchise to a consortium led by the Molson family which included The Woodbridge Company, BCE/Bell, the Fonds de solidarit\u00e9 FTQ, Michael Andlauer, Luc Bertrand and the National Bank Financial Group for $575\u00a0million, more than double the $275\u00a0million he spent on the purchase eight years prior.\nDuring the 2008\u201309 season, the Canadiens celebrated their 100th anniversary with various events,\nincluding hosting both the 2009 NHL All-Star Game, and the 2009 NHL entry draft.\nThe Canadiens became the first team in NHL history to reach 3,000 victories with their 5\u20132 victory over the Florida Panthers on December 29, 2008.\nFor the 2020\u201321 season, the league moved the Canadiens along with the other six teams from Canada to the North Division. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Canadiens only played against teams in the division in the regular season to avoid travel restrictions between the United States and Canada. All teams in the division played without fans to begin the season. The Canadiens advanced through the 2021 Stanley Cup playoffs, beating the Toronto Maple Leafs in the first round of the playoffs 4\u20133, overcoming a 3\u20131 Maple Leafs lead in the series. The Canadiens then swept the Winnipeg Jets in the second round, advancing to the Stanley Cup semifinals. After defeating the Vegas Golden Knights in the penultimate round, clinching an overtime victory in game 6 of the series, they reached their first Stanley Cup Final in 28 years, whilst also being the first Canadian team to do so since the Vancouver Canucks in 2011. Montreal eventually lost the Stanley Cup Final to the Tampa Bay Lightning, 4\u20131.\nIn 2021\u201322, the Canadiens were unable to replicate their success from the prior season, ultimately finishing last in the league for the first time since the 1939\u201340 season and the first time in the NHL's expansion era, in what was one of the worst seasons in the team's history. In the process, they set team records for most regulation losses (49), most goals against (319), fewest wins (22), and fewest points (55), while their .335 point percentage was the team's third-worst ever, after only the 1925\u201326 (.319) and 1939\u201340 (.260) campaigns. As a result, team owner Geoff Molson authorized a \"rebuild\" of the roster over an extended period, a first in the modern history of the franchise. The Canadiens finished fifth-last in the subsequent 2022\u201323 and 2023\u201324 seasons.\nTeam identity.\nThe Canadiens organization operates in both English and French. For many years, public address announcements and press releases have been given in both languages, and the team website and social media outlets are in both languages as well. At home games, the first stanza of O Canada is sung in French, and the chorus is sung in English.\nCrest and sweater design.\nOne of sport's oldest and most recognizable logos, the classic 'C' and 'H' of the Montreal Canadiens was first used together in the 1917\u201318 season, when the club changed its name to \"Club de hockey Canadien\" from \"Club athl\u00e9tique Canadien\", before evolving to its current form in 1952\u201353. The \"H\" stands for \"hockey\", not \"Habitants\", a popular misconception. According to About.com, the first man to refer to the team as \"the Habs\" was American Tex Rickard, owner of the Madison Square Garden, in 1924. Rickard apparently told a reporter that the \"H\" on the Canadiens' sweaters was for \"Habitants\". In French, the \"Habitants\" nickname dates back to at least 1914, when it was printed in \"Le Devoir\" to report a 9\u20133 win over Toronto on the ninth of February.\nSince 1911, the team's primary colours are blue, white and red. The home sweater is predominantly red in colour and features four blue and white stripes: one across each arm, one across the chest and the other across the waistline. The main road sweater is white with a red and blue stripe across the waist, red at the end of both arm sleeves, and red shoulder yokes. The basic design has been in use since 1914 and took its current form in 1925, generally evolving as materials changed. Because of the team's lengthy history and significance in Quebec, the sweater has been referred to as (the holy flannel sweater).\nAs of 2015, the Canadiens' home red sweater is the only uniform in the league to feature the French language version of the NHL shield logo (LNH) on the neck collar, in acknowledgment of Montreal's French Canadian heritage. The road white sweater retains the English NHL shield logo.\nThe Canadiens used multiple designs prior to adopting the aforementioned design in 1914. The original shirt of the 1909\u201310 season was blue with a white C. The second season had a red shirt featuring a green maple leaf with the C logo, and green pants. Lastly, the season before adopting the current look the Canadiens wore a \"barber pole\" design jersey with red, white and blue stripes, and the logo being a white maple leaf reading \"CAC\", \"Club athl\u00e9tique Canadien\". All three designs were worn during the 2009\u201310 season as part of the Canadiens' centenary.\nIn the 2020\u201321 season, the Canadiens unveiled a \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform in collaboration with Adidas. The uniform was essentially the same as their regular red uniform, but with blue as the primary colour and red as the stripe colour. A second iteration was released in the 2022\u201323 season, again using the same template but with red relegated to the logo only and featuring a light blue base with white/dark blue/white stripes. \nThis period also saw the introduction of corporate sponsor advertising across NHL-sanctioned equipment, starting with helmet ads and followed by front jersey patches on gameday uniforms. Contextually, the Canadiens' away jerseys feature the Air Canada logo in the upper right chest area whereas the name and shield for the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) is stitched onto its home counterpart.\nThe Canadiens' colours are a readily identifiable aspect of French Canadian culture. In the short story \"The Hockey Sweater\", Roch Carrier described the influence of the Canadiens and their jersey within rural Quebec communities during the 1940s. The story was later made into an animated short, \"The Sweater\", narrated by Carrier. A passage from the short story appears on the 2002 issuance of the Canadian five-dollar bill.\nMotto.\nTo you from failing hands we throw the torch. Be yours to hold it high.\nThe motto is from the poem \"In Flanders Fields\" by John McCrae, which was written in 1915, the year before the Canadiens won their first Stanley Cup championship. The motto appears on the wall of the Canadiens' dressing room as well as on the inside collar of the new Adidas Adizero jerseys introduced in 2017.\nMascot.\nBeginning in the 2004\u201305 season, the Canadiens adopted Youppi! as their official mascot, the first costumed mascot in their long history. The foregoing was the longtime mascot for Major League Baseball (MLB)'s Montreal Expos but was dropped from the franchise when they moved to Washington, D.C. prior to the 2005 MLB season and became the Washington Nationals. With the changeover, Youppi! became the first mascot in professional sports to switch leagues. He is also the first mascot in professional sports to get ejected from a game dating back to his time with the Expos. In June 2020, Youppi! became the first mascot from a Canadian-based club to be inducted into the Mascot Hall of Fame.\nIn November 2022, the Canadiens introduced METAL!, an \"unofficial official mascot\", for the team's Reverse Retro series of games that season. METAL! was retired ahead of the 2024\u201325 season.\nRivalries.\nToronto Maple Leafs.\nThe Canadiens have developed strong rivalries with two fellow Original Six franchises, with whom they frequently shared divisions and competed in postseason play. The oldest is with the Toronto Maple Leafs, who first faced the Canadiens as the Toronto Arenas in 1917. The teams met 16 times in the playoffs, including five Stanley Cup Final. Featuring the two largest cities in Canada and two of the largest fanbases in the league, the rivalry is sometimes dramatized as being emblematic of Canada's English and French linguistic divide. From 1938 to 1970, they were the only two Canadian teams in the league.\nBoston Bruins.\nThe team's other Original Six rivals are the Boston Bruins, who, since their NHL debut in 1924 have played the Canadiens more than any other team in both regular season play and the playoffs combined. The teams have played 34 playoff series, seven of which were in the finals.\nQuebec Nordiques (1979\u20131995).\nThe Canadiens also had an intraprovincial rivalry with the Quebec Nordiques during their existence from 1979 to 1995, nicknamed the \"Battle of Quebec\".\nBroadcasting.\nMontreal Canadiens games are broadcast locally in both the French and English languages. CHMP 98.5 is the Canadiens' French-language radio flagship. As of the 2017\u201318 season, the team's regional television in both languages, and its English-language radio rights, are held by Bell Media. CKGM, \"TSN Radio 690\", is the English-language radio flagship; it acquired the rights under a seven-year deal which began in the 2011\u201312 season. In June 2017, Bell Media reached a five-year extension.\nRegional television rights in French are held by R\u00e9seau des sports (RDS) under a 12-year deal that began in the 2014\u201315 season. A sister to the English-language network TSN, RDS was the only French-language sports channel in Canada until the 2011 launch of TVA Sports, and was also the previous national French rightsholder of the NHL; as a result, the Canadiens forwent a separate regional contract, and allowed all of its games to be televised nationally in French as part of RDS's overall NHL rights.\nWith TVA Sports becoming the national French rightsholder in the 2014\u201315 season through a sub-licensing agreement with Sportsnet, RDS subsequently announced a 12-year deal to maintain regional rights to Canadiens games not shown on TVA Sports. As a result, games on RDS are blacked out outside the Canadiens' home market of Quebec, Atlantic Canada and parts of Eastern Ontario shared with the Ottawa Senators. At least 22 Canadiens games per season (primarily through its Saturday night \"La super soir\u00e9e LNH\"), including all playoff games, are televised nationally by TVA Sports.\nTSN2 assumed the English-language regional television rights in the 2017\u201318 season, with John Bartlett on play-by-play, and Dave Poulin, Mike Johnson and Craig Button on colour commentary. All other games, including all playoff games, are televised nationally by Sportsnet or CBC. Bartlett returned to Sportsnet over the 2018 off-season, and was succeeded by Bryan Mudryk.\nEnglish-language regional rights were previously held by Sportsnet East (with CJNT \"City Montreal\" as an overflow channel), under a three-year deal that expired following the 2016\u201317 season; the games were called by Bartlett and Jason York. Prior to this deal, TSN held the rights from 2010 through 2014; the games were broadcast on a part-time channel with Dave Randorf on play-by-play.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a list of the last five seasons completed by the Canadiens. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Montreal Canadiens seasons.\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonoured members.\nRetired numbers.\nCollectively, the Canadiens have retired 15 numbers in honour of 18 players, the most of any team in the NHL. All honourees were born in Canada and were members of at least two Stanley Cup winning Canadiens teams. Howie Morenz was the first honouree, on November 2, 1937. The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky's No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.\nHall of Fame.\nThe Montreal Canadiens have an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame. Thirty-seven of these players are from three separate notable dynasties: 12 from 1955 to 1960, 11 from 1964 to 1969, and 13 from 1975 to 1979. Howie Morenz and Georges Vezina were the first Canadiens given the honour in 1945, while Shea Weber was the most recently inducted, in 2024. Along with players, a number of inductees from the builders category are affiliated with the club. The first inductee was vice president William Northey in 1945. The most recent inductee was Pat Burns in 2014.\nIn addition to players and builders, seven broadcasters for the Montreal Canadiens have been awarded the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award from the Hockey Hall of Fame. The first two recipients of the award were Danny Gallivan and Rene Lecavalier in 1984. The other five award recipients are Doug Smith (1985), Dick Irvin Jr. (1988), Richard Garneau (1999), Gilles Tremblay (2002), and Pierre Houde (2024).\nPlayers\nBuilders\nTeam captains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHead coaches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: \nFirst-round draft picks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise individual records.\nFranchise scoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games Played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecords \u2013 skaters.\nCareer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeason\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources: \nRecords \u2013 goaltenders.\nCareer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeason\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "42967", "revid": "50992914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42967", "title": "Ornithology", "text": "Study of birds\nOrnithology, from Ancient Greek \u1f44\u03c1\u03bd\u03b9\u03c2 (\"\u00f3rnis\"), meaning \"bird\", and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 (\"l\u00f3gos\"), meaning \"study\", is a branch of zoology dedicated to the study of birds. Several aspects of ornithology differ from related disciplines, due partly to the high visibility and the aesthetic appeal of birds. It has also been an area with a large contribution made by amateurs in terms of time, resources, and financial support. Studies on birds have helped develop key concepts in biology including evolution, behaviour and ecology such as the definition of species, the process of speciation, instinct, learning, ecological niches, guilds, insular biogeography, phylogeography, and conservation.\nWhile early ornithology was principally concerned with descriptions and distributions of species, ornithologists today seek answers to very specific questions, often using birds as models to test hypotheses or predictions based on theories. Most modern biological theories apply across life forms, and the number of scientists who identify themselves as \"ornithologists\" has therefore declined. A wide range of tools and techniques are used in ornithology, both inside the laboratory and out in the field, and innovations are constantly made. Most biologists who recognise themselves as \"ornithologists\" study specific biology research areas, such as anatomy, physiology, taxonomy (phylogenetics), ecology, or behaviour.\nDefinition and etymology.\nThe word \"ornithology\" comes from the late 16th-century Latin meaning \"bird science\" from the Greek (\"bird\") and (\"theory, science, thought\").\nHistory.\nThe history of ornithology largely reflects the trends in the history of biology, as well as many other scientific disciplines, including ecology, anatomy, physiology, paleontology, and more recently, molecular biology. Trends include the move from mere descriptions to the identification of patterns, thus towards elucidating the processes that produce these patterns. Since its modern views through scientific consensus of ornithology in the 21st century, birds are specifically descendants of small, feathered, maniraptoran theropods, which emerged from dinosaurs from the Jurassic period, 160 million years ago.\nEarly knowledge and study.\nHumans have had an observational relationship with birds since prehistory, with some stone-age drawings being amongst the oldest indications of an interest in birds. Birds were perhaps important as food sources, and bones of as many as 80 species have been found in excavations of early Stone Age settlements. Water bird and seabird remains have also been found in shell mounds on the island of Oronsay off the coast of Scotland.\nCultures around the world have rich vocabularies related to birds. Traditional bird names are often based on detailed knowledge of the behaviour, with many names being onomatopoeic, and still in use. Traditional knowledge may also involve the use of birds in folk medicine and knowledge of these practices is passed on through oral traditions (see ethnoornithology). Hunting of wild birds as well as their domestication would have required considerable knowledge of their habits. Poultry farming and falconry were practised from early times in many parts of the world. Artificial incubation of poultry was practised in China around 246\u00a0BC and at least around 400\u00a0BC in Egypt. The Egyptians also made use of birds in their hieroglyphic scripts, many of which, though stylized, are still identifiable to species. Early written records provide valuable information on the past distributions of species. For instance, Xenophon records the abundance of the ostrich in Assyria (Anabasis, i. 5); this subspecies from Asia Minor is extinct and all extant ostrich races are today restricted to Africa. Other old writings such as the Vedas (1500\u2013800 BC) demonstrate the careful observation of avian life histories and include the earliest reference to the habit of brood parasitism by the Asian koel (\"Eudynamys scolopaceus\"). Like writing, the early art of China, Japan, Persia, and India also demonstrates knowledge, with examples of scientifically accurate bird illustrations.\nAristotle in 350\u00a0BC in his \"History of animals\" noted the habits of bird migration, moulting, egg laying, and lifespans, as well as compiling a list of 170 different bird species. However, he also introduced and propagated several myths, such as the idea that swallows hibernated in winter, although he noted that cranes migrated from the steppes of Scythia to the marshes at the headwaters of the Nile. The idea of swallow hibernation became so well established that even as late as in 1878, Elliott Coues could list as many as 182 contemporary publications dealing with the hibernation of swallows and little published evidence to contradict the theory. Similar misconceptions existed regarding the breeding of barnacle geese. Their nests had not been seen, and they were believed to grow by transformations of goose barnacles, an idea that became prevalent from around the 11th century and noted by Bishop Giraldus Cambrensis (Gerald of Wales) in \"Topographia Hiberniae\" (1187). Around 77\u00a0AD, Pliny the Elder described birds, among other creatures, in his \"Historia Naturalis\".\nThe earliest record of falconry comes from the reign of Sargon II (722\u2013705 BC) in Assyria. Falconry is thought to have made its entry to Europe only after 400\u00a0AD, brought in from the east after invasions by the Huns and Alans. Starting from the eighth century, numerous Arabic works on the subject and general ornithology were written, as well as translations of the works of ancient writers from Greek and Syriac. In the 12th and 13th centuries, crusades and conquest had subjugated Islamic territories in southern Italy, central Spain, and the Levant under European rule, and for the first time translations into Latin of the great works of Arabic and Greek scholars were made with the help of Jewish and Muslim scholars, especially in Toledo, which had fallen into Christian hands in 1085 and whose libraries had escaped destruction. Michael Scotus from Scotland made a Latin translation of Aristotle's work on animals from Arabic here around 1215, which was disseminated widely and was the first time in a millennium that this foundational text on zoology became available to Europeans. Falconry was popular in the Norman court in Sicily, and a number of works on the subject were written in Palermo. Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen (1194\u20131250) learned about an falconry during his youth in Sicily and later built up a menagerie and sponsored translations of Arabic texts, among which the popular Arabic work known as the \"Liber Moaminus\" by an unknown author which was translated into Latin by Theodore of Antioch from Syria in 1240\u20131241 as the \"De Scientia Venandi per Aves\", and also Michael Scotus (who had removed to Palermo) translated Ibn S\u012bn\u0101's \"Kit\u0101b al-\u1e24ayaw\u0101n\" of 1027 for the Emperor, a commentary and scientific update of Aristotle's work which was part of Ibn S\u012bn\u0101's massive \"Kit\u0101b al-\u0160if\u0101\u02be\". Frederick II eventually wrote his own treatise on falconry, the \"De arte venandi cum avibus\", in which he related his ornithological observations and the results of the hunts and experiments his court enjoyed performing.\nSeveral early German and French scholars compiled old works and conducted new research on birds. These included Guillaume Rondelet, who described his observations in the Mediterranean, and Pierre Belon, who described the fish and birds that he had seen in France and the Levant. Belon's \"Book of Birds\" (1555) is a folio volume with descriptions of some 200 species. His comparison of the skeletons of humans and birds is considered as a landmark in comparative anatomy. Volcher Coiter (1534\u20131576), a Dutch anatomist, made detailed studies of the internal structures of birds and produced a classification of birds, \"De Differentiis Avium\" (around 1572), that was based on structure and habits. Konrad Gesner wrote the \"Vogelbuch\" and \"Icones avium omnium\" around 1557. Like Gesner, Ulisse Aldrovandi, an encyclopedic naturalist, began a 14-volume natural history with three volumes on birds, entitled \"ornithologiae hoc est de avibus historiae libri XII\", which was published from 1599 to 1603. Aldrovandi showed great interest in plants and animals, and his work included 3000 drawings of fruits, flowers, plants, and animals, published in 363 volumes. His \"Ornithology\" alone covers 2000 pages and included such aspects as the chicken and poultry techniques. He used a number of traits including behaviour, particularly bathing and dusting, to classify bird groups.\nWilliam Turner's \"Historia Avium\" (\"History of Birds\"), published at Cologne in 1544, was an early ornithological work from England. He noted the commonness of kites in English cities where they snatched food out of the hands of children. He included folk beliefs such as those of anglers. Anglers believed that the osprey emptied their fishponds and would kill them, mixing the flesh of the osprey into their fish bait. Turner's work reflected the violent times in which he lived, and stands in contrast to later works such as Gilbert White's 1789 \"The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne\" which were written in a tranquil era.\nIn the 17th century, Francis Willughby (1635\u20131672) and John Ray (1627\u20131705) created the first major system of bird classification that was based on function and morphology rather than on form or behaviour. Willughby's \"Ornithologiae libri tres\" (1676) completed by John Ray is sometimes considered to mark the beginning of scientific ornithology. Ray also worked on \"Ornithologia\", which was published posthumously in 1713 as \"Synopsis methodica avium et piscium\". The earliest list of British birds, \"Pinax Rerum Naturalium Britannicarum\", was written by Christopher Merrett in 1667, but authors such as John Ray considered it of little value. Ray did, however, value the expertise of the naturalist Sir Thomas Browne (1605\u20131682), who not only answered his queries on ornithological identification and nomenclature, but also those of Willoughby and Merrett in letter correspondence. Browne himself in his lifetime kept an eagle, owl, cormorant, bittern, and ostrich, penned a tract on falconry, and introduced the words \"incubation\" and \"oviparous\" into the English language. \nTowards the late 18th century, Mathurin Jacques Brisson (1723\u20131806) and Comte de Buffon (1707\u20131788) began new works on birds. Brisson produced a six-volume work \"Ornithologie\" in 1760 and Buffon's included nine volumes (volumes 16\u201324) on birds \"Histoire naturelle des oiseaux\" (1770\u20131785) in his work on science \" Histoire naturelle g\u00e9n\u00e9rale et particuli\u00e8re\" (1749\u20131804). Jacob Temminck sponsored Fran\u00e7ois Le Vaillant [1753\u20131824] to collect bird specimens in Southern Africa and Le Vaillant's six-volume (1796\u20131808) included many non-African birds. His other bird books produced in collaboration with the artist Barraband are considered among the most valuable illustrated guides ever produced. Louis Pierre Vieillot (1748\u20131831) spent 10 years studying North American birds and wrote the (1807\u20131808?). Vieillot pioneered in the use of life histories and habits in classification. Alexander Wilson composed a nine-volume work, \"American Ornithology\", published 1808\u20131814, which is the first such record of North American birds, significantly antedating Audubon. In the early 19th century, Lewis and Clark studied and identified many birds in the western United States. John James Audubon, born in 1785, observed and painted birds in France and later in the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. From 1827 to 1838, Audubon published \"The Birds of America\", which was engraved by Robert Havell Sr. and his son Robert Havell Jr. Containing 435 engravings, it is often regarded as the greatest ornithological work in history.\nScientific studies.\nThe emergence of ornithology as a scientific discipline began in the 18th century, when Mark Catesby published his two-volume \"Natural History of Carolina, Florida, and the Bahama Islands\", a landmark work which included 220 hand-painted engravings and was the basis for many of the species Carl Linnaeus described in the 1758 \"Systema Naturae\". Linnaeus' work revolutionised bird taxonomy by assigning every species a binomial name, categorising them into different genera. However, ornithology did not emerge as a specialised science until the Victorian era\u2014with the popularization of natural history, and the collection of natural objects such as bird eggs and skins. This specialization led to the formation in Britain of the British Ornithologists' Union in 1858. In 1859, the members founded its journal \"The Ibis\". The sudden spurt in ornithology was also due in part to colonialism. At 100 years later, in 1959, R. E. Moreau noted that ornithology in this period was preoccupied with the geographical distributions of various species of birds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No doubt the preoccupation with widely extended geographical ornithology, was fostered by the immensity of the areas over which British rule or influence stretched during the 19th century and for some time afterwards.\u2014\u200a\nThe bird collectors of the Victorian era observed the variations in bird forms and habits across geographic regions, noting local specialization and variation in widespread species. The collections of museums and private collectors grew with contributions from various parts of the world. The naming of species with binomials and the organization of birds into groups based on their similarities became the main work of museum specialists. The variations in widespread birds across geographical regions caused the introduction of trinomial names.\nThe search for patterns in the variations of birds was attempted by many. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775\u20131854), his student Johann Baptist von Spix (1781\u20131826), and several others believed that a hidden and innate mathematical order existed in the forms of birds. They believed that a \"natural\" classification was available and superior to \"artificial\" ones. A particularly popular idea was the Quinarian system popularised by Nicholas Aylward Vigors (1785\u20131840), William Sharp Macleay (1792\u20131865), William Swainson, and others. The idea was that nature followed a \"rule of five\" with five groups nested hierarchically. Some had attempted a rule of four, but Johann Jakob Kaup (1803\u20131873) insisted that the number five was special, noting that other natural entities such as the senses also came in fives. He followed this idea and demonstrated his view of the order within the crow family. Where he failed to find five genera, he left a blank insisting that a new genus would be found to fill these gaps. These ideas were replaced by more complex \"maps\" of affinities in works by Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alfred Russel Wallace. A major advance was made by Max F\u00fcrbringer in 1888, who established a comprehensive phylogeny of birds based on anatomy, morphology, distribution, and biology. This was developed further by Hans Gadow and others.\nThe Galapagos finches were especially influential in the development of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution. His contemporary Alfred Russel Wallace also noted these variations and the geographical separations between different forms leading to the study of biogeography. Wallace was influenced by the work of Philip Lutley Sclater on the distribution patterns of birds.\nFor Darwin, the problem was how species arose from a common ancestor, but he did not attempt to find rules for delineation of species. The species problem was tackled by the ornithologist Ernst Mayr, who was able to demonstrate that geographical isolation and the accumulation of genetic differences led to the splitting of species.\nEarly ornithologists were preoccupied with matters of species identification. Only systematics counted as true science and field studies were considered inferior through much of the 19th century. In 1901, Robert Ridgway wrote in the introduction to \"The Birds of North and Middle America\" that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are two essentially different kinds of ornithology: systematic or scientific, and popular. The former deals with the structure and classification of birds, their synonymies, and technical descriptions. The latter treats of their habits, songs, nesting, and other facts pertaining to their life histories.\nThis early idea that the study of living birds was merely recreation held sway until ecological theories became the predominant focus of ornithological studies. The study of birds in their habitats was particularly advanced in Germany with bird ringing stations established as early as 1903. By the 1920s, the \"Journal f\u00fcr Ornithologie\" included many papers on the behaviour, ecology, anatomy, and physiology, many written by Erwin Stresemann. Stresemann changed the editorial policy of the journal, leading both to a unification of field and laboratory studies and a shift of research from museums to universities. Ornithology in the United States continued to be dominated by museum studies of morphological variations, species identities, and geographic distributions, until it was influenced by Stresemann's student Ernst Mayr. In Britain, some of the earliest ornithological works that used the word ecology appeared in 1915. \"The Ibis\", however, resisted the introduction of these new methods of study, and no paper on ecology appeared until 1943. The work of David Lack on population ecology was pioneering. Newer quantitative approaches were introduced for the study of ecology and behaviour, and this was not readily accepted. For instance, Claud Ticehurst wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sometimes it seems that elaborate plans and statistics are made to prove what is commonplace knowledge to the mere collector, such as that hunting parties often travel more or less in circles.\nDavid Lack's studies on population ecology sought to find the processes involved in the regulation of population based on the evolution of optimal clutch sizes. He concluded that population was regulated primarily by density-dependent controls, and also suggested that natural selection produces life-history traits that maximize the fitness of individuals. Others, such as Wynne-Edwards, interpreted population regulation as a mechanism that aided the \"species\" rather than individuals. This led to widespread and sometimes bitter debate on what constituted the \"unit of selection\". Lack also pioneered the use of many new tools for ornithological research, including the idea of using radar to study bird migration.\nBirds were also widely used in studies of the niche hypothesis and Georgii Gause's competitive exclusion principle. Work on resource partitioning and the structuring of bird communities through competition were made by Robert MacArthur. Patterns of biodiversity also became a topic of interest. Work on the relationship of the number of species to area and its application in the study of island biogeography was pioneered by E. O. Wilson and Robert MacArthur. These studies led to the development of the discipline of landscape ecology.\nJohn Hurrell Crook studied the behaviour of weaverbirds and demonstrated the links between ecological conditions, behaviour, and social systems. Principles from economics were introduced to the study of biology by Jerram L. Brown in his work on explaining territorial behaviour. This led to more studies of behaviour that made use of cost-benefit analyses. The rising interest in sociobiology also led to a spurt of bird studies in this area.\nThe study of imprinting behaviour in ducks and geese by Konrad Lorenz and the studies of instinct in herring gulls by Nicolaas Tinbergen led to the establishment of the field of ethology. The study of learning became an area of interest and the study of bird songs has been a model for studies in neuroethology. The study of hormones and physiology in the control of behaviour has also been aided by bird models. These have helped in finding the proximate causes of circadian and seasonal cycles. Studies on migration have attempted to answer questions on the evolution of migration, orientation, and navigation.\nThe growth of genetics and the rise of molecular biology led to the application of the gene-centered view of evolution to explain avian phenomena. Studies on kinship and altruism, such as helpers, became of particular interest. The idea of inclusive fitness was used to interpret observations on behaviour and life history, and birds were widely used models for testing hypotheses based on theories postulated by W. D. Hamilton and others.\nThe new tools of molecular biology changed the study of bird systematics, which changed from being based on phenotype to the underlying genotype. The use of techniques such as DNA\u2013DNA hybridization to study evolutionary relationships was pioneered by Charles Sibley and Jon Edward Ahlquist, resulting in what is called the Sibley\u2013Ahlquist taxonomy. These early techniques have been replaced by newer ones based on mitochondrial DNA sequences and molecular phylogenetics approaches that make use of computational procedures for sequence alignment, construction of phylogenetic trees, and calibration of molecular clocks to infer evolutionary relationships. Molecular techniques are also widely used in studies of avian population biology and ecology.\nRise to popularity.\nThe use of field glasses or telescopes for bird observation began in the 1820s and 1830s, with pioneers such as J. Dovaston (who also pioneered in the use of bird feeders), but instruction manuals did not begin to insist on the use of optical aids such as \"a first-class telescope\" or \"field glass\" until the 1880s.\nThe rise of field guides for the identification of birds was another major innovation. The early guides such as Thomas Bewick's two-volume guide and William Yarrell's three-volume guide were cumbersome, and mainly focused on identifying specimens in the hand. The earliest of the new generation of field guides was prepared by Florence Merriam, sister of Clinton Hart Merriam, the mammalogist. This was published in 1887 in a series \"Hints to Audubon Workers: Fifty Birds and How to Know Them\" in Grinnell's \"Audubon Magazine\". These were followed by new field guides, \nfrom the pioneering illustrated handbooks of Frank Chapman to the classic \"Field Guide to the Birds\" by Roger Tory Peterson in 1934, to \"Birds of the West Indies\" published in 1936 by Dr. James Bond - the same who inspired the amateur ornithologist Ian Fleming in naming his famous literary spy.\nThe interest in birdwatching grew in popularity in many parts of the world, and the possibility for amateurs to contribute to biological studies was soon realized. As early as 1916, Julian Huxley wrote a two-part article in \"The Auk\", noting the tensions between amateurs and professionals, and suggested the possibility that the \"vast army of bird lovers and bird watchers could begin providing the data scientists needed to address the fundamental problems of biology.\" The amateur ornithologist Harold F. Mayfield noted that the field was also funded by non-professionals. He noted that in 1975, 12% of the papers in American ornithology journals were written by persons who were not employed in biology related work.\nOrganizations were started in many countries, and these grew rapidly in membership, most notable among them being the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) in Britain and the Audubon Society in the US, which started in 1885. Both these organizations were started with the primary objective of conservation. The RSPB, born in 1889, grew from a small Croydon-based group of women, including Eliza Phillips, Etta Lemon, Catherine Hall and Hannah Poland. Calling themselves the \"Fur, Fin, and Feather Folk\", the group met regularly and took a pledge \"to refrain from wearing the feathers of any birds not killed for the purpose of food, the ostrich only exempted.\" The organization did not allow men as members initially, avenging a policy of the British Ornithologists' Union to keep out women. Unlike the RSPB, which was primarily conservation oriented, the British Trust for Ornithology was started in 1933 with the aim of advancing ornithological research. Members were often involved in collaborative ornithological projects. These projects have resulted in atlases which detail the distribution of bird species across Britain. In Canada, citizen scientist Elsie Cassels studied migratory birds and was involved in establishing Gaetz Lakes bird sanctuary. In the United States, the Breeding Bird Surveys, conducted by the United States Geological Survey, have also produced atlases with information on breeding densities and changes in the density and distribution over time. Other volunteer collaborative ornithology projects were subsequently established in other parts of the world.\nTechniques.\nThe tools and techniques of ornithology are varied, and new inventions and approaches are quickly incorporated. The techniques may be broadly dealt under the categories of those that are applicable to specimens and those that are used in the field, but the classification is rough and many analysis techniques are usable both in the laboratory and field or may require a combination of field and laboratory techniques.\nCollections.\nThe earliest approaches to modern bird study involved the collection of eggs, a practice known as oology. While collecting became a pastime for many amateurs, the labels associated with these early egg collections made them unreliable for the serious study of bird breeding. To preserve eggs, a tiny hole was made and the contents extracted. This technique became standard with the invention of the blow drill around 1830. Egg collection is no longer popular; however, historic museum collections have been of value in determining the effects of pesticides such as DDT on physiology. Museum bird collections continue to act as a resource for taxonomic studies.\nThe use of bird skins to document species has been a standard part of systematic ornithology. Bird skins are prepared by retaining the key bones of the wings, legs, and skull along with the skin and feathers. In the past, they were treated with arsenic to prevent fungal and insect (mostly dermestid) attack. Arsenic, being toxic, was replaced by less-toxic borax. Amateur and professional collectors became familiar with these skinning techniques and started sending in their skins to museums, some of them from distant locations. This led to the formation of huge collections of bird skins in museums in Europe and North America. Many private collections were also formed. These became references for comparison of species, and the ornithologists at these museums were able to compare species from different locations, often places that they themselves never visited. Morphometrics of these skins, particularly the lengths of the tarsus, bill, tail, and wing became important in the descriptions of bird species. These skin collections have been used in more recent times for studies on molecular phylogenetics by the extraction of ancient DNA. The importance of type specimens in the description of species make skin collections a vital resource for systematic ornithology. However, with the rise of molecular techniques, establishing the taxonomic status of new discoveries, such as the Bulo Burti boubou (\"Laniarius liberatus\", no longer a valid species) and the Bugun liocichla (\"Liocichla bugunorum\"), using blood, DNA and feather samples as the holotype material, has now become possible.\nOther methods of preservation include the storage of specimens in spirit. Such wet specimens have special value in physiological and anatomical study, apart from providing better quality of DNA for molecular studies. Freeze drying of specimens is another technique that has the advantage of preserving stomach contents and anatomy, although it tends to shrink, making it less reliable for morphometrics.\nIn the field.\nThe study of birds in the field was helped enormously by improvements in optics. Photography made it possible to document birds in the field with great accuracy. High-power spotting scopes today allow observers to detect minute morphological differences that were earlier possible only by examination of the specimen \"in the hand\".\nThe capture and marking of birds enable detailed studies of life history. Techniques for capturing birds are varied and include the use of bird liming for perching birds, mist nets for woodland birds, cannon netting for open-area flocking birds, the \"bal-chatri\" trap for raptors, decoys and funnel traps for water birds.\nThe bird in the hand may be examined and measurements can be made, including standard lengths and weights. Feather moult and skull ossification provide indications of age and health. Sex can be determined by examination of anatomy in some sexually nondimorphic species. Blood samples may be drawn to determine hormonal conditions in studies of physiology, identify DNA markers for studying genetics and kinship in studies of breeding biology and phylogeography. Blood may also be used to identify pathogens and arthropod-borne viruses. Ectoparasites may be collected for studies of coevolution and zoonoses. In many cryptic species, measurements (such as the relative lengths of wing feathers in warblers) are vital in establishing identity. Captured birds are often marked for future recognition. Rings or bands provide long-lasting identification, but require capture for the information on them to be read. Field-identifiable marks such as coloured bands, wing tags, or dyes enable short-term studies where individual identification is required. Mark and recapture techniques make demographic studies possible. Ringing has traditionally been used in the study of migration. In recent times, satellite transmitters provide the ability to track migrating birds in near-real time.\nTechniques for estimating population density include point counts, transects, and territory mapping. Observations are made in the field using carefully designed protocols and the data may be analysed to estimate bird diversity, relative abundance, or absolute population densities. These methods may be used repeatedly over large timespans to monitor changes in the environment. Camera traps have been found to be a useful tool for the detection and documentation of elusive species, nest predators and in the quantitative analysis of frugivory, seed dispersal and behaviour.\nIn the laboratory.\nMany aspects of bird biology are difficult to study in the field. These include the study of behavioural and physiological changes that require a long duration of access to the bird. Nondestructive samples of blood or feathers taken during field studies may be studied in the laboratory. For instance, the variation in the ratios of stable hydrogen isotopes across latitudes makes establishing the origins of migrant birds possible using mass spectrometric analysis of feather samples. These techniques can be used in combination with other techniques such as ringing.\nThe first attenuated vaccine developed by Louis Pasteur, for fowl cholera, was tested on poultry in 1878. Anti-malarials were tested on birds which harbour avian-malarias. Poultry continues to be used as a model for many studies in non-mammalian immunology.\nStudies in bird behaviour include the use of tamed and trained birds in captivity. Studies on bird intelligence and song learning have been largely laboratory-based. Field researchers may make use of a wide range of techniques such as the use of dummy owls to elicit mobbing behaviour, and dummy males or the use of call playback to elicit territorial behaviour and thereby to establish the boundaries of bird territories. Studies of bird migration including aspects of navigation, orientation, and physiology are often studied using captive birds in special cages that record their activities. The Emlen funnel, for instance, makes use of a cage with an inkpad at the centre and a conical floor where the ink marks can be counted to identify the direction in which the bird attempts to fly. The funnel can have a transparent top and visible cues such as the direction of sunlight may be controlled using mirrors or the positions of the stars simulated in a planetarium.\nThe entire genome of the domestic fowl (\"Gallus gallus\") was sequenced in 2004, and was followed in 2008 by the genome of the zebra finch (\"Taeniopygia guttata\"). Such whole-genome sequencing projects allow for studies on evolutionary processes involved in speciation. Associations between the expression of genes and behaviour may be studied using candidate genes. Variations in the exploratory behaviour of great tits (\"Parus major\") have been found to be linked with a gene orthologous to the human gene \"DRD4\" (Dopamine receptor D4) which is known to be associated with novelty-seeking behaviour. The role of gene expression in developmental differences and morphological variations have been studied in Darwin's finches. The difference in the expression of \"Bmp4\" have been shown to be associated with changes in the growth and shape of the beak.\nThe chicken has long been a model organism for studying vertebrate developmental biology. As the embryo is readily accessible, its development can be easily followed (unlike mice). This also allows the use of electroporation for studying the effect of adding or silencing a gene. Other tools for perturbing their genetic makeup are chicken embryonic stem cells and viral vectors.\nCollaborative studies.\nWith the widespread interest in birds, use of a large number of people to work on collaborative ornithological projects that cover large geographic scales has been possible. These citizen science projects include nationwide projects such as the Christmas Bird Count, Backyard Bird Count, the North American Breeding Bird Survey, the Canadian EPOQ or regional projects such as the Asian Waterfowl Census and http:// in Europe. These projects help to identify distributions of birds, their population densities and changes over time, arrival and departure dates of migration, breeding seasonality, and even population genetics. The results of many of these projects are published as bird atlases. Studies of migration using bird ringing or colour marking often involve the cooperation of people and organizations in different countries.\nApplications.\nWild birds impact many human activities, while domesticated birds are important sources of eggs, meat, feathers, and other products. Applied and economic ornithology aim to reduce the ill effects of problem birds and enhance gains from beneficial species.\nThe role of some species of birds as pests has been well known, particularly in agriculture. Granivorous birds such as the queleas in Africa are among the most numerous birds in the world, and foraging flocks can cause devastation. Many insectivorous birds are also noted as beneficial in agriculture. Many early studies on the benefits or damages caused by birds in fields were made by analysis of stomach contents and observation of feeding behaviour. Modern studies aimed at managing birds in agriculture make use of a wide range of principles from ecology. Intensive aquaculture has brought humans into conflict with fish-eating birds such as cormorants.\nLarge flocks of pigeons and starlings in cities are often considered as a nuisance, and techniques to reduce their populations or their impacts are constantly innovated. Birds are also of medical importance, and their role as carriers of human diseases such as Japanese encephalitis, West Nile virus, and influenza H5N1 have been widely recognized. Bird strikes and the damage they cause in aviation are of particularly great importance, due to the fatal consequences and the level of economic losses caused. The airline industry incurs worldwide damages of an estimated US$1.2\u00a0billion each year.\nMany species of birds have been driven to extinction by human activities. Being conspicuous elements of the ecosystem, they have been considered as indicators of ecological health. They have also helped in gathering support for habitat conservation. Bird conservation requires specialized knowledge in aspects of biology and ecology, and may require the use of very location-specific approaches. Ornithologists contribute to conservation biology by studying the ecology of birds in the wild and identifying the key threats and ways of enhancing the survival of species. Critically endangered species such as the California condor have had to be captured and bred in captivity. Such \"ex situ\" conservation measures may be followed by reintroduction of the species into the wild.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42969", "revid": "50755384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42969", "title": "Dodge", "text": "American automobile manufacturer\nDodge is an American brand of automobiles and a division of Stellantis, based in Auburn Hills, Michigan. Dodge vehicles have historically included performance cars, and for much of its existence, Dodge was Chrysler's mid-priced brand above Plymouth.\nFounded as the Dodge Brothers Company machine shop by brothers Horace Elgin Dodge and John Francis Dodge in the early 1900s, Dodge was originally a supplier of parts and assemblies to Detroit-based automakers like Ford. They began building complete automobiles under the \"Dodge Brothers\" brand in 1914, predating the founding of the Chrysler Corporation. The factory located in Hamtramck, Michigan, was the Dodge main factory from 1910 until it closed in January 1980. John Dodge died from the Spanish flu in January 1920, having lungs weakened by tuberculosis 20 years earlier. Horace died in December of the same year, perhaps weakened by the Spanish flu, but the cause of death was cirrhosis of the liver. Their company was sold by their families to Dillon, Read &amp; Co. in 1925 before being sold to Chrysler in 1928.\nDodge's mainstay vehicles were trucks and full-sized passenger cars through the 1970s, but it also built compact cars such as the 1963 through 1976 Dart and midsize cars such as the \"B-Body\" Coronet and Charger from 1965 until 1978.\nThe 1973 oil embargo caused American \"gas guzzler\" sales to slump, prompting Chrysler to develop the Dodge Aries K platform compact and midsize cars for the 1981 model year. The K platform and its derivatives are credited with reviving Chrysler's business in the 1980s. One example was the Dodge Caravan.\nThe Dodge brand continued through multiple ownership changes of Chrysler from 1998 until 2009. These included its merger with Daimler-Benz AG between 1998 and 2007. Chrysler was subsequently sold by Daimler-Benz to Cerberus Capital Management. It went through the effects of the 2008\u20132010 automotive industry crisis on the United States resulting in the Chrysler Chapter 11 reorganization and ultimately being acquired by Fiat.\nIn 2011, Dodge and its sub-brands, Dodge Ram and Dodge Viper, were separated. Dodge announced that the Viper was to be an SRT product, and Ram a standalone marque. In 2014, SRT was merged back into Dodge. Later that year, the Chrysler Group was renamed FCA US LLC, coinciding with the merger of Fiat S.p.A.. The Chrysler Group was integrated into the corporate structure of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Subsequently, another merger occurred on January 16, 2021, between FCA and the PSA Group to form Stellantis, making the Dutch-domiciled automaker the second largest in Europe, after Volkswagen.\nHistory.\nFounding and early years.\nHorace and John Dodge founded the \"Dodge Brothers Company\" in Detroit in 1900, and quickly found work manufacturing precision engine and chassis components for the city's growing number of automobile firms. Chief among them were the established Olds Motor Vehicle Company and the new Ford Motor Company. Henry Ford selected the Dodge brothers to supply a wide range of components for his original Model A (1903\u201304) comprising the entire chassis: Ford needed to add only the body and wheels to finish the cars. Henry offered the Dodge brothers a 10% share in his new company in return for $10,000 worth of goods ($ in 2024 dollars). In 1902, the brothers won a contract to produce transmissions for Ransom E. Olds' company, Oldsmobile upon which they built a solid reputation for quality and service. They rejected a second contract from Oldsmobile in 1903, to retool their plant to manufacture engines for the Ford Motor Company, which would be in debt to the brothers.\nThe first machine shop where the brothers worked as parts suppliers for Olds and Ford was located at the Boydell Building on Beaubien Street at Lafayette. This location was replaced by a larger facility at Hastings Street and Monroe Avenue, which is now a parking garage for the Hollywood Casino (Hastings Street at this location has been renamed Chrysler Service Drive). By 1910 the Dodge Main factory was built in Hamtramck, where it remained until 1979.\nThe Dodge Brothers Motor Company was established in 1913 and by 1914, John and Horace designed and introduced the first car of their own \u2013 the four-cylinder Dodge Model 30-35 touring car. Marketed as a slightly more upscale competitor to the ubiquitous Ford Model T, it pioneered or made standard many features later taken for granted, such as all-steel bodies. The vast majority of cars worldwide still used wood-framing under steel panels, Other innovations were 12-volt electrical systems (6-volt systems would remain the norm until the 1950s), 35 horsepower engines versus the Model T's 20 horsepower, and sliding-gear transmission (the best-selling Model T retained an antiquated planetary design until its demise in 1927). John Dodge was quoted as saying, \"Someday, people who own a Ford are going to want an automobile.\" The company garnered a reputation for the highest quality truck, transmission, and motor parts supplied to other successful vehicles, and Dodge Brothers cars were ranked second in U.S. sales as early as 1916.\nThat same year, Henry Ford stopped paying stock dividends to finance the construction of his new River Rouge complex, and the Dodges filed a suit to protect their annual dividends of approximately one million dollars, leading Ford to buy out his shareholders. The Dodges were paid some US$25\u00a0million.($ in 2024 dollars) They had already earned $9,871,500 ($ in 2024 dollars) in dividends making a total return of $34,871,500 ($ in 2024 dollars) on their original $10,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) investment. The Ford contract set them up for life, but they never got to spend it.\nAlso in 1916, the Dodge Brothers vehicles won acclaim for their durability in military service. First with the U.S. Army's Pancho Villa Expedition, during the 1910s U.S. Mexico Border War\u2014the U.S. military's first operation to use truck convoys. General \"Blackjack\" Pershing procured a fleet of 150 to 250 Dodge Brothers vehicles for the Mexico campaign. Touring cars were used as staff and reconnaissance vehicles. Pershing himself used a Dodge touring car to keep abreast of army columns and control their movements.\nDuring an incident in May, the 6th Infantry reported a sighting of Julio C\u00e1rdenas, one of Villa's most trusted subordinates. Lt. George S. Patton led ten soldiers and two civilian guides in three Dodge Model 30 touring cars to conduct America's first motorized military raid at a ranch house in San Miguelito, Sonora. During the ensuing firefight, the party killed three men, with one identified as C\u00e1rdenas. Patton's men tied the bodies to the hoods of the Dodges, returning to headquarters in Dubl\u00e1n and an excited reception from US newspapermen.\nSubsequently, some 12,800 Dodge cars and light trucks were used in World War I\u2014over 8,000 touring cars, as well as 2,600 commercial vehicles, such as screen-side trucks and panel vans\u2014serving primarily as ambulances and repair trucks.\nDodge remained the United States military's primary supplier of light-wheeled vehicles until the U.S. joined the Second World War.\nDodge brothers death and sale to Chrysler.\nDodge Brothers cars continued to rank second place in American sales in 1920. However, the same year John Dodge died of pneumonia in January. His brother Horace then died of cirrhosis in December of the same year (reportedly still grieved over the loss of his brother, to whom he was very close). With the loss of both founders, the Dodge Brothers Company was left in the hands of their widows, Matilda Dodge Wilson and Anna Thompson Dodge, who promoted long-time employee Frederick Haynes to the presidency. During this time, the Model 30 was evolved to become the Series 116 (retaining the same basic construction and engineering features). As the 1920s progressed, Dodge gradually lost its ranking from the third-best-selling automaker to seventh place in the U.S. market.\nDodge Brothers expanded its truck line and became a leading builder of light trucks. After expanding production capacity, Haynes signed a contract in 1921 for Dodge's large dealer network to exclusively market trucks with bodies built by Graham Brothers of Evansville, Indiana. The Graham truck line from then on used only Dodge-built chassis, from 1-ton to 3-ton capacity, and Dodge kept making light-duty trucks.\nDevelopment was stagnating, and sales dropped Dodge Brothers to fifth place in the industry by 1925. That year, the Dodge Brothers company was sold by the widows to the investment group Dillon, Read &amp; Co. for no less than US$146\u00a0million which at the time was the largest cash transaction in history ($ in 2024 dollars).\nDillon, Read &amp; Co. offered non-voting stock on the market in the new Dodge Brothers firm, and along with the sale of bonds was able to raise $160\u00a0million ($ in 2024 dollars), reaping a $14\u00a0million (net) profit ($ in 2024 dollars). All voting stock was retained by Dillon, Read. Frederick Haynes remained as company head until E.G. Wilmer was named board chairman in November 1926. Wilmer was a banker with no auto experience and Haynes remained as president. Changes to the car, save for superficial things like trim levels and colors, remained minimal until 1927, when the new Senior six-cylinder line was introduced. The four-cylinder line was renamed the Fast Four line until it was dropped in favor of two lighter six-cylinder models (the Standard Six and Victory Six) for 1928.\nOn October 1, 1925, Dodge Brothers, Inc., acquired a 51% interest in Graham Brothers, Inc., for $13\u00a0million ($ in 2024 dollars) and the remaining 49% on May 1, 1926. Haynes purchased all of Graham's truck production, and in 1926, the Graham branch took charge of all of Dodge's truck manufacturing. Briefly \u2013 until the purchase by Chrysler \u2013 all trucks were Graham badged. A total of 60,000 trucks were built in 1927. The three Graham brothers, Robert, Joseph and Ray, assumed management positions in Dodge Brothers before departing early in 1927. The brothers established the Graham-Paige company to build a new line of Graham passenger cars.\nDespite this, Dodge Brothers' sales had dropped to thirteenth place in the industry by 1927 selling the Dodge Fast Four, and Dillon, Read began looking for someone to buy the company. Dodge was sold to the new Chrysler Corporation in 1928 in a stock transfer instead of cash for $170 million ($ in 2024 dollars) who had attempted to purchase Dodge two years earlier. Chrysler successfully purchased Dodge to gain the Dodge Factory and dealership network to better compete in the low-priced car field against Ford and Chevrolet, and in one year Dodge progressed from thirteenth place in sales to seventh place by 1928. On January 2, 1929, Chrysler announced that the Graham Badge was dropped, and Chrysler was now building Dodge Brothers trucks.\nPre-war years.\nTo fit better the Chrysler Corporation lineup, alongside low-priced Plymouth and medium-priced DeSoto, Dodge's lineup for early 1930 was trimmed down to a core group of two lines and thirteen models (from three lines and nineteen models just over a year previous). Prices started just above DeSoto but were somewhat less than top-of-the-line Chrysler, in a small-scale recreation of General Motors' \"step-up\" marketing concept. (DeSoto and Dodge would swap places in the market for the 1933 model year, Dodge dropping down between Plymouth and DeSoto.) As Plymouth cars were sold at Chrysler dealerships, Dodge branded vehicles were sold as a lower-cost alternative to DeSoto.\nFor 1930, Dodge took another step up by adding a new eight-cylinder line to replace the existing Senior six-cylinder. This basic format of a dual line with Six and Eight models continued through 1933, and the cars were gradually streamlined and lengthened in step with prevailing trends of the day. The Dodge Eight was replaced by a larger Dodge DeLuxe Six for 1934, which was dropped for 1935. A long-wheelbase edition of the remaining Six was added for 1936 and would remain a part of the lineup for many years. To enhance production, in 1932 Chrysler built a factory in Los Angeles, California where Chrysler, DeSoto, Dodge, and Plymouth vehicles were built until the factory closed in 1971.\nThe Dodge line, along with most of the corporation's output, was restyled in the so-called \"Wind Stream\" look for 1935. This was a mild form of streamlining, which saw sales jump remarkably over the previous year (even though Dodge as a whole still dropped to fifth place for the year after two years of holding down fourth). Dodge did not share the radical Airflow styling that was the cause of depressed sales of Chryslers and DeSotos from 1934 until 1937, as a passenger sedan, but it was used on commercial trucks for a short time. Dodge (along with the rest of Chrysler) added safety features such as a smooth, flat dashboard with no protruding knobs, curved in-door handles, and padded front-seat backs for the benefit of the rear-seat occupants.\nAnother major restyle arrived for the 25th-anniversary 1939 models, which Dodge dubbed the Luxury Liner series. These were once again completely redesigned, with new bodies for 1940, again in 1941, and a refreshing for 1942. However, just after the 1942 models were introduced, Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor forced the shutdown of Dodge's passenger car assembly lines in favor of war production in February 1942. 1941 saw the introduction of Fluid Drive for Dodge cars, which eliminated stalling or bucking if the clutch was released too quickly. This feature put a fluid coupling in between the engine and the clutch, although the driver still had to shift gears manually.\nWorld War II.\nChrysler was prolific in its production of war materiel, especially from 1942 until 1945. Dodge in particular was well known to both average citizens and thankful soldiers for their tough military-spec light trucks and WC54 ambulances. Dodge America \u2013 on paper under the Fargo Trucks name (in U.S. government contracts) \u2013 built over 400,000 trucks for the war, in its nearly new (1938) Warren truck plant at Mound Road, near Detroit, Michigan. Starting with the quickly converted VC and VF-series of 1940, Dodge built mostly light 4x4, but also light-medium 6x6 WC-series trucks, that evolved out of the VC-series. Smaller numbers of other models were built for China and Russia under Lend-Lease. Additionally, Chrysler Canada was enlisted to crank out another 180,000 Dodge trucks for the British and the Commonwealth militaries, over three-quarters of which were 3-ton trucks to be used in the CMP role.\nDodge readily built upon the reputation of the WC-series for itself, by carrying it over into civilian models after the war, beginning with the successful Power Wagon, introduced with minimal modification almost immediately after the war, in 1945, for the 1946 model year.\nPost-war years.\nCivilian production at Dodge was restarted by late 1945, in time for the 1946 model year. The \"seller's market\" of the early postwar years, brought on by the lack of any new cars throughout the war, meant that every automaker found it easy to sell vehicles regardless of any drawbacks they might have. Like almost every other automaker, Dodge sold lightly facelifted revisions of its 1942 design through the 1948 season. As before, these were a single series of six-cylinder models with two trim levels (basic Deluxe or plusher Custom). From 1949 until 1954, Fluid Drive could be combined with \"Gyro-Matic,\" a semi-automatic transmission that reduced (but did not eliminate) the need to shift gears.\nStyling was not initially Dodge's strong point during this period, but began to change by 1953 under the direction of corporate design chief Virgil Exner. However, the deluxe Coronet series, introduced for 1949, offered extra luxury as the top-of-the-line. The Coronet Diplomat, Dodge's first pillarless hardtop coupe, was new for 1950, at least one year before Ford, Plymouth, and other popular car makes offered it. At the same time, Dodge also introduced its first V8 engine \u2013 the Red Ram Hemi, a smaller version of the original design of the famed Chrysler Hemi. The new 1953 bodies were smaller and based on the Plymouth. For 1954, sales dropped, and the stubby styling did not go over well with the public. 1954 also saw the introduction of the fully automatic PowerFlite transmission.\nChrysler borrowed $250 million ($2,518,310,099.13 in 2021 Dollars) from Prudential in 1954 to finance expansion, acquisition, and updating the outdated styling of their car lines that contributed to Chrysler's failure to benefit from the postwar boom as GM and Ford were.\nExner led the development of the new corporate \"Forward Look\" styling of 1955, beginning a new era for Dodge. With steadily upgraded styling and ever-stronger engines every year through 1960, Dodge found a ready market for its products as America discovered the joys of freeway travel. This situation improved when Dodge introduced a new line of Dodges called the Dart to do battle against Ford, Chevrolet, and Plymouth. The result was that Dodge sales in the middle price class collapsed. Special and regional models were sold as well, including the LaFemme (a white and orchid-trimmed hardtop marketed toward women) and the Texan, a gold-accented Dodge sold in the Lone Star State. 1957 saw the introduction of a new automatic transmission, three-speed TorqueFlite. Both PowerFlite and TorqueFlite were controlled by mechanical push-buttons until 1965. 1956 saw the introduction of the 4-door pillarless hardtop (the same year most other makes offered this body style) in all three Dodge series, Custom Royal, Royal, and Coronet. Dodge's pillarless models were all badged \"Lancer.\"\nDodge entered the compact car field for the 1961 model year with the Lancer, a variation on Plymouth's Valiant. It was not initially successful but the successor, the 1963 Dart range would prove to be one of the division's top sellers for many years.\nChrysler made an ill-advised move to downsize the Dodge and Plymouth full-size lines for 1962, which resulted in a loss of sales. However, they turned this around in 1965 by turning those former full-sizes into \"new\" mid-size models; Dodge revived the Coronet nameplate in this way and later added a sporty fastback version called the Charger that became both a sales leader and a winner on the NASCAR circuit. This style dominated the racetracks for four years and the aerodynamic improvements changed the face of NASCAR racing.\nFull-size models evolved gradually during this time. After Dodge dealers complained about not having a true full-size car in the fall of 1961, the Custom 880 was hurried into production. The Custom 880 used the 1962 Chrysler Newport body with the 1961 Dodge front end and interior. The 880 continued into 1965, the year a completely new full-size body was put into production, the Polara entered the medium price class and the Monaco was added as the top series. The Polara and Monaco were changed mostly in appearance for the next ten years or so. Unique \"fuselage\" styling was employed from 1969 through 1973 and then was toned down again for the 1974 through 1977 models.\nDodge targeted the muscle car market of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Along with the Charger, models like the Coronet R/T and Super Bee were available for buyers seeking performance. Dodge entered the pony car market segment with the Challenger coupe and convertible for the 1970 model year. They were available with economy I6 engines and numerous trims and options up to the \"race-ready\" Hemi V8.\nTo offer a wider range of cars during the 1970s, Dodge partnered with Mitsubishi Motors to marketed their subcompact as the Colt positioned to compete with the AMC Gremlin, Chevrolet Vega, and Ford Pinto. Chrysler would come to rely heavily on their relationship with Mitsubishi. At the same time, Dodge marketed a version of the Plymouth Duster, badge-engineered as the Dodge Demon. It was inexpensive, but with I6 and V8 engines, the Demon could not achieve the fuel economy of the four-cylinder Colt. The Demon sold in much fewer numbers than the Duster.\n1973\u20131980.\nThe 1973 oil crisis caused significant changes at Dodge, as well as Chrysler as a whole. Except for the Colt and Slant Six models of the Dart, Dodge's lineup was viewed as uneconomical. Although this problem affected American automakers, Chrysler did not have the resources to respond to the changes in the marketplace. While General Motors and Ford began downsizing their largest cars, Chrysler (and Dodge) were slow to make change.\nChrysler was able to use some of its other resources. Borrowing the recently introduced Chrysler Horizon from their European division, Dodge was able to get its new Omni subcompact on the market fairly quickly. At the same time, they increased the number of models imported from Japanese partner Mitsubishi starting in 1971: first was a smaller Colt (based on Mitsubishi's Galant line), then a revival of the Challenger (Dodge Challenger) in 1976 as a compact two-door hardtop with a four-cylinder engine.\nThe 1975 model year had the Dodge Charger and Chrysler Cordoba share the same new body based on the B platform. The Chrysler Cordoba had replaced the Plymouth Satellite Sebring. The Charger SE (Special Edition) was the only model offered. It came with a wide variety engines from the \"LA\" series small block V8 to three versions of big block V8. The standard engine was the 2-bbl small block, along with the code E58 4-bbl and dual exhaust high-performance version (225\u00a0hp) available as an option. Sales in 1975 amounted to 30,812.\n1976 was the Dart's final year in the North American market. The rear-view mirror was mounted on the windshield rather than from the roof. Front disc brakes became standard equipment on January 1, 1976 in accord with more stringent U.S. federal brake performance requirements, and a new foot-operated parking brake replaced the under-dash T-handle used since the Dart's 1963 introduction as a compact car. The grille's parking lamps were cast in amber, whereas the previous years had clear lenses with amber-colored bulbs. The Dart Sport 360 was dropped as a separate model in 1976, but the four-barrel, dual exhaust (without catalytic converters) V8 was a $376 option (except in California) for the $3,370 Dart Sport V8 models with automatic transmission. \"Car &amp; Driver\" magazine tested the Dart Sport 360 in the April 1976 issue, pitting it against the Chevrolet Corvette and Pontiac Trans Am, and found its top speed of to be second to the Corvette's .\nDodge's replacement for the Dart was the Aspen, introduced in mid-1975 as a 1976 model. This new design featured lighter weight resulting in slightly improved fuel economy; it also had more interior and trunk room than the Dart. Front suspension was a new design; it featured transverse-mounted torsion bars which not only improved ride, but cornering as well. Its boxy styling gave the impression of a larger car. However, sales had to be shared with the virtually identical Plymouth Volare. Both cars were available in coupe, sedan, and station wagon body styles, and in both base and deluxe trim. Despite its virtues, customers soon found out about the Aspen's rush to market when they saw their cars experience severe body rust within a couple of years on the road; engine and drive train problems plagued the Aspen/Volare twins, and although the problems were largely worked out within a few years, the final Aspens were the 1980 models. This car was available with either a 225 cubic-inch Slant Six or a small block V8 displacing 318 or 360 cubic inches.\n1976 was the final model year for the Dodge Coronet, at least so far as the name Coronet went, also its body style choices were relegated to just only two four-door models, the four-door wagon and the four-door sedan. The former Dodge Coronet 2-door model, which appeared for just the previous model year was replaced by the Dodge Charger Sport 2-door model, which, itself, appeared for only one model year. During the next model year (1977), the mid-size Dodge Coronet would be renamed Monaco, which would be given stacked rectangular headlights and other minor cosmetic changes, that would provide a prompt sales boost. The Coronet and Charger were effectively replaced by the Diplomat for 1977, which was a fancier Aspen.\nAlso, during that same model year, the full-size Dodge Monaco would be renamed Dodge Royal Monaco, which would appear for just one model year only and after that, both Dodge and Plymouth (which would include Dodge Royal Monaco's entire Plymouth Gran Fury counterpart line up as well) would discontinue all production of any more full-size models. It lost sales every year until replaced by the St. Regis for 1979 following a one-year absence from the big car market. In a reversal of what happened in 1965, the St. Regis was an upsized Coronet. During the following model year (1978), the mid-size Dodge Monaco (which would include its entire Plymouth Fury counterpart lineup as well) would make its final appearance (for all during the remainder of the 1970s).\nWhile the Aspen got accolades for styling and handling, the build quality was problematic, sullying the car's reputation at a time when sales were desperately needed. It was noted for having problems with its carburetors which resulted in frequent stalling. The Aspen also had difficulties in starting, even after leaving the engine off for several minutes. This resulted in several recalls.\nThe Dodge Magnum was introduced for 1978 to supplement the Dodge Charger. It was sold in two forms, the \"XE\" and the \"GT\" and was the last vehicle to use the long-running Chrysler B platform. The appearance was somewhat of a rounded-off Charger and was in response to getting a car that would be eligible for NASCAR that would be more aerodynamic, something that the 1975\u20131978 Charger was not. Styling features included four rectangular headlights behind retractable clear covers, with narrow opera windows, and an optional T-bar or power sunroof. The Magnum was well-featured with power steering, brakes, and seats; the suspension included Chrysler's standard adjustable, longitudinal torsion bars, lower trailing links, and front and rear anti-sway bars. The base engine was the V8 with Lean-Burn, while two and four-barrel carbureted and V8s were optional; weight was nearly .\nThe Omni and Horizon were introduced at a critical time since the company was on the brink of bankruptcy and sought government support to survive. In 1978, Chrysler beat Ford and General Motors to the market with a domestically produced front-wheel drive car to challenge the VW Rabbit. However, the L-bodies miscarried at first, since 1978 was a year of strong sales for larger cars and demand for compacts and subcompacts noticeably shrank. These initial poor sales of the cars contributed to Chrysler's financial woes at the time, but when the company requested federal assistance, the Omni was an important piece of evidence that they were attempting to compete with imports and build small, fuel-efficient cars and might be worth saving. For the three years leading up to the introduction of Chrysler's K-cars, the Omni/Horizon was Chrysler's best-selling model line.\nEverything came to a head in 1979 when Chrysler's new chairman, Lee Iacocca, requested and received federal loan guarantees from the United States Congress to save the company from having to file for bankruptcy. With a Federal Loan in hand, Chrysler quickly set to work on new models that would leave the past behind, while reorganizing to pay the government loan which stood at 29%.\nThe Dodge Mirada was a mid-sized, rear-wheel drive coupe manufactured and marketed by Dodge from the 1980 through 1983 model years, sharing the Chrysler J platform along with its badge engineered variants, the second generation Chrysler Cordoba and the Imperial. Production of the Mirada reached just under 53,000 units, staying relatively unchanged over four years of production, except for paint colors and engines. The Mirada was marketed as a sporty personal luxury car with limited advertising and marketing during a period when Chrysler was in deep financial difficulty.\n1981\u20131990.\nThe first fruit of Chrysler's crash development program was the \"K-Car\", the Dodge version of which was the Dodge Aries. This basic and durable front-wheel drive platform spawned a whole range of new models at Dodge during the 1980s, including the groundbreaking Dodge Caravan. Lee Iacocca and Hal Sperlich developed their idea for this type of vehicle during their tenure at Ford Motor Company. Henry Ford II rejected the idea (and a prototype) of a minivan in 1974. Iacocca followed Sperlich to Chrysler, and together they created what was internally designated the T-115 minivan \u2013 a prototype that was to become the Caravan and Voyager, known in initial marketing as the Magic-wagons. Chrysler introduced the Dodge Caravan and the Plymouth Voyager in November 1983 for the 1984 model year, using the Chrysler S platform, an extended derivative of the Chrysler K platform. The Caravan not only helped save Chrysler as a serious high-volume American automaker, but also spawned an entirely new market segment that supplanted the role of the station wagon: the minivan.\nBy 1981, Chrysler was switching to smaller front-wheel drive designs. However, its older and larger rear-wheel drive Dodge Diplomat (as well as the Chrysler LeBaron and Fifth Avenue) continued to sell. Diplomats built from mid-1988 until the end of production were among the first Chrysler-built products to have a driver's side airbag as standard equipment, some two model years before the remainder of Chrysler's lineup (they were also among the only cars at the time to offer a tilt steering column with an airbag). As the 1980s progressed, fewer private customers purchased the Diplomat, and the M-body was eventually dropped during the 1989 model year. Although sales were strong, Chrysler CEO Lee Iacocca held a low opinion of the M-body line as a relic of the pre-K car era and declined to invest any money in them. \nDodge would not market another truly full-size car (at least based upon United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) passenger volume statistics) until the Monaco debuted as a 1990 model.\nThe Daytona originally used the 2.2\u00a0L Chrysler K engine in normally aspirated (93\u00a0hp) or turbocharged (142\u00a0hp) form. The 100 hp 2.5\u00a0L K engine was added for 1986. In 1985, the 2.2\u00a0L Turbo I engine's horsepower was increased to . The 1984 Daytona was available in three trim lines: standard, Turbo, and Turbo Z. Total production was 49,347. The Daytona Turbo was on \"Car and Driver\" magazine's 10Best list for 1984. Both the Daytona and Chrysler Laser were available with the Chrysler electronic voice alert system through 1987. A performance-oriented \"Shelby\" version of the Daytona was introduced in 1987. For 1987, the Daytona was restyled externally and featured pop-up headlights. New in 1987 was a \"Shelby Z\" trim level with an available Chrysler developed Turbo II ( \u2013 ) intercooled version of the 2.2\u00a0L Chrysler K engine, as well as a heavy-duty A555 transaxle with Getrag gears. The Shelby Z also featured numerous suspension upgrades, including a larger diameter front sway bar and disc brakes on all four wheels. This version was sold in Europe under the name \"Chrysler GS Turbo II\". A more luxury-oriented \"Pacifica\" trim line was also added to replace the Chrysler Laser, which was dropped in mid-year 1986. Among the optional equipment included a leather interior, an eight-way power enthusiast driver's seat (with mechanical thigh and lumbar controls), a digital instrument cluster, and a 12-button trip computer (with instant fuel ratings as well as trip averages and estimated travel times).\nThe Dodge Dynasty is related to the Chrysler New Yorker as both car lines were built on the Chrysler C platform in Belvidere, Illinois. Dynasty trim levels included base and LE. Additionally, a \"Brougham\" package was offered on 1992\u201393 LE models that added a padded \"landau\" vinyl roof. When the new front-wheel-drive Chrysler Corporation C-body cars (Dynasty and New Yorker) debuted for the 1988 model year, they were the first mass-produced cars in the world to have a fully multiplexed, fiber-optic wiring buss connecting all electronic accessories and controllers. The new electronically controlled four-speed automatic transmission, known as the Ultradrive or A604 (List of Chrysler transmissions), debuted in 1989, and became the sole transmission for V6 models through the 1993 final production year of the Dynasty. The vast majority of Dynasties sold to private customers had V6 engines; four-cylinder models mostly went to the fleet market.\nThrough the late 1980s and 1990s, Dodge's designation as the sporty-car division was backed by a succession of high-performance and/or aggressively styled models including the:\n1990s.\nThe Omni and the Horizon ended production in 1990, and were replaced by the Dodge Shadow/Plymouth Sundance, which were both introduced for 1987. Both the Monaco and Premier were discontinued during the 1992 model year. However, its state-of-the-art manufacturing plant and the key executive from American Motors behind the Premier/Monaco design, Fran\u00e7ois Castaing, would lead to the successful and highly rated \"cab-forward\" LH Dodge Intrepid, Chrysler Concorde, and Eagle Vision versions in late 1992 when production resumed at Brampton Assembly.\nDodge-branded Mitsubishi vehicles were phased out by 1993 except for the Dodge Stealth running through 1996. However, Mitsubishi-made engines and electrical components were still widely used in American domestic Chrysler products.\nIn 1992, Dodge moved their performance orientation forward substantially with the Viper, which featured an aluminum V10 engine and composite sports roadster body. This was the first step in what was marketed as \"The New Dodge\", which was an aggressive advertising campaign with a litany of new models, with television ads narrated by Edward Herrmann that pointed out the innovations in the vehicles and challenged their competitors. Also, he would go on to serve as the brand's spokesperson for the rest of the decade.\nLater that year was the introduction of the new Intrepid sedan, substantially different from its boxy Dynasty predecessor. The Intrepid used what Chrysler called \"cab forward\" styling, with the wheels pushed out to the corners of the chassis for maximum passenger space. The Intrepid was available in two trim levels: base and the sportier, better-equipped ES, which added four-wheel disc brakes, 16-inch wheels with better tires, and stiffer \"touring\" suspension damping. All Intrepids received driver and front passenger airbags, a rarity at the time, as well as air conditioning and the four-speed automatic transmission. Anti-lock brakes were optional, as was traction control, and the more powerful 3.5\u00a0L SOHC engine rated at (214\u00a0hp).\nIn 1994, the new second-generation Dodge Ram pickup was introduced with bold styling that departed radically from the boxy designs of trucks made by the Big Three for two decades prior. The second-generation Ram began development in 1986. The original concept, dubbed the \"Louisville Slugger\" by Chrysler's Advanced Packaging Studio, was to be a modular platform that would accommodate a full-size truck and full-size van, which would have provided a roomy cab and cargo bed. The design featured a big-rig-looking front end and a large grille that was deemed risky at its introduction, but ultimately proved popular with consumers. The redesigned 1994 Ram was a sales success and was named \"Truck of the Year\" by \"Motor Trend\" in 1994. Sales increased from 95,542 units in 1993 to 232,092 in 1994, 410,000 in 1995, and 411,000 by 1996. That year, it was prominently featured as the hero vehicle in the film \"Twister\". Sales of this generation peaked at just over 400,000 in 1999 before declining against the redesigned Ford and GM trucks.\nThey followed up on this idea on a smaller scale with the Neon and Stratus. The Dodge Stratus was the middle entry of the Chrysler JA platform (with the Cirrus being the higher-end model and the Breeze being the lower-end model). The three cars differed only in the front fascia, rear bumper, taillights, and wheels. The interiors also had little variation between the three models; being almost identical, save for the name on the steering wheel, and a few available options. The Stratus directly replaced the high-volume Spirit (United States only). The Stratus, Plymouth Breeze, and Chrysler Cirrus were all on \"Car and Driver\" magazine's Ten Best list for 1996 and 1997. It received critical acclaim at launch, but ratings fell over time.\nThe Neon was badged and sold as both a Dodge and a Plymouth in the United States and Canada; in Mexico was sold as Dodge and Chrysler, and in Europe, Australia and other export markets it was sold as the Chrysler Neon. At the Neon's release, then president of Chrysler Corporation Bob Lutz said, \"There's an old saying in Detroit: 'Good, fast, or cheap. Pick any two.' We refuse to accept that.\" The Japanese press touted the Neon as the \"Japanese car killer\", due to a spiraling Yen and the lower production cost of the Neon. The Neon, with SOHC and DOHC versions of Chrysler's 2.0 L 4-cylinder engine, received praise for its appearance, price, and power when compared to competing cars such as the Honda Civic DX at , the Civic EX at , the Nissan Sentra at , the Ford Escort ZX2 at , the Toyota Corolla at , the Saturn S-Series at for SOHC variants and for DOHC variants, and the Chevrolet Cavalier Base and LS models at , among others.\nThe Dodge Durango is a mid-size sport utility vehicle (SUV) produced by Dodge. The first two generations were very similar in that both were based on the Dodge Dakota, both featured a body-on-frame construction and both were produced at the Newark Assembly Plant in Newark, Delaware. The Durango was marketed as a sturdy truck-based SUV designed to hold up to seven passengers and tow up to when properly equipped. The Durango shared a front end, instrument panel, and front seats with the Dakota pickup on which it was based. Original designs of the eight-passenger Durango featured a rear-facing third-row similar to many older station wagons. To make room for a more practical forward-facing third row, Dodge shortened the length of the front doors and raised the roof two inches (5\u00a0cm) beyond the front seats, allowing for stadium seating. The Durango's roof rack was designed to mask the appearance of the raised roof.\nThe modern era: 1998\u2013present.\nDaimlerChrysler and private ownership.\nIn a move that never lived up to the expectations of its driving forces, Chrysler Corporation merged with Daimler-Benz AG in 1998 to form DaimlerChrysler. Rationalizing Chrysler's broad lineup was a priority, Dodge's sister brand Plymouth was withdrawn from the market. With this move, Dodge became DaimlerChrysler's low-price division as well as its performance division.\nThe Intrepid, Stratus, and Neon updates of the 1998 to 2000 timeframe were largely complete before Daimler's presence, and Dodge's first experience of any platform sharing with the German side of the company was the 2005 Magnum station wagon, introduced as a replacement for the Intrepid. Featuring Chrysler's first mainstream rear-wheel drive platform since the 1980s and a revival of the Hemi V8 engine. The Charger was launched in 2006 on the same platform.\nIn 2000, the Stratus became the last of the surviving Cloud Cars, with the Cirrus renamed as the Sebring, and the Breeze discontinued (along with the Plymouth brand).\nThis generation of the Dodge Stratus was not sold in Canada, although 1999 was the last year for Dodge Stratus sales in Canada. 2002 models dropped the \"DODGE\" badges from the doors. During this time, sales declined as its ratings from consumer and auto magazines fell below average among mid-size cars, while the sedan market had shifted and pushed the larger Intrepid and later Charger to record sales. 2004 brought styling revisions, which did not reverse this trend. The Stratus was discontinued in May 2006 (the Sebring name was continued). \nThe Dodge Avenger name returned in February 2007 as a 2008 model year sedan to replace the Dodge Stratus, whose coupe version had replaced the original Avenger in 2001. According to some reports, the Avenger, along with the redesigned Chrysler Sebring, shares a DaimlerChrysler/Mitsubishi Motors platform called JS which used the Mitsubishi GS as a starting point. The base engine in the SE and SXT trim levels was the 2.4\u00a0L GEMA I4 naturally aspirated \"World Engine\", a joint venture between DaimlerChrysler, Mitsubishi, and Hyundai. Additional engines included an optional 2.7\u00a0L V6 in the SXT and a standard 3.5\u00a0L V6 in the R/T trim level. In addition to the 2.4\u00a0L \"World Engine\" and the V6s, export vehicles were offered with the 2.0\u00a0L naturally aspirated \"World Engine\", as well as a 2.0\u00a0L turbocharged diesel (Pumpe-D\u00fcse) made by Volkswagen. As a 2008 model, the Dodge Avenger came to showrooms in February 2007.\nFurther cost savings were explored in the form of an extensive platform-sharing arrangement with Mitsubishi, which spawned the Caliber subcompact as a replacement for the Neon, and the Avenger sedan. The rear-drive chassis was then used in early 2008 to build a new Challenger, with styling reminiscent of the original 1970 Challenger. Like its predecessor, the new Challenger coupe was available with a V8 engine (base models featured a V6). In Spring 2007, DaimlerChrysler reached an agreement with Cerberus Capital Management to sell its Chrysler Group subsidiary, of which the Dodge division was a part. Soon after, the housing bubble began to collapse the American market, and on May 1, 2009, Chrysler and GM filed for bankruptcy on the same day.\nFiat ownership.\nOn June 10, 2009, Italian automaker Fiat formed a partnership with Chrysler under Sergio Marchionne, with the UAW, and the US Government to form Chrysler Group LLC, of which Dodge remained fully integrated. For its part, the US Government provided more than $6 billion in loans at 21%, called a \"bridge loan\" or \"bailout\". The newly formed company went on to fully repay that loan, remortgaging to reduce the interest rate several times down to 6%. They fully paid back the loan with interest to the U.S. Government on May 24, 2011, a full five years early. The UAW, being partners throughout the process, were paid well and above $3.9 billion in 2013 as Sergio's plan for full consolidation has continued on schedule. This has allowed Chrysler LLC to fully merge with Fiat to form FCA, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, in 2014. The combined company will be based in London.\nIn 2013, Dodge reintroduced a compact car based on an Alfa Romeo design called the Dart. It was the first new Dodge model produced under FCA.\nOn May 6, 2014, FCA announced a major restructuring, in which Dodge would focus solely on performance vehicles and will be positioned between Chrysler (which is moving downmarket into mainstream vehicles) and a relaunched Alfa Romeo (making its return to North America after a 20-year absence) in the FCA lineup. This is a setup similar to PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn, which positions Peugeot as its mainstream brand while Citro\u00ebn is more performance-based, as well as Hyundai Motor Group having its two mainstream brands, Kia Motors and Hyundai Motor Company focusing on performance and mid-luxury, respectively. (Among the American press, it has drawn comparisons to the decades-long positioning of Chevrolet and Pontiac at General Motors before the phase-out of Pontiac in 2010.) As part of the restructuring, Dodge will discontinue the Dodge Grand Caravan (after 32 years) and Dodge Avenger without replacements, while launching a sporty subcompact below the Dart in 2018. Additionally, while the Ram Trucks division will remain separate (although the Dodge Durango will remain in production as a Dodge), the SRT division was merged back into Dodge.\nOn July 8, 2020, FCA announced that Dodge will shift its focus to a performance marque offering three core brands, Charger, Challenger, and Durango, starting with the 2021 model year. Both the Journey and Grand Caravan were discontinued with the 2020 model year models.\nList of CEOs.\n\"Current\" Matt McAlear (since June 1st 2024)\nDodge trucks.\nOver the decades, Dodge has become well known for its passenger car output, along with its many truck models, but after almost a century of manufacturing these vehicles, a decision was made to spin off Dodge's trucks into a separate Ram brand, based on the popularity of their top-selling truck, the Dodge Ram. Although the Ram trucks are marketed separately from Dodge cars, Ram President Fred Diaz has said:\nRam trucks will always and forever be Dodges. Ram will always have the Dodge emblem inside and outside and they will be \"'vinned'\" (from the acronym VIN, or Vehicle Identification Number) as a Dodge. We need to continue to market as Ram so Dodge can have a different brand identity: hip, cool, young, energetic. That will not fit the campaign for truck buyers. The two should have distinct themes.\nPickups and medium to heavy trucks.\nEver since Dodge began building their cars in 1914, the company also offered light truck models. Initially, these were largely based on the existing passenger cars, but eventually gained their own chassis and body designs as the market matured. During the 1930s and 1940s, light- and medium-duty models were offered at first, then a heavy-duty range was added. The very large, new Warren Truck Assembly plant was built in Michigan, just north of Detroit, and opened in 1938, producing Dodge trucks ever since.\nIn 1936, Dodge's light, car-based trucks were crucially redesigned\u2014not only receiving a new \"Fore-Point\" (similar to Cab Forward) design of the front side and cab\u2014but especially, the old car frames were dropped and for the first time replaced by modern, truck-style chassis, with side rails \"welded\" to the cross members. These welded frames were from here on introduced on half-ton to one-ton rated trucks, expanding Dodge into a heavier truck market segment than before.\nIn 1939 again, Dodge presented a completely redesigned line of pickups and trucks, with streamlined new, 'art-deco' front sheet metal styling. Introducing the concept of \"Job-Rated\", Dodge tried to offer customers the truck that fit every job they were buying it for. From the 1939 'Job-Rated' trucks onwards, Dodge's light and medium trucks were built in its 'Mound Road\" plant in Warren, Michigan.\nFollowing World War II and the successful application of four-wheel drive to the truck line, Dodge introduced a civilian version that it called the Power Wagon. At first, based almost exactly on the military-type design, variants of the standard truck line were eventually given 4WD and the same \"Power Wagon\" name.\nDodge was among the first to introduce car-like features to its trucks, adding the plush Adventurer package during the 1960s and offering sedan-like space in its Club Cab bodies of the 1970s. Declining sales and increased competition during the 1970s eventually forced the company to drop its medium- and heavy-duty models, an arena the company has only recently begun to reenter.\nDodge introduced what they called the \"Adult Toys\" line to boost its truck sales in the late 1970s, starting with the limited edition Lil' Red Express pickup (featuring, a 360 c.i. police interceptor engine and visible big rig-style exhaust stacks). Later came the more widely available Warlock. Other \"Adult Toys\" from Dodge included the \"Macho Power Wagon\" and \"Street Van\".\nAs part of a general decline in the commercial vehicle field during the 1970s, Dodge eliminated their LCF Series heavy-duty trucks in 1975, along with the Bighorn and medium-duty D-Series trucks, and affiliated S Series school buses were dropped in 1978. On the other hand, Dodge produced several thousand pickups for the United States Military under the CUCV program from the late 1970s into the early 1980s.\nContinuing financial problems meant that even Dodge's light-duty models \u2013 renamed as the Ram Pickup line for 1981 \u2013 were carried over with the most minimal of updates until 1993. Two things helped to revitalize Dodge's fortunes during this time. One was the introduction of Cummins' powerful and reliable B Series turbo-diesel engine as an option for 1989. This innovation raised Dodge's profile among consumers who needed power for towing or large loads. The second was a class-exclusive V8 engine option for the mid-sized Dakota pickup.\nDodge introduced the Ram's all-new \"big-rig\" styling treatment for 1994. Besides its instantly polarizing looks, exposure was also gained by usage of the new truck on the hit TV show \"Walker, Texas Ranger\" starring Chuck Norris. The new Ram also featured a new interior with a console box big enough to hold a laptop computer, and ventilation and radio controls that were designed to be easily used even with gloves on. A V10 engine derived from that used in the Viper sports car was also new, and the previously offered Cummins turbodiesel remained available. The smaller Dakota was redesigned for 1997 using the \"big-rig\" styling, thus giving Dodge trucks a definitive \"face\" that set them apart from the competition.\nThe Ram was redesigned again for 2002, and the Dakota in 2005, and was an evolution of the original, but adding the Hemi V8 engine to the list of available options, due to the revival of the legendary Chrysler Hemi V8 engine. New medium-duty chassis-cab models were introduced for 2007 with standard Cummins turbodiesel power as a way of gradually getting Dodge back into the business truck market again.\nFor a time during the 1980s, Dodge imported a line of small pickups from Mitsubishi, known as the D50, or later the Ram 50 and were carried on as a stopgap until the Dakota's sales eventually made the imported trucks irrelevant. Reversing the role, Mitsubishi has more recently purchased Dakota pickups from Dodge and restyled them into their own Raider line for sale in North America.\nVans.\nDodge built panel delivery models for many years since its founding, but their first purpose-built van model arrived for the 1964 model year with the compact A Series. Based on the Dodge Dart platform and using its proven six-cylinder or V8 engines, the A-series was a strong competitor for both its domestic rivals (from Ford and Chevrolet/GMC) and the diminutive Volkswagen Transporter line.\nAs the market evolved, Dodge realized that a bigger and stronger van line would be needed in the future. The B Series was introduced for 1971 offering both car-like comfort in its Sportsman passenger line or expansive room for gear and materials in its Tradesman cargo line. A chassis cab version was also offered for use with bigger cargo boxes or flatbeds. Like the trucks, Chrysler's dire financial straits of the late 1970s precluded any major updates for the vans for many years. Rebadged as the Ram Van and Ram Wagon for 1981, this old design carried on for 33 years with little more than cosmetic and safety updates until 2003.\nThe DaimlerChrysler merger of 1998 made it possible for Dodge to explore new ideas; hence the European-styled Mercedes-Benz Sprinter line of vans was brought over and given a Dodge styling treatment. Redesigned for 2006 as a 2007 model, the economical diesel-powered Sprinters have become very popular for city usage among delivery companies like FedEx and UPS in recent years. Because of their fuel efficiency major motorhome manufacturer Thor Motor Coach made several Class C and Class A Motorhomes available on the Dodge Sprinter Chassis including their Four Winds Siesta &amp; Chateau Citation product lines.\nDodge also offered a cargo version of its best-selling Caravan for many years, at first calling it the Mini Ram Van, which was a name originally applied to the short-wheelbase B Series Ram Vans, and later naming it the Caravan C/V, the C/V stood for Cargo Van. For model year 2012, the Caravan C/V was rebranded as a Ram and was renamed the Ram C/V.\nThe Grand Caravan became Dodge's last minivan, as it was discontinued after the 2020 model year to introduce the Chrysler Voyager for the 2021 model year.\nSport utility vehicles.\nDodge's first experiments with anything like a sport utility vehicle appeared in the late 1950s with a windowed version of their standard panel truck \u2013 known as the Town Wagon. These were built in the same style through the mid-1960s.\nBut the division never entered the SUV arena in seriousness until 1974, with the purpose-built Ramcharger. Offering the then-popular open body style and Dodge's powerful V8 engines, the Ramcharger was a strong competitor for trucks like the Ford Bronco, Chevrolet Blazer and International Scout II.\nDodge was left with outdated products during the 1980s as the market evolved. The Ramcharger hung on through 1993 with only minor updates. When the Ram truck was redesigned for the 1994 model year, the Ramcharger was discontinued in the American and Canadian markets. A version using the updated styling was made for the Mexican Market but was never imported to the U.S. or Canada.\nUsing the mid-sized Dakota pickup's chassis as a base, Dodge introduced the 1997 four-door Durango SUV with seating for eight people and was sized between smaller SUVs (like the Chevrolet Blazer and Ford Explorer) and larger models (like the Chevrolet Tahoe and Ford Expedition). The redesigned version for 2004 grew a little in every dimension, becoming a full-size SUV, but was still sized between most of its competitors. For 2011 a new unibody Durango based on the Jeep Grand Cherokee was released. The 2011 Durango shrank slightly to a size comparable to the original model. With the Journey being discontinued in 2020, the Durango became the only SUV offering in the Dodge lineup.\nDodge also imported a version of Mitsubishi's popular Montero (Pajero in Japan) as the Raider from 1987 until 1989.\nHigh-performance vehicles.\nFrom the early 2000s, Dodge's highest-performing vehicles were marketed under Street &amp; Racing Technology (SRT) branding. These models often came equipped with high-performance V8s. These models included the Dodge Challenger SRT (2008\u2013current), Dodge Charger SRT (2006\u2013current), Dodge Magnum SRT (2006\u20132008) and Dodge Durango SRT (2018-current-). They also produced the Dodge Neon SRT-4 (2003\u20132005), Dodge Caliber SRT-4 (2008\u20132009), Dodge Viper (1991\u20132010; 2012\u20132017), and Dodge Ram SRT-10 (2004\u20132006). In 2015, FCA introduced the Hellcat, a 707 HP, supercharged 6.2\u00a0L Hemi V8. In 2017, Dodge released the Dodge Challenger SRT Demon. It is powered by an 840 HP supercharged 6.2\u00a0L Hemi V8, and comes from the factory with a toolbox known as the \"Demon Toolbox\" that has everything a buyer will need to drag race, including the skinny front drag tires. However, buyers will only get 840 HP on race fuel. On regular pump gas, it produces 808 HP, a 101 HP increase over the Hellcat.\nInternational markets.\nArgentina.\nDodge came to Argentina in the early 20th century with imported cars and trucks. In 1960, it partnered with Fevre-Basset as a local manufacturer. The first vehicle made in Argentina was the D-100 \"Sweptline\" pickup. Between 1961 and 1980, a variety of trucks were produced, including the D-400/DP-400, D-500/DP-500, DP600, DD900 and DD1000 (the last two with one curiosity: the air-cooled Deutz engine rather Perkins or Chrysler). Passenger cars were also produced, namely the Valiant I and II, and the local versions of the 1966 Dodge Dart (called Valiant III and IV). In 1971, the Dodge 1500, a rebadged Hillman Avenger from the United Kingdom was introduced. In 1982, production of Dodge vehicles ceased when German company Volkswagen bought the Fevre factory.\nIn Argentina, the name \"Polara\" was used to refer to a series of vehicles developed based on the fourth-generation North American Dodge Dart. These cars were manufactured between 1968 and 1980, by the subsidiary Chrysler-Fevre Argentina S.A.\nIn 1993, Dodge began marketing cars and pick-ups directly in Argentina. Currently, both the Journey and the Ram are available to Argentine customers.\nAsia.\nDodge entered the Japanese market in mid-2007 and re-entered the Chinese market in late 2007. Soueast Motors of China assembled the Caravan for the Chinese market. Dodge marketed its vehicles in South Korea in 2004, starting with the Dakota. Dodge vehicles are no longer marketed in China, Japan, and South Korea. In the Philippines, Dodge vehicles have been distributed by Auto Nation Group (formerly known as CATS Motors) since the 2000s. Dodge vehicles are also distributed in some Middle Eastern countries.\nAustralia.\nVehicles were produced in Australia under the Dodge name by Chrysler Australia from the 1950s through to the 1970s.\nDodge re-entered the Australian market in 2006 with the Caliber, their first offering since the AT4/D5N trucks in 1979 and the first Dodge passenger car to be marketed in Australia since the Phoenix sedan was discontinued in 1973. The second model to be introduced was the Nitro, with the Avenger and Journey followed. Dodge chose not to use the full model lines and engines available to them, the 2.7\u00a0L V6 being available in the Journey and Avenger instead of the 3.2\u00a0L in the North American versions. However, diesel engines were introduced in all their cars.\nAfter the 2008 financial crisis, Chrysler introduced the facelifted model of the Caliber and discontinued the Avenger imports. From early 2012 on, model year 2010 cars were available. By early 2012 no new cars were imported into Australia aside from the facelifted 2012 Journey.\nThere were rumors that Dodge cars would be re-badged as Fiats in the Australian market as was the case in Europe. The Dodge nameplate continued due to consistent sales of the Journey. However, the brand was discontinued in the Australian market after 2016.\nThe Dodge Kingsway was also assembled in India, by Premier Automobiles Limited, until the late 1950s.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, Dodge cars were produced between 1969 and 1981 with the models Dart, Charger, Magnum, LeBaron (all powered by the same 318\u00a0cid V8 engine), and the compact 1800/Polara, based on the British Hillman Avenger. The manufacturer was acquired by Volkswagen in 1981. In 1998, the Dakota pickup started production in a new plant in Campo Largo, Paran\u00e1 by Mercedes-Benz, which belongs to its former partner Daimler AG. It was built there until 2001 with petrol and diesel engines and regular, extended, and crew cabs. In 2010, Dodge started sales of the imported pickup Ram 2500. The model portfolio is being expanded, starting with the Journey crossover for the 2009 model year. The marque ended the sales of its last product, the Journey in 2019, remaining only to serve the existing customers.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the Dodge lineup of cars started down the road to elimination along with the Plymouth line when in 1988 the Dodge Dynasty was sold in Canada as the Chrysler Dynasty and sold at both Plymouth and Dodge dealers. Similarly, the new Dodge Intrepid, the Dynasty's replacement, was sold as the Chrysler Intrepid.\nFor 2000, the new Neon became the Chrysler Neon. The Chrysler Cirrus and Mitsubishi-built Dodge Avenger were dropped. Dodge trucks, which have been sold at Canadian Plymouth dealers since 1973, continued without change. All Plymouth-Chrysler and Dodge-Chrysler dealers became Chrysler-Dodge-Jeep dealers.\nThe diluting of the Chrysler name did not go well in Canada, especially as the nameplate had been pushed as a luxury line since the 1930s. For 2003, the revamped Neon appeared in Canada as the Dodge SX 2.0. Since then, all new Dodge models have been sold in Canada under the Dodge name.\nEurope.\nDodge started assembling lorries (trucks) in the United Kingdom from imported parts in 1922. In 1933 it began to manufacture a British chassis at its works in Kew, using American engines and gearboxes.\nDuring the Second World War, Dodge Kew was part of the London Aircraft Production Group, building fuselage sections for Handley Page Halifax bombers. The pre-war and wartime truck range was replaced by the Dodge 100 \"Kew\" truck (1949\u20131957), nicknamed the \"parrot nose\" due to the sculpted lines of its bonnet. Subsequent normal-control Dodges built at Kew were the 200 series (1957\u20131963) and the 400 series (1963\u20131965). The 400 series was a version of the American D series medium-duty models. Also built at Kew were the cab-over 300 series (1957\u20131965) and its successor the 500 series/K-series (1964\u20131978) tilt-cab. In 1964 Chrysler acquired its first stake in the British Rootes Group and it was decided to consolidate all truck production at Rootes' factory in Dunstable. British assembly of the 400 series was discontinued due to declining sales of normal-control trucks, and production of the 500 series was transferred to Dunstable in 1967.\nIn some export markets, British-built Dodge trucks used the Fargo or DeSoto marques, and the situation was further complicated after the takeover of the Rootes Group whose commercial vehicles were sold under the Commer and Karrier marques. Some Dodge 500s were given Commer badges, whilst the 100 series \"Commando\" light truck (1970\u20131989) developed by Rootes was initially marketed under all five marques. In the UK market, Commers were usually lighter than Dodges, whereas the Karrier marque tended to be used on vehicles sold to public sector operators such as local authorities. Some of the smaller Commer/Karrier vans were also sold as Fargos in export markets. In 1976 Chrysler Europe rationalized its marques and thereafter all the British-built commercial vehicles were sold as Dodges or (increasingly rarely) Karriers. This included the smaller Commer SpaceVan (1960\u20131983) and Commer Walk-Thru (1961\u20131979), which became Dodges for their final years. The van and pick-up versions of Chrysler Europe's French-built Simca 1100 were also branded as Dodges in Britain from 1976, although they remained Simcas elsewhere (and became Talbots in Britain after 1979).\nAmerican Chrysler Corporation cars, including some Dodge models, were assembled from CKD kits at various locations in Europe until the 1970s, including Kew (1920s-30s), Antwerp (1926\u20131958), and Rotterdam (1958\u20131970), but sales volumes were low as even 'compact' American cars like the Dodge Dart were enormous gas-guzzlers by European standards. However, protectionist policies in some countries encouraged small local manufacturers to license-build CKD models, including AMAG in Switzerland (building Chryslers and Dodges 1948\u20131972) and Barreiros in Spain (building Dodge Darts from 1965 as the Barreiros Dart). By 1969 Chrysler had acquired full control of Barreiros, and Darts were being exported to other European countries under the Dodge name (precipitating the closure of the Rotterdam plant). From 1970 the Spanish-built Dart was replaced by the Barreiros/Dodge 3700 which remained in production until 1977. The Dodge cars were a relatively small part of the Madrid factory's output, which was dominated by smaller Simca-designed cars and Barreiros-designed heavy-duty trucks. From 1972 such trucks were sold as the Dodge 300 (though unrelated to the earlier British 300 series), which was available as 4\u00d72, 6\u00d74, 8\u00d72, and 8\u00d74 rigids, as well as 4\u00d72 semi-trailer tractors.\nFollowing Chrysler Europe's collapse in 1977 and the sale of their assets to Peugeot, the van and truck range and the associated factories in Dunstable and Madrid were quickly passed on to Renault V\u00e9hicules Industriels. Chrysler licensed the Dodge name to be used on Renault trucks sold in certain European markets \u2013 most notably the United Kingdom. However, the only subsequent new model to carry the Dodge name was the Dodge 50 series (1979\u20131992), which replaced the earlier Walk-Thru and was widely used in Britain by utility companies, the military, and as a minibus, but was rarely seen outside the UK. Thereafter all-new models were Renaults, and in 1987 the Dodge name was dropped from the remaining inherited models (50 and Commando), which became Renaults for their last few years of production.\nDodge vehicles would not return to Europe until the introduction of the Neon, badged as a Chrysler, in the mid-1990s.\nChrysler reintroduced the Dodge marque to Europe on a broad scale in 2006, with a lineup consisting of North American-built Caliber, Avenger, Viper SRT-10, Nitro, and Dodge Journey cars and SUVs, but this proved to be a short-lived return due to the onset of the Great Recession and the takeover of Chrysler by Fiat. In 2010 the Dodge marque was pulled from the UK due to poor sales and on June 1, 2011, it was dropped from the rest of Europe. All of the Dodge models were discontinued in Europe except the Dodge Journey, which became the Fiat Freemont (and which was not available in the right-hand-drive Ireland or UK markets). The Dodge marque was reintroduced to many European markets in 2019.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, the Hyundai Accent, Hyundai Atos, and Hyundai H100 were branded as \"Dodge\", Dodge Attitude, \"Verna by Dodge\", \"Atos by Dodge\" and \"Dodge H100\" respectively, and sold at Chrysler/Dodge dealers in the 2000s and early 2010s. Dodge and Hyundai ended the venture and Dodge began to sell rebadged and reworked Fiats and Mitsubishi.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "42970", "revid": "50714462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42970", "title": "Future history", "text": "List of fictional future events\nA future history, imaginary history or anticipatory history is a fictional conjecture of the future used by authors of science fiction and other speculative fiction to construct a common background for stories. Sometimes the author publishes a timeline of events in the history, while other times the reader can reconstruct the order of the stories from information provided. The term can also be used to describe the subgenre of science fiction that uses this framework.\nA set of stories which share a backdrop but are not really concerned with the sequence of history in their universe are not considered future histories. For example, Lois McMaster Bujold's Vorkosigan Saga is not generally considered a future history. Standalone stories which trace an arc of history are rarely considered future histories.\nFuture histories differ from alternate history, in which different outcomes are ascribed to past events, because they consist of imagined events in the writer's future.\nHistory.\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" calls \"The Ruins; Or, a Survey of the Revolutions of Empires\", by Constantin Fran\u00e7ois de Chasseb\u0153uf, comte de Volney (published in 1791) probably the first recognizable future history. In it, the narrator is transported into space and sees the Earth as a whole while its history unfolds, which Volney uses to present his political and theological ideas. It lists similar examples from the 19th and 20th centuries by William Delisle Hay, Alfred D\u00f6blin (\"Berge Meere und Giganten\", 1924), Andr\u00e9 Maurois, and Olaf Stapledon (\"Last and First Men\", 1930, and \"Star Maker\", 1937). Some of these purported to be excerpts of a history book from the future, having no personal protagonists but rather describing the development of nations and societies over decades and centuries. Other related classic works include:\nIn science fiction.\nThe first science fiction writer to create a future history may have been Neil R. Jones in his stories of the 1930s. The term appears to have been coined by John W. Campbell,\u00a0Jr., the editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\", in the February 1941 issue of the magazine, to describe Robert A. Heinlein's \"Future History\"; the issue included a timeline of the stories. However, a fan had used the term, with \"history\" in quotation marks, in a letter to the pulp \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" the previous year.\nFuture becoming past.\nThe future projected in a \"future history\" can often turn out to be wildly inaccurate.\nFor example, in 1933 H. G. Wells postulated in \"The Shape of Things to Come\" a Second World War in which Nazi Germany and Poland are evenly matched militarily, fighting an indecisive war over ten years; and Poul Anderson's early 1950s Psychotechnic League depicted a world undergoing a devastating nuclear war in 1958, yet by the early 21st century managing not only to rebuild the ruins on Earth but also engage in extensive space colonization of the Moon and several planets. A writer possessing knowledge of the actual swift collapse of Poland in World War II and the enormous actual costs of far less ambitious space programs in a far less devastated world would have been unlikely to postulate such outcomes. \"\" was set in the future and featured developments in space travel and habitation which have not occurred on the timescale postulated.\nA problem with future history science fiction is that it will date and be overtaken by real historical events, for instance H. Beam Piper's future history, which included a nuclear war in 1973, and much of the future history of \"Star Trek\". Jerry Pournelle's \"CoDominium\" future history assumed that the Cold War would end with the United States and Soviet Union establishing a co-rule of the world, the CoDominium of the title, which would last into the 22nd Century\u2014rather than the Soviet Union collapsing in 1991.\nThere are several ways this is dealt with. One solution to the problem is when some authors set their stories in an indefinite future, often in a society where the current calendar has been disrupted due to a societal collapse or undergone some form of distortion due to the impact of technology. Related to the first, some stories are set in the very remote future and only deal with the author's contemporary history in a sketchy fashion, if at all (e.g. the original \"Foundation\" Trilogy by Asimov). Another related case is where stories are set in the near future, but with an explicitly allohistorical past, as in Ken MacLeod's \"Engines of Light\" series.\nIn other cases, the merging of the fictional history and the known history is done through extensive use of retroactive continuity. In yet other cases, such as the \"Doctor Who\" television series and the fiction based on it, much use is made of secret history, in which the events that take place are largely secret and not known to the general public.\nAs with Heinlein, some authors simply write a detailed future history and accept the fact that events will overtake it, making the sequence into a \"de facto\" alternate history.\nLastly, some writers formally transform their future histories into alternate history, once they had been overtaken by events. For example, Poul Anderson started The Psychotechnic League history in the early 1950s, assuming a nuclear war in 1958\u2014then a future date. When it was republished in the 1980s, a new foreword was added explaining how that history's timeline diverged from ours and led to war.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42971", "revid": "18515189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42971", "title": "The Dukes of Hazzard", "text": "American action-comedy television series (1979\u20131985)\nThe Dukes of Hazzard is an American action comedy television series created by Gy Waldron that aired on CBS from 1979 to 1985, with a total of seven seasons consisting of 147 episodes. It was consistently among the top-viewed television series in the late 1970s and early 1980s (at one point, ranking second only to \"Dallas\", which immediately followed the show on CBS's Friday night schedule).\nThe show's ensemble cast is about two young male cousins, Bo Duke and Luke Duke, who live in rural Georgia and are on probation for moonshine-running. Probation prevents the \"Duke Boys\" from owning guns, and they are armed with bows and arrows (which are sometimes tipped with dynamite) and clever plans to outwit a corrupt sheriff and greedy rich \"city slickers.\" They and their family (cousin Daisy Duke and patriarch Uncle Jesse Duke) live on a small farm on the outskirts of town, where they plan various escapades to expose and evade county commissioner Boss Hogg and law officer Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane. The \"Duke Boys\" drive a customized 1969 Dodge Charger nicknamed the \"General Lee\", which became a symbol of the show.\nThe series was inspired by the 1975 film \"Moonrunners\", about a bootlegger family, which Waldron wrote and directed and had many identical or similar character names and concepts.\nThe show was followed by four films, ' (1997), ' (2000), \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" (2005), and \"\" (2007).\nPlot.\n\"The Dukes of Hazzard\" follows the adventures of \"the Duke boys\", primarily cousins Bo Duke (John Schneider) and Luke Duke (Tom Wopat) (but alternatively Coy and Vance Duke for most of season 5), who live on a family farm in fictional Hazzard County, Georgia (the exact location of which is never specified, though Atlanta is mentioned several times as the nearest big city), with their cousin Daisy (Catherine Bach) and their wise old Uncle Jesse (Denver Pyle). The Duke boys race around in their customized 1969 Dodge Charger stock car, dubbed \"(The) General Lee\", evading crooked and corrupt county commissioner Boss Hogg (Sorrell Booke) and his bumbling and corrupt Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane (James Best) along with his deputy(s), and always managing to get caught in the middle of various local escapades and incidents.\nBo and Luke were previously sentenced to probation for illegal transportation of moonshine; their Uncle Jesse made a plea bargain with the U.S. government to refrain from distilling moonshine in exchange for Bo and Luke's freedom. As a result, Bo and Luke are on probation and not allowed to carry firearms\u2014instead, they often use compound bows, sometimes with arrows tipped with dynamite\u2014or to leave Hazzard County unless they get permission from their probation officer, Boss Hogg. The details of their probation terms vary from episode to episode. Sometimes it is implied that they would be jailed for merely crossing the county line, or in other episodes the state line. On other occasions it is shown that they may leave Hazzard as long as they are back within a certain time. Several other technicalities of their probation come into play at various times.\nCorrupt county commissioner Jefferson Davis (J. D.) \"Boss\" Hogg either runs or has his fingers in virtually everything in Hazzard County. Hogg is forever angry at the Dukes, especially Bo and Luke, for their habit of foiling his crooked schemes. Many episodes revolve around Hogg's attempts to engage in some such scheme, sometimes with the aid of hired criminal help.\nSome of these are get-rich-quick schemes, but many others affect the financial security of the Duke farm, which Hogg has long wanted to acquire for various reasons. Other times, Hogg hires criminals from out of town to do his dirty work for him, and he often tries to frame Bo and Luke as part of these plots. Bo and Luke always seem to stumble over Hogg's latest scheme, sometimes by curiosity, and often by sheer luck, and quash it. Despite the Dukes often coming to his rescue, Hogg never loses his irrational dislike of the clan, particularly Bo and Luke, often accusing them of spying on him, robbing or planning to rob him, or other nefarious actions.\nHogg was played by Sorrell Booke, who performed frequently on radio, stage, and film before his role in \"The Dukes of Hazzard\". Hogg is one of only two characters to appear in every episode of the series, the other being Uncle Jesse Duke. Daisy Duke appears in all but one episode (season 3's \"To Catch a Duke\").\nThe show's other main characters include local mechanic Cooter Davenport (Ben Jones), who in early episodes was portrayed as a wild, unshaven rebel, often breaking or treading on the edge of the law, before settling down to become the Duke family's best friend (often called an \"honorary Duke\") and owning the local garage. Enos Strate (Sonny Shroyer) is an honest but na\u00efve young deputy who, despite his friendship with the Dukes (and his crush on Daisy), is reluctantly forced to take part in Hogg and Rosco's crooked schemes. In the third and fourth seasons, when Shroyer left for his own show, his character was replaced by Deputy Cletus Hogg (Rick Hurst), Boss's cousin, who is slightly wilier than Enos but still a somewhat reluctant player in Hogg's plots.\nOwing to their fundamentally good natures, the Dukes often wind up helping Boss Hogg out of trouble, albeit grudgingly. More than once Hogg is targeted by former associates who are either seeking revenge or have double-crossed him after a scheme has unraveled. Sheriff Coltrane also finds himself targeted in some instances. On such occasions, Bo and Luke usually have to rescue their adversaries as an inevitable precursor to defeating the bad guys; in other instances, the Dukes join forces with Hogg and Coltrane to tackle bigger threats to Hazzard or one of their respective parties. These instances became more frequent as the show progressed, and later seasons saw a number of stories where the Dukes and Hogg (and Coltrane) temporarily work together.\nProduction.\nThe series was developed from the 1975 film \"Moonrunners\". Created by Gy Waldron in collaboration with ex-moonshiner Jerry Rushing, this movie shares many identical and very similar names and concepts with the subsequent TV series. Although itself essentially a comedy, this original movie was much cruder and edgier than the family-friendly TV series that evolved from it.\nIn 1977, Waldron was approached by Warner Bros. with the idea of developing \"Moonrunners\" into a television series. Waldron reworked various elements from \"Moonrunners\", ultimately devising what became \"The Dukes of Hazzard\". Production began in October 1978 with the original intention of only nine episodes for a mid-season filler. The first five episodes were filmed in Covington and Conyers, Georgia and surrounding areas, including some location work in nearby Atlanta. After completing production on the fifth episode, \"High Octane\", the cast and crew broke for Christmas break, expecting to return in several weeks to complete the ordered run of episodes. In the meantime, executives at Warner Bros. were impressed by the rough preview cuts of the completed episodes and saw potential in developing the show into a full-running series. Part of this plan was to move production from Georgia to the Warner Bros. lot in Burbank, California, to simplify production as well as develop a larger workshop to service the large number of automobiles needed for the series.\nRushing appeared as shady used car dealer Ace Parker in the third episode, \"Repo Men\" (the fourth to be broadcast). Rushing believed this to be the start of a recurring role, in return for which he would supply creative ideas from his experiences: many of the \"Dukes\" (and thus \"Moonrunners\") characters and situations were derived from Rushing's experiences as a youth, and much of the character of Bo Duke, he states to be based on him. However, \"Repo Men\" turned out to be the character's only appearance in the show's run, leading to a legal dispute in the following years over the rights to characters and concepts. Despite this, Rushing remained on good terms with cast and crew and in recent years has made appearances at several fan conventions.\nBy the end of the first (half) season, the family-friendly tone of \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" was mostly in place. When the show returned for a second season in the fall of 1979 (its first full season), with a few further minor tweaks, it quickly found its footing as a family-friendly comedy-adventure series. By the third season, starting in the fall of 1980, the template which would be widely associated with the show was evident.\nAs well as car chases, jumps and stunts, \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" relied on character familiarity, with each character effectively serving the same role within a typical episode. Deputy Cletus replaced Deputy Enos in seasons 3 and 4, and Coy and Vance Duke temporarily replaced Bo and Luke (due to a salary dispute) for most of season 5, but these were the only major cast changes through the show's run. Only Uncle Jesse and Boss Hogg appeared in all 145 episodes; Daisy appears in all but one, the third season's \"To Catch a Duke.\" The \"General Lee\" appears in all episodes except \"Mary Kaye's Baby\".\nThe show was largely filmed in Hidden Valley in Thousand Oaks, California, with scenes also shot at nearby Lake Sherwood and at Paramount Ranch in nearby Agoura Hills.\nEpisodes.\nThe show ran for seven seasons and a total of 147 episodes. Many of the episodes followed a similar structure \"out-of-town crooks pull a robbery or commit a crime or scandal, Duke boys blamed, spend the rest of the hour clearing their names, the General Lee flies and the squad cars crash\".\nCast and characters.\nMain characters.\nThe pilot episode was to include a barber modeled after Floyd Lawson on \"The Andy Griffith Show\" as a regular character, but was eliminated when the final draft of the pilot's script was written and before the show was cast.\nNotable guest appearances.\nThroughout its network television run, \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" had a consistent mix of up-and-comers and established stars make guest appearances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOthers.\nNASCAR driver Terry Labonte makes a brief, uncredited appearance as a crewman in the episode \"Undercover Dukes Part 1\". The race cars supplied for both \"Part 1\" and \"Part 2\" of \"Undercover Dukes\" were supplied by Labonte's racing team owner, Billy Hagan. However, the emblems of the sponsors of the cars (at that time Labonte was sponsored by Budweiser) were covered to avoid paying royalties.\nThe celebrity speed trap.\nDuring the show's second season, the show's writers began incorporating a \"celebrity speed trap\" into some of the episodes, as a means to feature top country stars of the day performing their hits. On its first couple of instances, the \"speed trap\" was featured early in the story, but for most of the cases, it was featured in the last few minutes of an episode, often used when the main story was running too short to fill episode time.\nThe \"celebrity speed trap\" feature was essentially the same each time: Aware that a big-name country star was passing through the area, Boss Hogg would order Rosco to lower the speed limit on a particular road to an unreasonable level (using a reversible sign, with one speed limit on one side and another, far lower, on the back), so that the targeted singer would be in violation of the posted limit. The singer would be required to give a free performance at the Boar's Nest in exchange for having their citations forgiven; the performer would then perform one of their best-known hits or other popular country music standard, while the Dukes, Boss, Rosco, Enos, Cletus, Cooter, and other patrons whooped and hollered in enjoyment of the performance. More often than not, the performer would give a sarcastic parting shot to Boss and Rosco.\nSingers who were featured in the \"speed trap\" segments were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonorable mentions: Mickey Gilley, Loretta Lynn\nGilley's and Lynn's appearances were not solely for the celebrity speed trap. After performing a concert in Hazzard, Gilley was nabbed while leaving and forced to do a second show to nullify his citation. Loretta Lynn was kidnapped by criminals wanting to break into the music business. Lynn was the very first country music guest star on the show in 1979 and had an entire episode dedicated to her, titled \"Find Loretta Lynn\".\nJanie Fricke was the only country music guest star who did not perform a song, celebrity speed trap or otherwise. She played an accomplice to a robber who hid money in the dashboard of the car that was to become the \"General Lee\".\nCasting of Coy and Vance.\n\"The Dukes of Hazzard\" was consistently among the top-rated television series (at one point, ranking second only to \"Dallas\", which immediately followed the show on CBS' Friday night schedule). With that success came huge profits in merchandising, with a wide array of \"Dukes of Hazzard\" toys and products being licensed and becoming big sellers. However, over the course of the show's fourth season, series stars Tom Wopat and John Schneider\u2014who had already previously voiced their concern and discontent about increasingly inferior scripts being written for episodes\u2014became increasingly concerned about a contract dispute over their salaries and merchandising royalties owed to them from the high sales of \"Dukes\" products. They felt that neither of them was being paid what was owed to them and this became very frustrating to the duo. As a result, in the spring of 1982, as filming was due to begin on the fifth season, Wopat and Schneider did not report to the set in protest over the matter. Catherine Bach also considered walking out due to similar concerns, but Wopat and Schneider convinced her to stay, insisting that if she left, there might not be a show to come back to, and that settling the issue was up to them.\nProduction was pushed back by a few weeks as fairly similar looking replacements were hastily hired: Byron Cherry as Coy Duke and Christopher Mayer as Vance Duke. Bo and Luke were said to have gone to race on the NASCAR circuit; how they did this considering the terms of their probation was never explained. Cherry and Mayer were originally contracted at just 10 episodes as stand-ins, still with hope that a settlement might be reached with Wopat and Schneider (in total, they made 19 episodes including one with Bo and Luke). Some scripts for Coy and Vance were originally written for Bo and Luke but with their names crossed out and Coy and Vance penned in.\nThe new Dukes\u2014previously unmentioned nephews of Uncle Jesse, who were said to have left the farm in 1976 before the show had started\u2014were unpopular with the great majority of viewers, and the ratings immediately sank. Much of the criticism was that Coy and Vance were nothing but direct clones of Bo and Luke, with Coy a direct \"carbon copy\" replacement for Bo and Vance for Luke, with little variation in character. This was something that even show creator Gy Waldron has said was wrong, and that he insisted, unsuccessfully, that audiences would not accept direct clones and the two replacements should be taken in a different direction character wise, but was overruled by the producers. Waldron also commented that if Bach too had walked, the show would probably have been canceled. It was reported that prior to filming, Cherry and Mayer were given Bo and Luke episodes to watch, to study and learn to emulate them, although Cherry has said in interviews that he does not recall this ever happening.\nHit hard by the significant drop in ratings, Warner Bros. renegotiated with Wopat and Schneider, and eventually a settlement was reached, and the original Duke boys returned to the series in early 1983, four episodes from the conclusion of the fifth season. Initially, part of the press release announcing Wopat and Schneider's return suggested that Cherry and Mayer would remain as part of the cast (though presumably in a reduced role), but it was quickly realized that \"four Duke boys\" would not work within the context of the series, and due to the huge unpopularity associated with their time on the show, they were quickly written out of the same episode in which Bo and Luke returned.\nReturn of Bo and Luke.\nAlthough Coy and Vance were never popular, viewers were disappointed by their departure episode, \"Welcome Back, Bo 'n' Luke\", which was for the most part a standard episode, with the return of Bo and Luke and the departure of Coy and Vance tacked onto the beginning. (Bo and Luke return from their NASCAR tour just as Coy and Vance leave Hazzard to tend to a sick relative.) More than a few viewers commented that they were disappointed by this, and that they would have liked to see both pairs of Duke boys team up to tackle a particularly dastardly plot by Boss Hogg before Coy and Vance's departure; but as it turned out, Coy and Vance had little dialogue and were gone by the first commercial break, never to be seen, heard from or even mentioned again.\nWhile the return of Bo and Luke was welcomed by ardent and casual viewers alike, and as a result ratings recovered slightly, the show never completely regained its former popularity. One of Wopat and Schneider's disputes even before they left was what they considered to be increasingly weak and formulaic scripts and episode plots. With Wopat and Schneider's return, the producers agreed to try a wider scope of storylines. It continued for two more seasons. Many cast members, including Wopat, decried the miniature car effects newly incorporated to depict increasingly absurd \"General Lee\" and patrol-car stunts (which had previously been performed by stunt drivers in real cars). The miniature car effects were intended as a budget-saving measure (to save the cost of repairing or replacing damaged vehicles) and to help compete visually with KITT from the NBC series \"Knight Rider\". By February 1985, \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" ended its run after seven seasons.\nVehicles.\nThe show is estimated to have gone through 250\u2013355 cars during filming.\nThe \"General Lee\" (Dodge Charger).\nThe \"General Lee\" was based on a 1969 Dodge Charger owned by Bo and Luke. It was orange with a Confederate battle flag painted on the roof, the words \"GENERAL LEE\" over each door, and the number \"01\" on each door. In the original five Georgia-filmed episodes, a Confederate flag along with a checkered racing flag in a criss-cross pattern could be seen behind the rear window; this was removed because the extra decal was impossible to replicate over and over again. The name refers to the American Civil War Confederate General Robert E. Lee. The television show was based on the movie \"Moonrunners\", in turn based on actual moonshine runners who used a 1958 Chrysler named \"Traveler\", after General Lee's horse (with a slight spelling change). \"Traveler\" was originally intended to be the name of the Duke boys' stock car too, until producers agreed that \"General Lee\" had more punch to it.\nSince it was built as a race car, the doors were welded shut. Through the history of the show, an estimated 309 Chargers were used; 17 are still known to exist in various states of repair. A replica was owned by John Schneider, known as \"Bo's General Lee\". In 2008, Schneider sold \"Bo's General Lee\" at the Barrett-Jackson automobile auction for $230,000. An eBay auction which garnered a bid of $9,900,500 for the car was never finalized, with the purported bidder claiming his account had been hacked. The underside of the hood has the signatures of the cast from the 1997 TV movie. Schneider has also restored over 20 other \"General Lee\"\u200as to date. In 2008, a replica of the \"General Lee\" fetched a high bid of $450,000 at the Barrett-Jackson auto auction. In 2012, the \"General Lee 1\", the first car used in filming the series, was purchased at auction by golfer Bubba Watson for $110,000. The car had been scrapped after being wrecked during the famous opening jump shoot, and was later discovered in a junkyard by the president of the North American General Lee fan club. In 2015, following a wave of sentiment against Confederate symbolism in the wake of shootings in Charleston, SC (relating to photos where the attacker had posed with the Confederate flag), Bubba Watson announced that he would remove the Confederate flag from the roof of the \"General Lee 1\" and repaint it with the U.S. national flag.\nThe show also used 1968 Chargers (which shared the same sheet metal) by pop-riveting the \"I\" piece to the center of the 68's grille, as well as cutting out the tail lights, pop-riveting the '69 lenses in place, and removing the round side marker lights. These Chargers performed many record-breaking jumps throughout the show, almost all of them resulting in a completely destroyed car. No 1970 Chargers were used, as backdating them proved to be too time-consuming.\nThe Duke boys added a custom air horn to the \"General Lee\" that played the first 12 notes of the song \"Dixie\". The Dixie horn was not originally planned, until a Georgia local hot rod racer drove by and sounded his car's Dixie horn. The producers immediately rushed after him asking where he had bought the horn. Warner Bros. purchased several Chargers for stunts, as they generally destroyed at least one or two cars per episode. By the end of the show's sixth season, the Chargers were becoming harder to find and more expensive. In addition, the television series \"Knight Rider\" began to rival the \"General Lee\"'s stunts. As such, the producers used 1:8 scale miniatures, filmed by Jack Sessums' crew, or recycled stock jump footage\u2014the latter being a practice that had been in place to an extent since the second season, and had increased as the seasons passed.\nSome of the 01 and Confederate flag motifs were initially hand painted, but as production sped up, these were replaced with vinyl decals for quick application (and removal), as needed.\nDuring the first five episodes of the show that were filmed in Georgia, the cars involved with filming were given to the crew at the H&amp;H body shop near the filming location. At this shop, the men worked day and night to prepare the wrecked cars for the next day while still running their body shop during the day. Time was of the essence, and the men that worked at this shop worked hard hours to get the cars prepared for the show.\nThe third episode, \"Mary Kaye's Baby\", is the only one in which the \"General Lee\" does not appear. Instead, the Dukes drove around in a blue 1975 Plymouth Fury borrowed from Cooter that Luke later destroyed by shooting a flaming arrow at the car, whose trunk had been leaking due to the moonshine stowed in the back.\nThe Duke boys' CB handle was (jointly) \"Lost Sheep\". Originally when the show was conceived, their handle was to be \"General Lee\" to match their vehicle, but this was only ever used on-screen on one occasion, in the second episode, \"Daisy's Song\", when Cooter calls Bo and Luke over the CB by this handle, although they were actually driving Daisy's Plymouth Road Runner (see below) at the time. As it became obvious that the \"General Lee\" handle would be out of place when the Duke boys were in another vehicle, the \"Lost Sheep\" handle was devised (with Uncle Jesse being \"Shepherd\" and Daisy being \"Bo Peep\").\nHazzard police cars (AMC Matador, Dodge Polara, Dodge Monaco, Plymouth Fury).\nThe 1975 AMC Matador was one of many Hazzard County police cars used on the series, mostly in the first season; they had light bars and working radios. A 1970 Dodge Polara and a 1974 Dodge Monaco were used during the pilot episode \"One Armed Bandits\"; these were also seen in the show's title sequence. From the second season, the 1977 Dodge Monaco was mostly used. From mid-season four the similar looking 1978 Plymouth Fury was used instead. The Matadors and Furies were former Los Angeles Police Department vehicles, while the Monacos were former California Highway Patrol units.\nPlymouth Road Runner.\nA 1974 Plymouth Road Runner (yellow with a black stripe) was Daisy Duke's car in the first five episodes of the first season. For the last episodes of the first season a similarly painted 1971 Plymouth Satellite Sebring with a matching \"Road Runner\" stripe was used. In the second season Bo and Luke send it off a cliff in \"The Runaway\". Another identical Plymouth 1971 model car appeared in a few more episodes after \"The Runaway\" due to the episodes being aired out of production order.\nJeep CJ-7.\n\"Dixie\" was the name given to Daisy Duke's white 1980 Jeep CJ-7 \"Golden Eagle\" which had a golden eagle emblem on the hood and the name \"Dixie\" on the sides. Like other vehicles in the show, there was more than one Jeep used throughout the series, which were both manual and automatic transmission. The design of the roll cage also varied across the seasons. When the Jeep was introduced at the end of the second season's \"The Runaway\", it was seen to have doors and a slightly different paint job, but, bar one appearance in the next produced episode, \"Arrest Jesse Duke\" (actually broadcast before \"The Runaway\", causing a continuity error), thereafter the doors were removed and the paint job was made all-white, with \"Dixie\" painted on the sides of the hood. These Jeeps were leased to the producers of the show by American Motors Corporation in exchange for a brief mention in the closing credits of the show.\nFord F-100 pickup truck.\nUncle Jesse's truck was a white Ford pickup truck, most commonly a sixth-generation (1973\u20131977) F100 Styleside. However, in the earliest episodes it had a Flareside bed, and varied between F100 and F250 models throughout the show's run. Bo, Luke and Daisy also drove Jesse's truck on occasion.\nCadillac de Ville.\nA white 1970 Cadillac de Ville convertible was used as Boss Hogg's car, notably with large bull horns as a hood ornament. In early seasons, Hogg was almost always driven by a chauffeur, who was normally nameless and had little or no dialogue, but identified on occasion as Alex; and played by several uncredited actors, including stuntman Gary Baxley. This chauffeur was often dressed in a red plaid shirt and deep brown or black Stetson hat but was on occasion an older man, sometimes dressed in more typical chauffeur attire.\nHogg is first seen to drive for himself in the second-season opener \"Days of Shine and Roses\", where he and Jesse challenge each other to one last moonshine race. From the fourth season onward, except for a couple of brief reappearances of the chauffeur (during the fourth season), Hogg drove himself around in his Cadillac (or occasionally driven by Rosco and, in the series' finale, by Uncle Jesse) and frequently challenged others by invoking his driving expertise from his days as a ridge-runner. Unlike other vehicles in the series, Boss Hogg's Cadillac is typically treated with kid gloves. The car is almost always seen with its convertible top down, with the top only being seen in two episodes, \"Daisy's Song\" (the chauffeur was called \"Eddie\" in this episode), the second to be produced and broadcast, and briefly in the second-season episode \"Witness for the Persecution\", when Cooter is returning it to the Court House after repairs. When filming close-up shots inside the studio, a similar-looking 1967 De Ville is used. The door vent windows were eliminated for 1969, and the small, round, chrome exterior mirror is noticeably different from the 1970 model's large, square, brushed stainless mirror.\nFord Custom 500.\nA green and blacked out 1971 Ford Custom 500 sedan named \"Black Tillie\" was once used by Uncle Jesse to make moonshine runs. It makes its only physical appearance in \"High Octane\" (season 1 episode 5). A 1967 Ford Mustang coupe, known as \"Black Tillie II\", was used in \"Days of Shine and Roses\" (season 2 episode 1). It was used for a race between Jesse Duke and Boss Hogg to settle their argument over who was the better moonshiner, where because of the agreement with the federal government they carried 10 gallons of water to replace the moonshine.\nTheme song.\nThe theme song \"Good Ol' Boys\" was written and performed by Waylon Jennings. He was also \"The Balladeer\" (as credited), and served as narrator of the show. The version released as a single is not the same version used in the show's opening credits; the single version has a repeat of the chorus and an instrumental to pad out the length, uses a different instrumental mix that emphasizes the bass, and replaces the last verse with an inside joke about how the TV show producers \"keep on showing [Jennings's] hands and not [his] face on TV\".\nIn 1980, the song reached No. 1 on the American Country chart and peaked at No. 21 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nBroadcast history.\nUnited States.\nSyndication and cable.\nSoon before the series ended its original run on CBS, \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" went into off-network syndication. Although not as widely run as it was back in the 1980s and the years since, reruns of the program do continue to air in various parts of the United States.\nNotably, television stations that aired the show in syndication include KCOP Los Angeles, WGN-TV Chicago, KBHK-TV San Francisco, WKBD Detroit, WTAF/WTXF Philadelphia, KTXL Sacramento, WVTV Milwaukee, KMSP Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul, among others.\nThe Nashville Network bought \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" from Warner Bros. in 1997 for well over $10 million; not only did it improve the network's ratings, the show was also popular among younger viewers, a demographic TNN had a notorious difficulty in drawing.\nNationwide, the show also aired on ABC Family (2000\u201301, 2004), TNN's sister network CMT (2005\u201307, 2010\u201312, 2014\u201315) and TV Land (2015); TV Land dropped the show in the wake of protests and controversy surrounding the display of the Confederate flag.\nFeature films.\nThe films from 2005 and 2007 were more buddy comedy road film in tone than the original TV series, which was an action-comedy.\nVideo games.\nSeveral video games based on the series were created:\nHome media.\nDVD.\nWarner Home Video has released all seven seasons of \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" on DVD in Regions 1 and 2. The two TV movies that followed the series were released on DVD in Region 1 on June 10, 2008, and in Region 4 on June 4, 2014. In Region 4, Warner has released only the first six seasons on DVD and the two TV movies. \"The Complete Series and Two Unrated Feature Films Box Set\" was released on DVD in Region 1 on November 14, 2017.\nTwo one-shot DVDs were also released by Warner, the first one containing three episodes from the TV series (one from each one of its first three seasons) and the second one containing the first episode from it and a behind-the-scenes featurette that announced the upcoming premiere of the 2005 film.\nStreaming.\nThe TV series was also made available for streaming and download through a variety of services.\nReception.\nSeason 1 garnered a mixed reception from critics. Tom Shales (\"The Washington Post\"): \"Within five minutes, the program is out of breath from pandering so pantingly to its audience. [...] If this show succeeds, every television critic in America may as well quit.\" Peter Hartlaub, writing for the \"San Francisco Chronicle\": \"Unfortunately, the first \"Dukes\" season wasn't the best, with a low budget and characters who found their footing as the series continued (Cooter started out a numbskull type).\" Conversely, Danny Graydon (\"Empire\") writes: \"Today, \"Hazzard\"'s considerable charm endures, even if the sheer predictability is wearing.\"\nLegacy and influence in popular culture.\n\"Alice\".\nSorrell Booke and Sonny Shroyer appeared in 1983 during \"Mel is Hogg-Tied\", an eighth-season episode of the television series \"Alice\". Booke guest-starred as Boss Hogg, who is a distant cousin of Jolene Hunnicutt, arrives from Hazzard County and tries to swindle Mel into selling his diner to him for $1. Shroyer also guest-starred as Deputy Enos Strate.\n\"Hazzard County\".\nIn 2005, the Humana Festival of New American Plays premiered a full-length comedy drama entitled \"Hazzard County\" by Allison Moore. The story centers on a young widowed mother and a visit that she receives from a big city television producer. Interspersed with recollections of Bo, Luke, and Daisy, the play takes a deep look at Southern \"good ol' boy\" culture and its popularization through the lens of American mass media.\n\"Smallville\".\nTom Wopat and John Schneider were reunited in 2005 during \"Exposed\", a fifth-season episode of the television series \"Smallville\". Wopat guest-starred as Kansas State Senator Jack Jennings, an old friend of Clark Kent's adoptive father Jonathan Kent (portrayed by Schneider). In the episode, Jennings drives a 1968 Dodge Charger\u2014the same body style as the \"General Lee\".\nDaisy Dukes.\nDaisy Duke was almost always dressed in very short blue jeans shorts. That style of shorts became known as \"Daisy Dukes\". Katy Perry references \"Daisy Dukes\" in her number one single \u201cCalifornia Gurls\u201d. The popularity grew first in 1993 with the song \"Daisey Dukes\" by rap group Duice and the 69 Boys. \n\"Only Fools and Horses\".\nThe series is referenced in the British sitcom \"Only Fools and Horses\"; it is one of Grandad's favourite television programmes.\nLizard Lick Towing.\n\"Lizard Lick Towing\" featured an episode with its repossession specialists Ronnie Shirley and Bobby Brantley repossessing a \"General Lee\" replica.\nAutoTrader commercial.\nIn 2014, AutoTrader made a commercial where Bo and Luke shop for a new car while being chased.\nConfederate battle flag.\nAfter the 2015 Charleston church shooting, renewed debate about the symbolism of the Confederate battle flag (which was prominently featured on the \"General Lee\"'s roof, and the panel behind the rear window in the first five episodes) prompted TV Land to pull reruns of the original series. Warner Bros., which owns the property, announced it would also no longer create merchandise bearing the flag, including miniatures of the \"General Lee\". During the 2020 George Floyd protests, Amazon reportedly considered removing the program from its streaming service.\nCooter's.\nArtifacts from the show are on display in Luray, Virginia; Nashville, Tennessee; and Pigeon Forge, Tennessee. Cooter's Place in Luray is overseen by Ben \"Cooter\" Jones from the series. The Pigeon Forge location features a gift shop and a small display of costumes, collectibles and artifacts from the show.\nCovington and Conyers, Georgia, where the original five episodes were produced and filmed, have been two major tourist attractions for \"The Dukes of Hazzard\" fans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42972", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42972", "title": "Rio Grande river", "text": ""}
{"id": "42975", "revid": "17777255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42975", "title": "Hubble's law", "text": "Observation in physical cosmology\nHubble's law, officially the Hubble\u2013Lema\u00eetre law, is the observation in physical cosmology that galaxies are moving away from Earth at speeds proportional to their distance. In other words, the farther a galaxy is from the Earth, the faster it moves away. A galaxy's recessional velocity is typically determined by measuring its redshift, a shift in the frequency of light emitted by the galaxy.\nThe discovery of Hubble's law is attributed to work published by Edwin Hubble in 1929, but the notion of the universe expanding at a calculable rate was first derived from general relativity equations in 1922 by Alexander Friedmann. The Friedmann equations showed the universe might be expanding, and presented the expansion speed if that were the case. Before Hubble, astronomer Carl Wilhelm Wirtz had, in 1922 and 1924, deduced with his own data that galaxies that appeared smaller and dimmer had larger redshifts and thus that more distant galaxies recede faster from the observer. In 1927, Georges Lema\u00eetre concluded that the universe might be expanding by noting the proportionality of the recessional velocity of distant bodies to their respective distances. He estimated a value for this ratio, which\u2014after Hubble confirmed cosmic expansion and determined a more precise value for it two years later\u2014became known as the Hubble constant. Hubble inferred the recession velocity of the objects from their redshifts, many of which were earlier measured and related to velocity by Vesto Slipher in 1917. Combining Slipher's velocities with Henrietta Swan Leavitt's intergalactic distance calculations and methodology allowed Hubble to better calculate an expansion rate for the universe.\nHubble's law is considered the first observational basis for the expansion of the universe, and is one of the pieces of evidence most often cited in support of the Big Bang model. The motion of astronomical objects due solely to this expansion is known as the Hubble flow. It is described by the equation \"v\" \n \"H\"0\"D\", with \"H\"0 the constant of proportionality\u2014the Hubble constant\u2014between the \"proper distance\" D to a galaxy (which can change over time, unlike the comoving distance) and its speed of separation v, i.e. the derivative of proper distance with respect to the cosmic time coordinate. Though the Hubble constant \"H\"0 is constant at any given moment in time, the Hubble parameter H, of which the Hubble constant is the current value, varies with time, so the term \"constant\" is sometimes thought of as somewhat of a misnomer.\nThe units of the Hubble constant are km/s/Mpc, which gives the speed of a galaxy away as 70 km/s. The reciprocal of \"H\"0 is the Hubble time (14.4 billion years). The Hubble constant can also be stated as a relative rate of expansion. In this form \"H\"0\u00a0= 7%/Gyr, meaning that, at the current rate of expansion, it takes one billion years for an unbound structure to grow by 7%.\nDiscovery.\nA decade before Hubble made his observations, a number of physicists and mathematicians had established a consistent theory of an expanding universe by using Einstein field equations of general relativity. Applying the most general principles to the nature of the universe yielded a dynamic solution that conflicted with the then-prevalent notion of a static universe.\nSlipher's observations.\nIn 1912, Vesto M. Slipher measured the first Doppler shift of a \"spiral nebula\" (the obsolete term for spiral galaxies) and soon discovered that almost all such objects were receding from Earth. He did not grasp the cosmological implications of this fact, and indeed at the time it was highly controversial whether or not these nebulae were \"island universes\" outside the Milky Way galaxy.\nFLRW equations.\nIn 1922, Alexander Friedmann derived his Friedmann equations from Einstein field equations, showing that the universe might expand at a rate calculable by the equations. The parameter used by Friedmann is known today as the scale factor and can be considered as a scale invariant form of the proportionality constant of Hubble's law. Georges Lema\u00eetre independently found a similar solution in his 1927 paper discussed in the following section. The Friedmann equations are derived by inserting the metric for a homogeneous and isotropic universe into Einstein's field equations for a fluid with a given density and pressure. This idea of an expanding spacetime would eventually lead to the Big Bang and Steady State theories of cosmology.\nLema\u00eetre's equation.\nIn 1927, two years before Hubble published his own article, the Belgian priest and astronomer Georges Lema\u00eetre was the first to publish research deriving what is now known as Hubble's law. According to the Canadian astronomer Sidney van den Bergh, \"the 1927 discovery of the expansion of the universe by Lema\u00eetre was published in French in a low-impact journal. In the 1931 high-impact English translation of this article, a critical equation was changed by omitting reference to what is now known as the Hubble constant.\" It is now known that the alterations in the translated paper were carried out by Lema\u00eetre himself.\nShape of the universe.\nBefore the advent of modern cosmology, there was considerable talk about the size and shape of the universe. In 1920, the Shapley\u2013Curtis debate took place between Harlow Shapley and Heber D. Curtis over this issue. Shapley argued for a small universe the size of the Milky Way galaxy, and Curtis argued that the universe was much larger. The issue was resolved in the coming decade with Hubble's improved observations.\nCepheid variable stars outside the Milky Way.\nEdwin Hubble did most of his professional astronomical observing work at Mount Wilson Observatory, home to the world's most powerful telescope at the time. His observations of Cepheid variable stars in \"spiral nebulae\" enabled him to calculate the distances to these objects. Surprisingly, these objects were discovered to be at distances which placed them well outside the Milky Way. They continued to be called \"nebulae\", and it was only gradually that the term \"galaxies\" replaced it.\nCombining redshifts with distance measurements.\nThe velocities and distances that appear in Hubble's law are not directly measured. The velocities are inferred from the redshift \"z\" = \u2206\"\u03bb\"/\"\u03bb\" of radiation and distance is inferred from brightness. Hubble sought to correlate brightness with parameter z.\nCombining his measurements of galaxy distances with Vesto Slipher and Milton Humason's measurements of the redshifts associated with the galaxies, Hubble discovered a rough proportionality between redshift of an object and its distance. Though there was considerable scatter (now known to be caused by peculiar velocities\u2014the 'Hubble flow' is used to refer to the region of space far enough out that the recession velocity is larger than local peculiar velocities), Hubble was able to plot a trend line from the 46 galaxies he studied and obtain a value for the Hubble constant of 500\u00a0(km/s)/Mpc (much higher than the currently accepted value due to errors in his distance calibrations; see cosmic distance ladder for details).\nHubble diagram.\nHubble's law can be easily depicted in a \"Hubble diagram\" in which the velocity (assumed approximately proportional to the redshift) of an object is plotted with respect to its distance from the observer. A straight line of positive slope on this diagram is the visual depiction of Hubble's law.\nCosmological constant abandoned.\nAfter Hubble's discovery was published, Albert Einstein abandoned his work on the cosmological constant, a term he had inserted into his equations of general relativity to coerce them into producing the static solution he previously considered the correct state of the universe. The Einstein equations in their simplest form model either an expanding or contracting universe, so Einstein introduced the constant to counter expansion or contraction and lead to a static and flat universe. After Hubble's discovery that the universe was, in fact, expanding, Einstein called his faulty assumption that the universe is static his \"greatest mistake\". On its own, general relativity could predict the expansion of the universe, which (through observations such as the bending of light by large masses, or the precession of the orbit of Mercury) could be experimentally observed and compared to his theoretical calculations using particular solutions of the equations he had originally formulated.\nIn 1931, Einstein went to Mount Wilson Observatory to thank Hubble for providing the observational basis for modern cosmology.\nThe cosmological constant has regained attention in recent decades as a hypothetical explanation for dark energy.\nInterpretation.\nThe discovery of the linear relationship between redshift and distance, coupled with a supposed linear relation between recessional velocity and redshift, yields a straightforward mathematical expression for Hubble's law as follows:\nformula_1\nwhere\nHubble's law is considered a fundamental relation between recessional velocity and distance. However, the relation between recessional velocity and redshift depends on the cosmological model adopted and is not established except for small redshifts.\nFor distances D larger than the radius of the Hubble sphere \"r\"HS, objects recede at a rate faster than the speed of light (\"See\" Uses of the proper distance for a discussion of the significance of this):\nformula_2\nSince the Hubble \"constant\" is a constant only in space, not in time, the radius of the Hubble sphere may increase or decrease over various time intervals. The subscript '0' indicates the value of the Hubble constant today. Current evidence suggests that the expansion of the universe is accelerating (\"see\" Accelerating universe), meaning that for any given galaxy, the recession velocity dD/dt is increasing over time as the galaxy moves to greater and greater distances; however, the Hubble parameter is actually thought to be decreasing with time, meaning that if we were to look at some fixed distance D and watch a series of different galaxies pass that distance, later galaxies would pass that distance at a smaller velocity than earlier ones.\nRedshift velocity and recessional velocity.\nRedshift can be measured by determining the wavelength of a known transition, such as hydrogen \u03b1-lines for distant quasars, and finding the fractional shift compared to a stationary reference. Thus, redshift is a quantity unambiguously acquired from observation. Care is required, however, in translating these to recessional velocities: for small redshift values, a linear relation of redshift to recessional velocity applies, but more generally the redshift-distance law is nonlinear, meaning the co-relation must be derived specifically for each given model and epoch.\nRedshift velocity.\nThe redshift z is often described as a \"redshift velocity\", which is the recessional velocity that would produce the same redshift if it were caused by a linear Doppler effect (which, however, is not the case, as the velocities involved are too large to use a non-relativistic formula for Doppler shift). This redshift velocity can easily exceed the speed of light. In other words, to determine the redshift velocity \"v\"rs, the relation:\nformula_3\nis used. That is, there is no fundamental difference between redshift velocity and redshift: they are rigidly proportional, and not related by any theoretical reasoning. The motivation behind the \"redshift velocity\" terminology is that the redshift velocity agrees with the velocity from a low-velocity simplification of the so-called Fizeau\u2013Doppler formula\nformula_4\nHere, \"\u03bb\"o, \"\u03bb\"e are the observed and emitted wavelengths respectively. The \"redshift velocity\" \"v\"rs is not so simply related to real velocity at larger velocities, however, and this terminology leads to confusion if interpreted as a real velocity. Next, the connection between redshift or redshift velocity and recessional velocity is discussed.\nRecessional velocity.\nSuppose \"R\"(\"t\") is called the \"scale factor\" of the universe, and increases as the universe expands in a manner that depends upon the cosmological model selected. Its meaning is that all measured proper distances \"D\"(\"t\") between co-moving points increase proportionally to R. (The co-moving points are not moving relative to their local environments.) In other words:\nformula_5\nwhere \"t\"0 is some reference time. If light is emitted from a galaxy at time \"t\"e and received by us at \"t\"0, it is redshifted due to the expansion of the universe, and this redshift z is simply:\nformula_6\nSuppose a galaxy is at distance D, and this distance changes with time at a rate dtD. We call this rate of recession the \"recession velocity\" \"v\"r:\nformula_7\nWe now define the Hubble constant as\nformula_8\nand discover the Hubble law:\nformula_9\nFrom this perspective, Hubble's law is a fundamental relation between (i) the recessional velocity associated with the expansion of the universe and (ii) the distance to an object; the connection between redshift and distance is a crutch used to connect Hubble's law with observations. This law can be related to redshift z approximately by making a Taylor series expansion:\nformula_10\nIf the distance is not too large, all other complications of the model become small corrections, and the time interval is simply the distance divided by the speed of light:\nformula_11\nor\nformula_12\nAccording to this approach, the relation \"cz\" = \"v\"r is an approximation valid at low redshifts, to be replaced by a relation at large redshifts that is model-dependent. See velocity-redshift figure.\nObservability of parameters.\nStrictly speaking, neither v nor D in the formula are directly observable, because they are properties now of a galaxy, whereas our observations refer to the galaxy in the past, at the time that the light we currently see left it.\nFor relatively nearby galaxies (redshift z much less than one), v and D will not have changed much, and v can be estimated using the formula v = zc where c is the speed of light. This gives the empirical relation found by Hubble.\nFor distant galaxies, v (or D) cannot be calculated from z without specifying a detailed model for how H changes with time. The redshift is not even directly related to the recession velocity at the time the light set out, but it does have a simple interpretation: (1 + \"z\") is the factor by which the universe has expanded while the photon was traveling towards the observer.\nExpansion velocity vs. peculiar velocity.\nIn using Hubble's law to determine distances, only the velocity due to the expansion of the universe can be used. Since gravitationally interacting galaxies move relative to each other independent of the expansion of the universe, these relative velocities, called peculiar velocities, need to be accounted for in the application of Hubble's law. Such peculiar velocities give rise to redshift-space distortions.\nTime-dependence of Hubble parameter.\nThe parameter H is commonly called the \"Hubble constant\", but that is a misnomer since it is constant in space only at a fixed time; it varies with time in nearly all cosmological models, and all observations of far distant objects are also observations into the distant past, when the \"constant\" had a different value. \"Hubble parameter\" is a more correct term, with \"H\"0 denoting the present-day value.\nAnother common source of confusion is that the accelerating universe does not imply that the Hubble parameter is actually increasing with time; since formula_13, in most accelerating models formula_14 increases relatively faster than formula_15, so H decreases with time. (The recession velocity of one chosen galaxy does increase, but different galaxies passing a sphere of fixed radius cross the sphere more slowly at later times.)\nOn defining the dimensionless deceleration parameter it follows that\nformula_16\nFrom this it is seen that the Hubble parameter is decreasing with time, unless \"q\" &lt; -1; the latter can only occur if the universe contains phantom energy, regarded as theoretically somewhat improbable.\nHowever, in the standard Lambda cold dark matter model (Lambda-CDM or \u039bCDM model), q will tend to \u22121 from above in the distant future as the cosmological constant becomes increasingly dominant over matter; this implies that H will approach from above to a constant value of \u2248\u00a057\u00a0(km/s)/Mpc, and the scale factor of the universe will then grow exponentially in time.\nIdealized Hubble's law.\nThe mathematical derivation of an idealized Hubble's law for a uniformly expanding universe is a fairly elementary theorem of geometry in 3-dimensional Cartesian/Newtonian coordinate space, which, considered as a metric space, is entirely homogeneous and isotropic (properties do not vary with location or direction). Simply stated, the theorem is this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any two points which are moving away from the origin, each along straight lines and with speed proportional to distance from the origin, will be moving away from each other with a speed proportional to their distance apart.\nIn fact, this applies to non-Cartesian spaces as long as they are locally homogeneous and isotropic, specifically to the negatively and positively curved spaces frequently considered as cosmological models (see shape of the universe).\nAn observation stemming from this theorem is that seeing objects recede from us on Earth is not an indication that Earth is near to a center from which the expansion is occurring, but rather that every observer in an expanding universe will see objects receding from them.\nUltimate fate and age of the universe.\nThe value of the Hubble parameter changes over time, either increasing or decreasing depending on the value of the so-called deceleration parameter q, which is defined by\nformula_17\nIn a universe with a deceleration parameter equal to zero, it follows that \"H\" = 1/\"t\", where t is the time since the Big Bang. A non-zero, time-dependent value of q simply requires integration of the Friedmann equations backwards from the present time to the time when the comoving horizon size was zero.\nIt was long thought that q was positive, indicating that the expansion is slowing down due to gravitational attraction. This would imply an age of the universe less than 1/\"H\" (which is about 14 billion years). For instance, a value for q of 1/2 (once favoured by most theorists) would give the age of the universe as 2/(3\"H\"). The discovery in 1998 that q is apparently negative means that the universe could actually be older than 1/\"H\". However, estimates of the age of the universe are very close to 1/\"H\".\nOlbers' paradox.\nThe expansion of space summarized by the Big Bang interpretation of Hubble's law is relevant to the old conundrum known as Olbers' paradox: If the universe were infinite in size, static, and filled with a uniform distribution of stars, then every line of sight in the sky would end on a star, and the sky would be as bright as the surface of a star. However, the night sky is largely dark.\nSince the 17th\u00a0century, astronomers and other thinkers have proposed many possible ways to resolve this paradox, but the currently accepted resolution depends in part on the Big Bang theory, and in part on the Hubble expansion: in a universe that existed for a finite amount of time, only the light of a finite number of stars has had enough time to reach us, and the paradox is resolved. Additionally, in an expanding universe, distant objects recede from us, which causes the light emanated from them to be redshifted and diminished in brightness by the time we see it.\nDimensionless Hubble constant.\nInstead of working with Hubble's constant, a common practice is to introduce the dimensionless Hubble constant, usually denoted by h and commonly referred to as \"little h\", then to write Hubble's constant \"H\"0 as \"h\" \u00d7 100 km\u22c5s\u22121\u22c5Mpc\u22121, all the relative uncertainty of the true value of \"H\"0 being then relegated to h. The dimensionless Hubble constant is often used when giving distances that are calculated from redshift z using the formula \"d\" \u2248 \u00d7 \"z\". Since \"H\"0 is not precisely known, the distance is expressed as:\nformula_18\nIn other words, one calculates 2998 \u00d7 z and one gives the units as Mpc\u00a0\"h\"-1 or \"h\"-1\u00a0Mpc.\nOccasionally a reference value other than 100 may be chosen, in which case a subscript is presented after h to avoid confusion; e.g. \"h\"70 denotes \"H\"0 = 70 \"h\"70\u00a0, which implies \"h\"70 = \"h\" / 0.7.\nThis should not be confused with the dimensionless value of Hubble's constant, usually expressed in terms of Planck units, obtained by multiplying \"H\"0 by (from definitions of parsec and \"t\"P), for example for \"H\"0 = 70, a Planck unit version of is obtained.\nAcceleration of the expansion.\nA value for q measured from standard candle observations of Type Ia supernovae, which was determined in 1998 to be negative, surprised many astronomers with the implication that the expansion of the universe is currently \"accelerating\" (although the Hubble factor is still decreasing with time, as mentioned above in the Interpretation section; see the articles on dark energy and the \u039bCDM model).\nDerivation of the Hubble parameter.\nStart with the Friedmann equation:\nformula_19\nwhere H is the Hubble parameter, a is the scale factor, G is the gravitational constant, k is the normalised spatial curvature of the universe and equal to \u22121, 0, or 1, and \u039b is the cosmological constant.\nMatter-dominated universe (with a cosmological constant).\nIf the universe is matter-dominated, then the mass density of the universe \u03c1 should be taken to include just matter so\nformula_20\nwhere \"\u03c1\"\"m\"0 is the density of matter today. From the Friedmann equation and thermodynamic principles we know for non-relativistic particles that their mass density decreases proportional to the inverse volume of the universe, so the equation above must be true. We can also define (see density parameter for \u03a9\"m\")\nformula_21\ntherefore:\nformula_22\nAlso, by definition,\nformula_23\nwhere the subscript 0 refers to the values today, and \"a\"0 = 1. Substituting all of this into the Friedmann equation at the start of this section and replacing a with \"a\" = 1/(1+\"z\") gives\nformula_24\nMatter- and dark energy-dominated universe.\nIf the universe is both matter-dominated and dark energy-dominated, then the above equation for the Hubble parameter will also be a function of the equation of state of dark energy. So now:\nformula_25\nwhere \u03c1de is the mass density of the dark energy. By definition, an equation of state in cosmology is \"P\" = \"w\u03c1c\"2, and if this is substituted into the fluid equation, which describes how the mass density of the universe evolves with time, then\nformula_26\nIf w is constant, then\nformula_27\nimplying:\nformula_28\nTherefore, for dark energy with a constant equation of state w, If this is substituted into the Friedman equation in a similar way as before, but this time set \"k\" = 0, which assumes a spatially flat universe, then (see shape of the universe)\nformula_29\nIf the dark energy derives from a cosmological constant such as that introduced by Einstein, it can be shown that \"w\" = \u22121. The equation then reduces to the last equation in the matter-dominated universe section, with \u03a9\"k\" set to zero. In that case the initial dark energy density \"\u03c1\"\"de\"0 is given by\nformula_30\nIf dark energy does not have a constant equation-of-state w, then\nformula_31\nand to solve this, \"w\"(\"a\") must be parametrized, for example if \"w\"(\"a\") = \"w\"0 + \"w\"\"a\"(1\u2212\"a\"), giving\nformula_32\nUnits derived from the Hubble constant.\nHubble time.\nThe Hubble constant \"H\"0 has units of inverse time; the Hubble time tH is simply defined as the inverse of the Hubble constant, i.e.\nformula_33\nThis is slightly different from the age of the universe, which is approximately 13.8\u00a0billion years. The Hubble time is the age it would have had if the expansion had been linear, and it is different from the real age of the universe because the expansion is not linear; it depends on the energy content of the universe (see ).\nThe Hubble time is sometimes said to set the scale for the age of universe.\nThe present age of the universe can be related to the relative density of matter (formula_34), radiation (formula_35), and dark energy (formula_36) as\nformula_37\nThe integral is close to 1 so the Hubble time factor in front sets the scale.\nHubble length.\nThe Hubble length or Hubble distance is a unit of distance in cosmology, defined as \"cH\"\u22121 \u2014 the speed of light multiplied by the Hubble time. It is equivalent to 4,420 million parsecs or 14.4 billion light years. (The numerical value of the Hubble length in light years is, by definition, equal to that of the Hubble time in years.) Substituting \"D\" = \"cH\"\u22121 into the equation for Hubble's law, \"v\" \n \"H\"0\"D\" reveals that the Hubble distance specifies the distance from our location to those galaxies which are currently receding from us at the speed of light.\nHubble volume.\nThe Hubble volume is sometimes defined as a volume of the universe with a comoving size of \"cH\"\u22121. The exact definition varies: it is sometimes defined as the volume of a sphere with radius \"cH\"\u22121, or alternatively, a cube of side \"cH\"\u22121. Some cosmologists even use the term Hubble volume to refer to the volume of the observable universe, although this has a radius approximately three times larger.\nDetermining the Hubble constant.\nThe value of the Hubble constant, \"H\"0, cannot be measured directly, but is derived from a combination of astronomical observations and model-dependent assumptions. Increasingly accurate observations and new models over many decades have led to two sets of highly precise values which do not agree. This difference is known as the \"Hubble tension\".\nEarlier measurements.\nFor the original 1929 estimate of the constant now bearing his name, Hubble used observations of Cepheid variable stars as \"standard candles\" to measure distance. The result he obtained was , much larger than the value astronomers currently calculate. Later observations by astronomer Walter Baade led him to realize that there were distinct \"populations\" for stars (Population I and Population II) in a galaxy. The same observations led him to discover that there are two types of Cepheid variable stars with different luminosities. Using this discovery, he recalculated Hubble constant and the size of the known universe, doubling the previous calculation made by Hubble in 1929. He announced this finding to considerable astonishment at the 1952 meeting of the International Astronomical Union in Rome.\nFor most of the second half of the 20th century, the value of \"H\"0 was estimated to be between .\nThe value of the Hubble constant was the topic of a long and rather bitter controversy between G\u00e9rard de Vaucouleurs, who claimed the value was around 100, and Allan Sandage, who claimed the value was near 50. In one demonstration of vitriol between the parties, when Sandage and his colleague Gustav Andreas Tammann formally acknowledged the shortcomings of confirming the systematic error of their method in 1975, Vaucouleurs responded: \"It is unfortunate that this sober warning was so soon forgotten and ignored by most astronomers and textbook writers\". In 1996, a debate moderated by John Bahcall between Sidney van den Bergh and Gustav Tammann was held in similar fashion to the earlier Shapley\u2013Curtis debate over these two competing values.\nThis previously wide variance in estimates was partially resolved with the introduction of the \u039bCDM model of the universe in the late 1990s. Incorporating the \u039bCDM model, observations of high-redshift clusters at X-ray and microwave wavelengths using the Sunyaev\u2013Zel'dovich effect, measurements of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background radiation, and optical surveys all gave a value of around 50\u201370\u00a0km/s/Mpc for the constant.\nPrecision cosmology and the Hubble tension.\nBy the late 1990s, advances in ideas and technology allowed higher precision measurements.\nHowever, two major categories of methods, each with high precision, fail to agree.\n\"Late universe\" measurements using calibrated distance ladder techniques have converged on a value of approximately . Since 2000, \"early universe\" techniques based on measurements of the cosmic microwave background have become available, and these agree on a value near . (This accounts for the change in the expansion rate since the early universe, so is comparable to the first number.) Initially, this discrepancy was within the estimated measurement uncertainties and thus no cause for concern. However, as techniques have improved, the estimated measurement uncertainties have shrunk, but the discrepancies have \"not\", to the point that the disagreement is now highly statistically significant. This discrepancy is called the Hubble tension.\nAn example of an \"early\" measurement, the Planck mission published in 2018 gives a value for \"H\"0 = of . In the \"late\" camp is the higher value of determined by the Hubble Space Telescope \nand confirmed by the James Webb Space Telescope in 2023.\nThe \"early\" and \"late\" measurements disagree at the &gt;5 \"\u03c3\" level, beyond a plausible level of chance. The resolution to this disagreement is an ongoing area of active research.\nReducing systematic errors.\nSince 2013, extensive checks for possible systematic errors and improvements in reproducibility have been undertaken.\nThe \"late universe\" or distance ladder measurements typically employ three stages or \"rungs\". In the first rung, distances to Cepheids are determined while trying to reduce luminosity errors from dust and correlations of metallicity with luminosity. The second rung uses \nType Ia supernova, explosions of almost constant amounts of mass. Thusly, these produce very similar amounts of light; the primary systematic error in this case is the limited number of objects that can be observed. The third rung of the distance ladder measures the red-shift of supernovae to extract the Hubble flow, and from that the constant. At this rung, corrections due to motion other than expansion are applied. \nAs an example of the kind of work needed to reduce systematic errors, photometry on observations from the James Webb Space Telescope of extra-galactic Cepheids confirm the findings from the HST. The higher resolution avoided confusion from crowding of stars in the field of view but came to the same value for H0.\nThe \"early universe\" or inverse distance ladder measures the observable consequences of spherical sound waves on primordial plasma density. These pressure waves \u2013 called baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) \u2013 ceased once the universe cooled enough for electrons to stay bound to nuclei, ending the plasma and allowing the photons trapped by interaction with the plasma to escape. The subsequent pressure waves are evident in very small perturbations in the density imprinted on the cosmic microwave background, and on the large-scale density of galaxies across the sky. Detailed structure in high-precision measurements of the CMB can be matched to physics models of the oscillations. These models depend upon the Hubble constant such that a match reveals a value for the constant. Similarly, the BAO affects the statistical distribution of matter, observed as distant galaxies across the sky.\nThese two independent measurements produce similar values for the constant from the current models, giving strong evidence that systematic errors in the measurements themselves do not affect the result.\nOther kinds of measurements.\nIn addition to measurements based on calibrated distance ladder techniques or measurements of the CMB, other methods have been used to determine the Hubble constant.\nOne alternative method for constraining the Hubble constant involves transient events seen in multiple images of a strongly lensed object. A transient event, such as a supernova, is seen at different times in each of the lensed images, and if this \"time delay\" between each image can be measured, it can be used to constrain the Hubble constant. This method is commonly known as \"time-delay cosmography\", and was first proposed by Refsdal in 1964, years before the first strongly lensed object was observed. The first strongly lensed supernova to be discovered was named SN Refsdal in his honor. While Refsdal suggested this could be done with supernovae, he also noted that extremely luminous and distant star-like objects could also be used. These objects were later named quasars, and to date (April 2025) the majority of time-delay cosmography measurements have been done with strongly lensed quasars. This is because current samples of lensed quasars vastly outnumber known lensed supernovae, of which &lt;10 are known. This is expected to change dramatically in the next few years, with surveys such as LSST expected to discover ~10 lensed SNe in the first three years of observation. For example time-delay constraints on H0, see the results from STRIDES and H0LiCOW in the table below.\nIn October 2018, scientists used information from gravitational wave events (especially those involving the merger of neutron stars, like GW170817), of determining the Hubble constant.\nIn July 2019, astronomers reported that a new method to determine the Hubble constant, and resolve the discrepancy of earlier methods, has been proposed based on the mergers of pairs of neutron stars, following the detection of the neutron star merger of GW170817, an event known as a dark siren. Their measurement of the Hubble constant is (km/s)/Mpc.\nAlso in July 2019, astronomers reported another new method, using data from the Hubble Space Telescope and based on distances to red giant stars calculated using the tip of the red-giant branch (TRGB) distance indicator. Their measurement of the Hubble constant is .\nIn February 2020, the Megamaser Cosmology Project published independent results based on astrophysical masers visible at cosmological distances and which do not require multi-step calibration. That work confirmed the distance ladder results and differed from the early-universe results at a statistical significance level of 95%.\nIn July 2020, measurements of the cosmic background radiation by the Atacama Cosmology Telescope predict that the Universe should be expanding more slowly than is currently observed.\nIn July 2023, an independent estimate of the Hubble constant was derived from a kilonova, the optical afterglow of a neutron star merger, using the expanding photosphere method. Due to the blackbody nature of early kilonova spectra, such systems provide strongly constraining estimators of cosmic distance. Using the kilonova AT2017gfo (the aftermath of, once again, GW170817), these measurements indicate a local-estimate of the Hubble constant of .\nPossible resolutions of the Hubble tension.\nThe cause of the Hubble tension is unknown, and there are many possible proposed solutions. The most conservative is that there is an unknown systematic error affecting either early-universe or late-universe observations. Although intuitively appealing, this explanation requires multiple unrelated effects regardless of whether early-universe or late-universe observations are incorrect, and there are no obvious candidates. Furthermore, any such systematic error would need to affect multiple different instruments, since both the early-universe and late-universe observations come from several different telescopes.\nAlternatively, it could be that the observations are correct, but some unaccounted-for effect is causing the discrepancy. If the cosmological principle fails (see ), then the existing interpretations of the Hubble constant and the Hubble tension have to be revised, which might resolve the Hubble tension. In particular, we would need to be located within a very large void, up to about a redshift of 0.5, for such an explanation to conflate with supernovae and baryon acoustic oscillation observations. Yet another possibility is that the uncertainties in the measurements could have been underestimated, but given the internal agreements this is neither likely, nor resolves the overall tension.\nFinally, another possibility is new physics beyond the currently accepted cosmological model of the universe, the \u039bCDM model. There are very many theories in this category, for example, replacing general relativity with a modified theory of gravity could potentially resolve the tension, as can a dark energy component in the early universe, dark energy with a time-varying equation of state, or dark matter that decays into dark radiation. A problem faced by all these theories is that both early-universe and late-universe measurements rely on multiple independent lines of physics, and it is difficult to modify any of those lines while preserving their successes elsewhere. The scale of the challenge can be seen from how some authors have argued that new early-universe physics alone is not sufficient; while other authors argue that new late-universe physics alone is also not sufficient. Nonetheless, astronomers are trying, with interest in the Hubble tension growing strongly since the mid 2010s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42977", "revid": "34845715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42977", "title": "Mercedes-Benz Group", "text": "German multinational automotive company\nMercedes-Benz Group AG (formerly Daimler-Benz, DaimlerChrysler, and Daimler) is a German multinational automotive company headquartered in Stuttgart, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany. It is one of the world's leading car manufacturers. Daimler-Benz was formed with the merger of Benz &amp; Cie., the world's oldest car company, and Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft in 1926. The company was renamed DaimlerChrysler upon the acquisition of the American automobile manufacturer, Chrysler Corporation in 1998, it was renamed to Daimler upon the divestment of Chrysler in 2007. In 2021, Daimler was the second-largest German automaker and the sixth-largest worldwide by production. In February 2022, Daimler was renamed Mercedes-Benz Group as part of a transaction that spun-off its commercial vehicle segment as an independent company, Daimler Truck.\nThe Mercedes-Benz Group's marques are Mercedes-Benz for cars and vans (including Mercedes-AMG and Mercedes-Maybach). It has shares in other vehicle manufacturers such as Daimler Truck, BAIC Motor and Aston Martin. Since 2019, Smart left Daimler AG and became a 50/50 joint venture with Geely.\nBy unit sales, the Mercedes-Benz Group is the tenth-largest car manufacturer in the world; shipping two million passenger vehicles in 2021 and by revenue the seventh-largest car manufacturer worldwide in 2023. Also in 2023, the company was ranked 42nd in the Forbes Global 2000. The group provides financial services through its Mercedes-Benz Mobility arm. The company is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. The central company headquarters, the Mercedes-Benz offices, a car assembly plant, the Mercedes-Benz Museum and the Mercedes-Benz Arena are situated in the Mercedes-Benz complex in Stuttgart.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1926\u20131998: Daimler-Benz.\nThe Mercedes-Benz Group origin is in an \"Agreement of Mutual Interest\" signed on 1 May 1924 between Benz &amp; Cie. (founded in 1883 by Carl Benz) and Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft (founded in 1890 by Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach). Both companies continued to manufacture their separate automobile and internal combustion engine marques until 28 June 1926, when Benz &amp; Cie. and Daimler-Motoren-Gesellschaft formally merged\u00a0\u2013 becoming Daimler-Benz AG (Aktiengesellschaft)\u00a0\u2013 and agreed that thereafter, all of the factories would use the brand name of \"Mercedes-Benz\" on their automobiles. The inclusion of the name Mercedes in the new brand name honored the most important model series of DMG automobiles, the Mercedes series, which were designed and built by Wilhelm Maybach. They derived their name from a 1900 engine named after the daughter of Emil Jellinek. Jellinek became one of DMG's directors in 1900, ordered a small number of motor racing cars built to his specifications by Maybach, stipulated that the engine must be named \"Daimler-Mercedes\", and made the new automobile famous through motorsports. That race car later became known as the \"Mercedes 35 hp\". The first of the series of production models bearing the name Mercedes had been produced by DMG in 1902. Jellinek left the DMG board of directors in 1909.\nThe name of Daimler as a marque of automobiles had been given by Gottlieb Daimler for use by other companies. It is or was used principally by Daimler Motor Company and Austro-Daimler later Steyr-Daimler-Puch but also, very briefly by Daimler Manufacturing Company and Panhard-Daimler, and others. The new company, Daimler-Benz, did not obtain consent to include Daimler in its brand name and used the name Mercedes to represent the Daimler-Motoren-Gesellschaft interest. Karl Benz remained as a member of the board of directors of Daimler-Benz AG until his death in 1929.\nAlthough Daimler-Benz is best known for its Mercedes-Benz automobile brand, during World War II, it also created a notable series of engines for German aircraft, tanks, and submarines. Its cars became the first choice of many Nazi, Fascist Italian, and Japanese officials including Hermann G\u00f6ring, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Francisco Franco and Hirohito, who most notably used the Mercedes-Benz 770 luxury car. Daimler also produced parts for German arms, most notably barrels for Mauser Kar98k rifles. \nPrior to World War II, Mercedes Benz gave Adolf Hitler dealer discounts. Once WW II began, Mercedes Benz production lines were almost entirely dedicated to manufacturing for the Nazi Regime. During World War II, Daimler-Benz had over 60,000 concentration camp prisoners and other forced laborers to build machinery. After the war, Daimler admitted to its links and coordination with the Nazi government.\nIn 1966, Maybach-Motorenbau GmbH merged with Mercedes-Benz Motorenbau Friedrichshafen GmbH to form Maybach Mercedes-Benz Motorenbau GmbH, under partial ownership by Daimler-Benz. The company is renamed Motoren und Turbinen-Union Friedrichshafen GmbH (MTU Friedrichshafen) in 1969.\nIn 1989, Daimler-Benz InterServices AG (Debis) was created to handle data processing, financial and insurance services, and real estate management for the Daimler group.\nIn 1995, MTU Friedrichshafen became a wholly owned subsidiary of Daimler-Benz.\n1998\u20132007: DaimlerChrysler.\nIn a so-called \"merger of equals,\" or \"marriage made in heaven,\" according to its then CEO and architect J\u00fcrgen E. Schrempp, Daimler-Benz, and United States\u2013based automobile manufacturer Chrysler Corporation, the smallest of the main three American automakers, merged in 1998 in an exchange of shares and formed DaimlerChrysler AG. Valued at US$38\u00a0billion, it was the world's largest ever cross-border deal.\nThe terms of the merger allowed Daimler-Benz's non-automotive businesses such as Daimler-Benz InterServices AG, \"debis AG\" for short, to continue to pursue their respective strategies of expansion. \"debis AG\" reported revenues of $8.6\u00a0bn (DM 15.5\u00a0bn) in 1997.\nThe merger was contentious with investors launching lawsuits over whether the transaction was the 'merger of equals' that senior management claimed or actually amounted to a Daimler-Benz takeover of Chrysler. A class action investor lawsuit was settled in August 2003 for US$300\u00a0million while a suit by billionaire investor activist Kirk Kerkorian was dismissed on 7 April 2005. The transaction claimed the job of its architect, Chairman J\u00fcrgen E. Schrempp, who resigned at the end of 2005 in response to the fall of the company's share price following the transaction.\nAnother issue of contention is whether the merger delivered promised synergies and successfully integrated the two businesses. Martin H. Wiggers' concept of a platform strategy, like the VW Group's, was implemented only for a few models, so the synergy effects in development and production were low. As late as 2002, DaimlerChrysler appeared to run two independent product lines. Later that year, the company launched products that did integrate elements from both sides of the company, including the Chrysler Crossfire, which was based on the Mercedes SLK platform and utilized Mercedes's 3.2\u00a0L V6, and the Dodge Sprinter/Freightliner Sprinter, a re-badged Mercedes-Benz Sprinter van.\nIn 2000, DaimlerChrysler acquired the Detroit Diesel Corporation and placed its on-highway division under Daimler Trucks North America. The off-highway division was placed under MTU Friedrichshafen to form MTU America. Detroit Diesel branding has been maintained by DTNA and MTU America. In 2005, MTU-Friedrichshafen was sold to the Swedish investment firm EQT Partners. That same year, DaimlerChrysler entered into an alliance with Mitsubishi Motors Corporation in an effort to reach the Asian market. The alliance resulted in the platform sharing between the 2002-2013 Colt and first-generation Smart Forfour, but the declining performance of Mitsubishi led DaimlerChrysler to sell its shares back by 2004.\nIn 2006, Chrysler reported losses of US$1.5\u00a0billion. It then announced plans to lay off 13,000 employees in mid-February 2007, close a major assembly plant and reduce production at other plants in order to restore profitability by 2008. That same year, Chrysler was overtaken by Toyota in the US market, leaving it outside of the traditional \"Big Three\" of US automakers for the first time.\nDaimlerChrysler had reportedly approached other carmakers and investment groups to sell Chrysler in early 2007. General Motors was reported to be a suitor, but Daimler agreed to sell the Chrysler unit to Cerberus Capital Management in May 2007 for US$6\u00a0billion and completed the sale on 3 August 2007. The original agreement stated that Cerberus would take an 80.1 percent stake in the new company, Chrysler Holding LLC. DaimlerChrysler changed its name to Daimler AG and retained the remaining 19.9% stake in the separated Chrysler LLC.\nThe terms saw Daimler pay Cerberus US$650\u00a0million to take Chrysler and associated liabilities off its hands. Of the US$7.4\u00a0billion purchase price, Cerberus Capital Management was to invest US$5\u00a0billion in Chrysler Holdings and US$1.05\u00a0billion in Chrysler's financial unit. The de-merged Daimler AG received US$1.35\u00a0billion directly from Cerberus but directly invested US$2\u00a0billion in Chrysler itself. Chrysler filed bankruptcy in 2009.\nDC Aviation rose in 2007 from the previous DaimlerChrysler Aviation, an auxiliary of DaimlerChrysler AG, which was established in 1998.\n2007\u20132022: Daimler AG.\nIn May 2010, the \"Shenzhen BYD Daimler New Technology Co., Ltd.\", trading as \"Denza\" was established between BYD and Daimler to produce luxury electric vehicles.\nIn November 2014, Daimler announced it would acquire 25 percent of Italian motorcycle producer MV Agusta for an undisclosed fee. MV Holding acquired the 25 percent of MV Agusta back from Daimler in December 2017.\nOn 3 August 2015, Nokia announced that it had reached a deal to sell its Here digital maps division to a consortium of three German automakers\u2014BMW, Daimler AG, and Volkswagen Group, for \u20ac2.8\u00a0billion. This was seen as an indication that the automakers were interested in automated cars.\nIn 2017, Daimler announced a series of acquisitions and partnerships with car startups focused on car sharing, in a move towards what it sees as the next generation of car ownership and usage. Part of its corporate strategy is to \"transition from being an automobile manufacturer to a mobility services provider\".\nIn April 2017 it announced a partnership with Via, a New York\u2013based ride-sharing app, to launch a new ride-sharing service across Europe. In September, it was announced that Daimler had led a fundraising round for car-sharing start up Turo, which is a platform that lets owners rent their vehicles out to other users. It also acquired Flinc, a German startup that has built an app for peer-to-peer-style carpooling, has invested in Storedot, Careem, Blacklane, and FlixBus. It has also acquired car2go and mytaxi (now Free Now).\nLi Shufu of Chinese automobile manufacturer Geely took a 9.69% stake in the company, through Tenaciou3 Prospect Investment Limited, in February 2018, making it the company's largest single shareholder. Geely is already known from its ownership of Volvo Car Corporation. In September 2018, Daimler invested $155\u00a0million in US-based electric bus and its battery management technology manufacturer Proterra.\nIn July 2019, BAIC Group purchased a 5% stake in Daimler, which is a reciprocal shareholder in BAIC's Hong Kong listed subsidiary.\nIn September 2019, Daimler announced that it would be \"stopping its internal combustion engine development initiatives as part of its efforts to embrace electric vehicles.\"\nIn February 2020, Daimler partnered with Twelve to create the world's first C-pillar made with polycarbonate from CO2 electrolysis in an effort towards a fully carbon neutral fleet.\nIn September 2020, the company was fined 875 million dollars by the United States for having violated the Clean Air Act. It agreed to pay $1.5 billion to settle all related court actions.\nIn February 2021, Daimler said it planned to rename itself adopting the name of its flagship marque, Mercedes-Benz, and spun off its heavy commercial vehicles unit, Daimler Truck, into a separate listed company. Daimler Truck is listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and its first trading day was on 10 December 2021.\nIn the 2021 review of WIPO's annual World Intellectual Property Indicators Daimler ranked 8th in the world, with 65 of its designs in industrial design registrations being published under the Hague System during 2020. This position is up on its previous 10th-place ranking in 2019.\nSince 2022: Mercedes-Benz Group.\nOn 28 January 2022, CEO Ola K\u00e4llenius announced that Daimler will be rebranded as Mercedes-Benz to pursue a higher valuation for the company as it shifts deeper into high-tech electric vehicles. On 1 February 2022, Daimler officially changed its registered company name to Mercedes-Benz Group AG.\nSales of Mercedes-Benz Group vehicles in 2023 \u2013 2,491,600 (+1.5%). Sales of superior products increased: Mercedes-Maybach (+19%), G-Class (+11%) and Mercedes-AMG (+4%). Fully electric Mercedes-Benz passenger car sales rose by 73% during the year. Only Core segment sales declined by 2%, with 1,096,800 units sold due to supplier bottlenecks and the transition to the new E-Class.\nCorporate affairs.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for the Mercedes-Benz Group are (as at the financial year ending 31 December):\nManagement.\nOla K\u00e4llenius became the Chairman of Mercedes-Benz Group and Head of Mercedes-Benz Cars on 22 May 2019. As of \u00a02018[ [update]], the members of the Board of Management of Mercedes-Benz Group AG were:\n2025 shareholder structure.\nThe following structure is based on The German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) and Mercedes-Benz's site data.\nEADS shareholding.\nIn March 2010, Daimler owned a 22.5% share of EADS.\nIn April 2013, Daimler sold its shares in EADS, and the same year, EADS restructured itself into a new aerospace company named Airbus.\nNorth Charleston expansion.\nOn 5 March 2015, Daimler AG announced a 1,200-job package to the North Charleston region for its van plant, to allow the company to start manufacturing Mercedes-Benz Sprinter vans from scratch to meet demand in North America. From 2010, these vans were set up in Germany, then shipped to the United States partially disassembled for reassembly to avoid import tariffs. A Daimler official said that the Sprinter's popularity in North America was making that process less efficient. The North Charleston plant had been employing only 100 workers. The Sprinter is available on the U.S. market as a panel van, crew bus and chassis in several variants with three lengths and roof heights, six-cylinder diesel or gasoline engines. The Sprinter has been assembled and sold in the United States since 2001.\nBrands.\nThe Mercedes-Benz Group sells automobiles under the following brands worldwide:\nLocations.\nThe Mercedes-Benz Group has a worldwide network of production plants and research centers. The following list describes all locations around the world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHoldings.\nIn 2015, Daimler held interests in the following companies:\nUntil the end of 2011, the company had also held shares in McLaren Group. Daimler held 25% of MV Agusta of Italy until 2017. Daimler sold its 50% stake in Engine Holding, to its joint venture partner, Rolls-Royce Holdings in 2014. It is now called Rolls-Royce Power Systems AG. Daimler used to own 50.1% Automotive Fuel Cell Cooperation of Canada but the joint venture was closed in 2018.\nJoint ventures and alliances.\nFAW and later Beijing Automotive Group.\nFrom 1986 to 1989, Daimler produced the Mercedes-Benz W123 (200 and 230E) sedans in China under a joint venture with FAW Group, with 828 units assembled in Changchun.\nBeijing Jeep was a joint venture between Chrysler and BAIC Motor. After DaimlerChrysler was formed, its legal name was changed to Beijing Benz in 2004, and it started producing Mercedes-Benz models in 2006. The partnership has continued during the Daimler AG era.\nIn February 2013, Daimler acquired a 12% stake in BAIC Motor, becoming the first western car manufacturer to own a stake in a Chinese company.\nDaimler works with China's Beiqi Foton (a subsidiary of BAIC) to build Auman trucks.\nForce Motors.\nDaimler has partnered with Force Motors since the 1950s, they let Force Motors use the OM616 on the Force Gurkha and Trax.\nFujian Benz.\nIn 2007 Daimler created a joint venture with Fujian Motors Group and China Motor Corporation and created Fujian Benz (originally Fujian Daimler Automotive Co.).\nSsangYong Motors.\nBetween 1990 and 2010 SsangYong partnered with Daimler-Benz. The deal was for SsangYong to develop an SUV with Mercedes-Benz technology. This was supposedly to allow SsangYong to gain footholds in new markets without having to build their own infrastructure (utilizing existing Mercedes-Benz networks) while giving Mercedes a competitor in the then-booming SUV market. This resulted in the Musso, which was sold first by Mercedes-Benz and later by SsangYong. SsangYong further benefited from this alliance, long after Daimler-Benz stopped selling the Musso, producing a badge engineered version of the Mercedes-Benz MB100, the Istana and using Daimler designs in many other models, including the second-generation Korando (engine and transmission), the Rexton (transmission), the Chairman H (chassis and transmission) and the Kyron (transmission). Ssangyong Also Partnered with Daewoo Motors to sell the chairman, Korando, Istana, and Musso to the rest of South Korea and Asia, Ssangyong later partnered with SAIC (Roewe) to rebadge the Chairman W in china as the Roewe R95/850 and the Kyron as Roewe W5 and also use the Mercedes-Benz 5G-Tronic transmission for the W5, SAIC has been working with Daimler since the 1964 with the Shanghai SH760 using a modified W121 chassis. Micro another company that rebadged Ssangyong's like Kyron, Actyon and Rexton using Mercedes-Benz engines.\nRenault-Nissan-Mitsubishi and Daimler Alliance.\nOn 7 April 2010, Renault-Nissan executives, Carlos Ghosn and Dieter Zetsche, announced an intercourse between the three companies. The first fruits of the alliance in 2012 included engine sharing (Infiniti Q50 utilising Mercedes diesel engines) and a re-badged Renault Kangoo being sold as a Mercedes-Benz Citan.\nAlternative propulsion.\nElectric.\nDaimler AG and the utility company RWE AG were set in 2009 to begin a joint electric car and charging station test project in the German capital, Berlin, called \"E-Mobility Berlin.\" \nFollowing trials in 2007 and then with Tesla in 2009, Daimler is building a production Smart electric drive car using Tesla's battery technology. Daimler temporarily invested in Tesla, saving it from bankruptcy.\nDaimler's joint venture with BYD has resulted in the creation of the new brand Denza.\nIn 2016, Daimler subsidiary ACCUMOTIVE announced their stationary batteries, to store up to 20 kWh of solar power for later use. Daimler plans to invest \u20ac1.5\u00a0billion in battery technology, and unveiled a factory in Kamenz in May 2017.\nIn September 2019, Daimler redirected its internal combustion engine development initiatives to focus on electric vehicle technologies, leaving electric propulsion rather less of an \"alternative\" and more the Daimler mainline. Their Research and Development department has developed a compostable battery that uses graphene-based organic cell chemistry. This means that no rare, toxic metals are needed for the battery, which makes it 100% recyclable.\nSince 2019, fully electric cars have been released through the Mercedes-EQ brand.\nFuel cell.\nDaimler has been involved with fuel cell vehicle development for some time, with a number of research and concept vehicles shown and demonstrated, the first being the 2002 Mercedes-Benz F-Cell car and the Mercedes-Benz Citaro hydrogen bus. In 2013, the Renault-Nissan/Daimler alliance was joined by Ford to further develop the fuel cell technology with an aim for production by 2017.\nHybrid.\nMercedes-Benz launched its first passenger car model equipped with a hybrid drive system in summer 2009, the Mercedes-Benz S-Class 400 Hybrid. and the Citaro Hybrid bus in 2007. Daimler Trucks and Mitusbishi Fuso have also trialed various hybrid models including the Mitsubishi Fuso Canter Eco Hybrid and Mitsubishi Fuso Aero Star Aero Star Eco Hybrid bus.\nBiofuel research.\nDaimler AG is involved in a joint project with Archer Daniels Midland Company and Bayer CropScience to develop the semi-evergreen shrub jatropha curcas as a biofuel.\nFormula One.\nOn 16 November 2009, Daimler and Aabar Investments purchased a 75.1% stake in Brawn GP (Daimler holding 45.1%). The company was rebranded as Mercedes GP with its base in Brackley, UK and Ross Brawn remaining team principal. The Brawn purchase led to Daimler selling back its stake in McLaren in stages, completed in 2011. Mercedes continued to provide sponsorship and engines to McLaren until 2014.\nPrior to the 2011 season, Daimler and Aabar Investments purchased the remaining 24.9% stake owned by the team management in February 2011. In November 2012, Aabar Investments sold its remaining shares, leaving the team (rebranded as Mercedes AMG Petronas F1 Team) wholly Daimler-owned.\nDaimler also owns Mercedes AMG High Performance Powertrains which, as of 2024, supplied engines to Aston Martin, Williams, and McLaren, in addition to Mercedes AMG Petronas.\nO-Bahn.\nThe O-Bahn system was conceived by Daimler-Benz to enable buses to avoid traffic congestion by sharing tram tunnels in the German city of Essen. However, the project did not materialise there; the project was built in the Australian city of Adelaide.\nBribery and corruption.\nOn 1 April 2010, Daimler AG's German and Russian subsidiaries each pleaded guilty to two counts of bribery charges brought by the U.S. Justice Department and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The parent company made a US$185\u00a0million settlement, but the company and its Chinese subsidiary remained subject to a two-year deferred prosecution agreement requiring further cooperation with regulators, adherence to internal controls and meeting other terms before final sentencing. Daimler would face harsher penalties should it fail to meet the terms of the agreement during the two-year period.\nAdditionally, Louis J. Freeh, a former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, served as an independent monitor to oversee Daimler's compliance with anti-bribery laws.\nU.S. prosecutors accused key executives of Daimler, Daimler subsidiaries, and Daimler affiliates of illegally showering foreign officials with money and gifts between 1998 and 2008 to secure government contracts around the world. The investigation for the case revealed that Daimler improperly paid some $56\u00a0million in bribes related to more than 200 transactions in at least 22 countries (including China, Russia, Turkey, Hungary, Greece, Latvia, Serbia and Montenegro, Egypt, and Nigeria, among other places) that, in return, awarded the company $1.9\u00a0billion in revenue and at least $91.4\u00a0million in illegal profits.\nThe SEC case was sparked in 2004 after David Bazzetta, a former auditor at then DaimlerChrysler Corp, filed a whistleblower complaint after he was fired for raising questions about bank accounts controlled by Mercedes-Benz units in South America. Bazzetta alleged that he learned in a July 2001 corporate audit executive committee meeting in Stuttgart that business units \"continued to maintain secret bank accounts to bribe foreign government officials\", though the company knew the practice violated U.S. laws.\nIn another attempt to silence Bazzetta, Daimler later offered to settle his termination of employment suit out of court and he eventually accepted a settlement. But Daimler's strategy with Bazzetta proved to be a failure as the U.S. criminal investigation for violating anti-bribery laws was already underway in what has been one of the most wide-ranging cases brought against a foreign corporation.\nAccording to the charges, the bribes were frequently made by over-invoicing customers and paying the excess back to top government officials or their proxies. The bribes also took the form of luxury European vacations, armored Mercedes vehicles for high-ranking government officials and a birthday gift to the dictator of Turkmenistan, Turkmenbashi (Saparmurat Niyazov), including a golden box and 10,000 copies of his personal manifesto, \"Ruhnama\", translated into German.\nInvestigators also found that the firm violated the terms of the United Nations' Oil-for-Food Programme with Iraq by giving kickbacks worth 10% of the contract values to officials within the Iraqi government, then led by Saddam Hussein. The SEC said the company made more than $4\u00a0million in profit from the sale of vehicles and spare parts in the corrupt oil-for-food deals.\nU.S. prosecutors further alleged that some bribes were paid through shell companies based in the U.S. \"In some cases Daimler wired these improper payments to U.S. bank accounts or to the foreign bank accounts of U.S. shell companies in order to transmit the bribe\", the court papers said.\nProsecutors said that Daimler engaged in a \"long-standing practice\" of paying bribes, due in part to a corporate culture that encouraged the practice.\n\"Using offshore bank accounts, third-party agents and deceptive pricing practices, [Daimler AG, its subsidiaries and its affiliates] saw foreign bribery as a way of doing business,\" said Mythili Raman, a principal deputy in the Justice Department's criminal division.\n\"It is no exaggeration to describe corruption and bribe-paying at Daimler as a standard business practice\", Robert Khuzami, director of the SEC's enforcement division, said in a statement.\nAs per the agreement with prosecutors, the two Daimler subsidiaries admitted to knowingly violating the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which bars companies and their officials from paying bribes to foreign officials to win business. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act applies to any company that lists its shares on U.S. stock exchanges. Daimler AG was listed with the symbol \"DAI\" on the New York Stock Exchange, giving the Justice Department jurisdiction over the German car maker's payments in countries around the globe. Judge Richard J. Leon of the United States District Court in Washington, D.C., approved the plea agreement and settlement, calling it a \"just resolution.\" Daimler AG agreed to settle for $2.2\u00a0billion to US and California state regulators.\nLabor relations.\nUnited States.\nIn March 2024, workers at the Mercedes-Benz plant in Tuscaloosa County, Alabama filed charges against the company with the US National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), accusing the company of illegally disciplining workers at the plant in retaliation for organizing with the United Auto Workers (UAW) labor union. In May 2024, following the loss of a unionization vote at the plant, the UAW filed a formal complaint with the NLRB seeking a new election due to what it called \"wanton lawlessness\" on the part of Mercedes-Benz in the run up to the election, with the UAW accusing the company of holding anti-union captive audience meetings, targeting pro-union workers for drug tests, and illegally terminating UAW supporters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42978", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42978", "title": "Jack London", "text": "American author, journalist and social activist (1876\u20131916)\nJohn Griffith London (n\u00e9\u00a0Chaney; January 12, 1876 \u2013 November 22, 1916), better known as Jack London, was an American novelist, journalist and activist. A pioneer of commercial fiction and American magazines, he was one of the first American authors to become an international celebrity and earn a large fortune from writing. He was also an innovator in the genre that would later become known as science fiction.\nLondon was part of the radical literary group \"The Crowd\" in San Francisco and a passionate advocate of animal welfare, workers' rights and socialism. London wrote several works dealing with these topics, such as his dystopian novel \"The Iron Heel\", his non-fiction expos\u00e9 \"The People of the Abyss\", \"War of the Classes\", and \"Before Adam\".\nHis most famous works include \"The Call of the Wild\" and \"White Fang\", both set in Alaska and the Yukon during the Klondike Gold Rush, as well as the short stories \"To Build a Fire\", \"An Odyssey of the North\", and \"Love of Life\". He also wrote about the South Pacific in stories such as \"The Pearls of Parlay\" and \"The Heathen\".\nFamily.\nJack London was born January 12, 1876. His mother, Flora Wellman, was the fifth and youngest child of Pennsylvania Canal builder Marshall Wellman and his first wife, Eleanor Garrett Jones. Marshall Wellman was descended from Thomas Wellman, an early Puritan settler in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Flora left Massillon, Ohio and moved to the Pacific coast when her father remarried after her mother died. In San Francisco, Flora worked as a music teacher and spiritualist.\nThe biographer Clarice Stasz and others believe London's father was astrologer William Chaney. Flora Wellman was living with Chaney in San Francisco when she became pregnant. Whether Wellman and Chaney were legally married is unknown. Stasz notes that in his memoirs, Chaney refers to London's mother Flora Wellman as having been \"his wife\"; he also cites an advertisement in which Flora called herself \"Florence Wellman Chaney\".\nAccording to Flora Wellman's account, as recorded in the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" of June 4, 1875, Chaney demanded that she have an abortion. When she refused, he disclaimed responsibility for the child. In desperation, she shot herself. She was not seriously wounded, but she was temporarily deranged. After giving birth, Flora sent the baby for wet-nursing to Virginia (Jennie) Prentiss, a neighbor and former slave. Prentiss was an important maternal figure throughout London's life, and he would later refer to her as his primary source of love and affection as a child.\nLate in 1876, Flora Wellman married John London, a partially disabled Civil War veteran, and brought her baby John, later known as Jack, to live with the newly married couple. The family moved around the San Francisco Bay Area before settling in Oakland, where London completed public grade school. The Prentiss family moved with the Londons, and remained a stable source of care for the young Jack.\nIn 1897, when he was 21 and a student at the University of California, Berkeley, London searched for and read the newspaper accounts of his mother's suicide attempt and the name of his biological father. He wrote to William Chaney, then living in Chicago. Chaney responded that he could not be London's father because he was impotent; he casually asserted that London's mother had relations with other men and averred that she had slandered him when she said he insisted on an abortion. London was devastated by his father's letter; in the months following, he quit school at Berkeley and went to the Klondike during the gold rush boom.\nEarly life.\nLondon was born near Third and Brannan Streets in San Francisco. The house burned down in the fire after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake; the California Historical Society placed a plaque at the site in 1953. Although the family was working class, it was not as impoverished as London's later accounts claimed. London was largely self-educated.\nIn 1885, London found and read Ouida's long Victorian novel \"Signa\". He credited this as the seed of his literary success. In 1886, he went to the Oakland Public Library and found a sympathetic librarian, Ina Coolbrith, who encouraged his learning. (She later became California's first \"poet laureate\" and an important figure in the San Francisco literary community).\nIn 1889, London began working 12 to 18\u00a0hours a day at Hickmott's Cannery. Seeking a way out, he borrowed money from his foster mother Virginia Prentiss, bought the sloop \"Razzle-Dazzle\" from an oyster pirate named French Frank, and became an oyster pirate himself. In his memoir, \"John Barleycorn\", he claims also to have stolen French Frank's mistress Mamie. After a few months, his sloop became damaged beyond repair. London hired on as a member of the California Fish Patrol.\nIn 1893, he signed on to the sealing schooner \"Sophie Sutherland\", bound for the coast of Japan. When he returned, the country was in the grip of the panic of '93 and Oakland was swept by labor unrest. After grueling jobs in a jute mill and a street-railway power plant, London joined Coxey's Army and began his career as a tramp. In 1894, he spent 30\u00a0days for vagrancy in the Erie County Penitentiary at Buffalo, New York. In \"The Road\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Man-handling was merely one of the very minor unprintable horrors of the Erie County Pen. I say 'unprintable'; and in justice I must also say undescribable. They were unthinkable to me until I saw them, and I was no spring chicken in the ways of the world and the awful abysses of human degradation. It would take a deep plummet to reach bottom in the Erie County Pen, and I do but skim lightly and facetiously the surface of things as I there saw them.\u2014\u200a\nAfter many experiences as a hobo and a sailor, he returned to Oakland and attended Oakland High School. He contributed a number of articles to the high school's magazine, \"The Aegis\". His first published work was \"Typhoon off the Coast of Japan\", an account of his sailing experiences.\nAs a schoolboy, London often studied at Heinold's First and Last Chance Saloon, a port-side bar in Oakland. At 17, he confessed to the bar's owner, John Heinold, his desire to attend university and pursue a career as a writer. Heinold lent London tuition money to attend college.\nLondon desperately wanted to attend the University of California, located in Berkeley. In 1896, after a summer of intense studying to pass certification exams, he was admitted. Financial circumstances forced him to leave in 1897, and he never graduated. No evidence has surfaced that he ever wrote for student publications while studying at Berkeley.\nWhile at Berkeley, London continued to study and spend time at Heinold's saloon, where he was introduced to the sailors and adventurers who would influence his writing. In his autobiographical novel, \"John Barleycorn,\" London mentioned the pub's likeness seventeen times. Heinold's was the place where London met Alexander McLean, a captain known for his cruelty at sea. London based his protagonist Wolf Larsen, in the novel \"The Sea-Wolf,\" on McLean.\nHeinold's First and Last Chance Saloon is now unofficially named Jack London's Rendezvous in his honor.\nGold rush and first success.\nOn July 12, 1897, London (age 21) and his sister's husband Captain Shepard sailed to join the Klondike Gold Rush. This was the setting for some of his first successful stories. London's time in the harsh Klondike, however, was detrimental to his health. Like so many other men who were malnourished in the goldfields, London developed scurvy. His gums became swollen, leading to the loss of his four front teeth. A constant gnawing pain affected his hip and leg muscles, and his face was stricken with marks that always reminded him of the struggles he faced in the Klondike. Father William Judge, \"The Saint of Dawson\", had a facility in Dawson that provided shelter, food and any available medicine to London and others. His struggles there inspired London's short story, \"To Build a Fire\" (1902, revised in 1908), which many critics assess as his best.\nHis landlords in Dawson were mining engineers Marshall Latham Bond and Louis Whitford Bond, educated at the Bachelor's level at the Sheffield Scientific School at Yale and at the Master's level at Stanford, respectively. The brothers' father, Judge Hiram Bond, was a wealthy mining investor. While the Bond brothers were at Stanford, Hiram at the suggestion of his brother bought the New Park Estate at Santa Clara as well as a local bank. The Bonds, especially Hiram, were active Republicans. Marshall Bond's diary mentions friendly sparring with London on political issues as a camp pastime.\nLondon left Oakland with a social conscience and socialist leanings; he returned to become an activist for socialism. He concluded that his only hope of escaping the work \"trap\" was to get an education and \"sell his brains\". He saw his writing as a business, his ticket out of poverty and, he hoped, as a means of beating the wealthy at their own game.\nOn returning to California in 1898, London began working to get published, a struggle described in his novel \"Martin Eden\" (serialized in 1908, published in 1909). His first published story since high school was \"To the Man On Trail\", which has frequently been collected in anthologies. When \"The Overland Monthly\" offered him only five dollars for it\u2014and was slow paying\u2014London came close to abandoning his writing career. In his words, \"literally and literarily I was saved\" when \"The Black Cat\" accepted his story \"A Thousand Deaths\" and paid him $40\u2014the \"first money I ever received for a story\".\nLondon began his writing career just as new printing technologies enabled lower-cost production of magazines. This resulted in a boom in popular magazines aimed at a wide public audience and a strong market for short fiction. In 1900, he made $2,500 in writing, about $ in today's currency.\nAmong the works he sold to magazines was a short story known as either \"Diable\" (1902) or \"B\u00e2tard\" (1904), two editions of the same basic story. London received $141.25 for this story on May 27, 1902. In the text, a cruel French Canadian brutalizes his dog, and the dog retaliates and kills the man. London told some of his critics that man's actions are the main cause of the behavior of their animals, and he would show this famously in another story, \"The Call of the Wild\".\nIn early 1903, London sold \"The Call of the Wild\" to \"The Saturday Evening Post\" for $750 and the book rights to Macmillan. Macmillan's promotional campaign propelled it to swift success.\nWhile living at his rented villa on Lake Merritt in Oakland, California, London met poet George Sterling; in time they became best friends. In 1902, Sterling helped London find a home closer to his own in nearby Piedmont. In his letters London addressed Sterling as \"Greek\", owing to Sterling's aquiline nose and classical profile, and he signed them as \"Wolf\". London was later to depict Sterling as Russ Brissenden in his autobiographical novel \"Martin Eden\" (1910) and as Mark Hall in \"The Valley of the Moon\" (1913).\nIn later life London indulged his wide-ranging interests by accumulating a personal library of 15,000 volumes. He referred to his books as \"the tools of my trade\".\n\"The Crowd\" (literary group).\n\"The Crowd\" gathered at the restaurants (including Coppa's&lt;ref name=\"sfchronicle/10609139\"&gt;\nBohemian group that often spent its Sunday afternoons picnicking, reading each other's latest compositions, gossiping about each other's infidelities and frolicking beneath the cherry boughs in the hills of Piedmont\n\u2013 Alex Kershaw, historian&lt;ref name=\"paintingpiedmont/crowd\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nFormed after 1898, they met at Xavier Martinez's home on Sundays, and at Jack London's home on Wednesdays. The group usually included George Sterling (poet) and his wife Caroline \"Carrie\" E. (n\u00e9e Rand) Sterling, Anna Strunsky, Herman Whitaker, Ambrose Bierce, Richard Partington and his wife Blanche, Joseph Noel (dramatist, novelist and journalist),&lt;ref name=\"archives.nypl/21404\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"nytimes/1946/08/08/joseph-noel-65\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Joaquin Miller, Arnold Genthe and the hosts, Jack London and his wife, Bessie Maddern London, and Xavier Martinez and his wife, Elsie Whitaker Martinez.\nFirst marriage (1900\u20131904).\nLondon married Elizabeth Mae (or May) \"Bessie\" Maddern on April 7, 1900, the same day \"The Son of the Wolf\" was published. Bess had been part of his circle of friends for a number of years. She was related to stage actresses Minnie Maddern Fiske and Emily Stevens. Stasz says, \"Both acknowledged publicly that they were not marrying out of love, but from friendship and a belief that they would produce sturdy children.\" Kingman says, \"they were comfortable together... Jack had made it clear to Bessie that he did not love her, but that he liked her enough to make a successful marriage.\"\nLondon met Bessie through his friend at Oakland High School, Fred Jacobs; she was Fred's fianc\u00e9e. Bessie, who tutored at Anderson's University Academy in Alameda California, tutored Jack in preparation for his entrance exams for the University of California at Berkeley in 1896. Jacobs was killed aboard the \"Scandia\" in 1897, but Jack and Bessie continued their friendship, which included taking photos and developing the film together. This was the beginning of Jack's passion for photography.\nDuring the marriage, London continued his friendship with Anna Strunsky, co-authoring \"The Kempton-Wace Letters\", an epistolary novel contrasting two philosophies of love. Anna, writing \"Dane Kempton's\" letters, arguing for a romantic view of marriage, while London, writing \"Herbert Wace's\" letters, argued for a scientific view, based on Darwinism and eugenics. In the novel, his fictional character contrasted two women he had known.\nLondon's pet name for Bess was \"Mother-Girl\" and Bess's for London was \"Daddy-Boy\". Their first child, Joan, was born on January 15, 1901, and their second, Bessie \"Becky\" (also reported as Bess), on October 20, 1902. Both children were born in Piedmont, California. Here London wrote one of his most celebrated works, \"The Call of the Wild.\"\nWhile London had pride in his children, the marriage was strained. Kingman says that by 1903 the couple were close to separation as they were \"extremely incompatible\". \"Jack was still so kind and gentle with Bessie that when Cloudsley Johns was a house guest in February 1903 he didn't suspect a breakup of their marriage.\"\nLondon reportedly complained to friends Joseph Noel and George Sterling:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Bessie] is devoted to purity. When I tell her morality is only evidence of low blood pressure, she hates me. She'd sell me and the children out for her damned purity. It's terrible. Every time I come back after being away from home for a night she won't let me be in the same room with her if she can help it.\nStasz writes that these were \"code words for [Bess's] fear that [Jack] was consorting with prostitutes and might bring home venereal disease.\"\nOn July 24, 1903, London told Bessie he was leaving and moved out. During 1904, London and Bess negotiated the terms of a divorce, and the decree was granted on November 11, 1904.\nWar correspondent (1904).\nLondon accepted an assignment of the \"San Francisco Examiner\" to cover the Russo-Japanese War in early 1904, arriving in Yokohama on January 25, 1904. He was arrested by Japanese authorities in Shimonoseki, but released through the intervention of American ambassador Lloyd Griscom. After travelling to Korea, he was again arrested by Japanese authorities for straying too close to the border with Manchuria without official permission, and was sent back to Seoul. Released again, London was permitted to travel with the Imperial Japanese Army to the border, and to observe the Battle of the Yalu.\nLondon asked William Randolph Hearst, the owner of the \"San Francisco Examiner\", to be allowed to transfer to the Imperial Russian Army, where he felt that restrictions on his reporting and his movements would be less severe. However, before this could be arranged, he was arrested for a third time in four months, this time for assaulting his Japanese assistants, whom he accused of stealing the fodder for his horse. Released through the personal intervention of President Theodore Roosevelt, London departed the front in June 1904.\nBohemian Club.\nOn August 18, 1904, London went with his close friend, the poet George Sterling, to \"Summer High Jinks\" at the Bohemian Grove. London was elected to honorary membership in the Bohemian Club and took part in many activities. Other noted members of the Bohemian Club during this time included Ambrose Bierce, Gelett Burgess, Allan Dunn, John Muir, Frank Norris, and Herman George Scheffauer.\nBeginning in December 1914, London worked on \"The Acorn Planter, A California Forest Play\", to be performed as one of the annual Grove Plays, but it was never selected. It was described as too difficult to set to music. London published \"The Acorn Planter\" in 1916.\nSecond marriage.\nAfter divorcing Maddern, London married Charmian Kittredge in 1905. London had been introduced to Kittredge in 1900 by her aunt Netta Eames, who was an editor at \"Overland Monthly\" magazine in San Francisco. The two met prior to his first marriage but became lovers years later after Jack and Bessie London visited Wake Robin, Netta Eames' Sonoma County resort, in 1903. London was injured when he fell from a buggy, and Netta arranged for Charmian to care for him. The two developed a friendship, as Charmian, Netta, her husband Roscoe, and London were politically aligned with socialist causes. At some point the relationship became romantic, and Jack divorced his wife to marry Charmian, who was five years his senior.\nBiographer Russ Kingman called Charmian \"Jack's soul-mate, always at his side, and a perfect match.\" Their time together included numerous trips, including a 1907 cruise on the yacht \"Snark\" to Hawaii and Australia. Many of London's stories are based on his visits to Hawaii, the last one for 10\u00a0months beginning in December 1915.\nThe couple also visited Goldfield, Nevada, in 1907, where they were guests of the Bond brothers, London's Dawson City landlords. The Bond brothers were working in Nevada as mining engineers.\nLondon had contrasted the concepts of the \"Mother Girl\" and the \"Mate Woman\" in \"The Kempton-Wace Letters\". His pet name for Bess had been \"Mother-Girl\"; his pet name for Charmian was \"Mate-Woman\". Charmian's aunt and foster mother, a disciple of Victoria Woodhull, had raised her without prudishness. Every biographer alludes to Charmian's uninhibited sexuality.\nJoseph Noel calls the events from 1903 to 1905 \"a domestic drama that would have intrigued the pen of an Ibsen... London's had comedy relief in it and a sort of easy-going romance.\" In broad outline, London was restless in his first marriage, sought extramarital sexual affairs, and found, in Charmian Kittredge, not only a sexually active and adventurous partner, but his future life-companion. They attempted to have children; one child died at birth, and another pregnancy ended in a miscarriage.\nIn 1906, London published in \"Collier's\" magazine his eye-witness report of the San Francisco earthquake.\nBeauty Ranch (1905\u20131916).\nIn 1905, London purchased a ranch in Glen Ellen, Sonoma County, California, on the eastern slope of Sonoma Mountain. He wrote: \"Next to my wife, the ranch is the dearest thing in the world to me.\" He desperately wanted the ranch to become a successful business enterprise. Writing, always a commercial enterprise with London, now became even more a means to an end: \"I write for no other purpose than to add to the beauty that now belongs to me. I write a book for no other reason than to add three or four hundred acres to my magnificent estate.\"\nStasz writes that London \"had taken fully to heart the vision, expressed in his agrarian fiction, of the land as the closest earthly version of Eden ... he educated himself through the study of agricultural manuals and scientific tomes. He conceived of a system of ranching that today would be praised for its ecological wisdom.\" He was proud to own the first concrete silo in California. He hoped to adapt the wisdom of Asian sustainable agriculture to the United States. He hired both Italian and Chinese stonemasons, whose distinctly different styles are obvious.\nThe ranch was an economic failure. Sympathetic observers such as Stasz treat his projects as potentially feasible, and ascribe their failure to bad luck or to being ahead of their time. Unsympathetic historians such as Kevin Starr suggest that he was a bad manager, distracted by other concerns and impaired by his alcoholism. Starr notes that London was absent from his ranch about six months a year between 1910 and 1916 and says, \"He liked the show of managerial power, but not grinding attention to detail ... London's workers laughed at his efforts to play big-time rancher [and considered] the operation a rich man's hobby.\"\nLondon spent $80,000 ($ in current value) to build a stone mansion called Wolf House on the property. Just as the mansion was nearing completion, two weeks before the Londons planned to move in, it was destroyed by fire.\nLondon's last visit to Hawaii, beginning in December 1915, lasted eight months. He met with Duke Kahanamoku, Prince Jonah K\u016bhi\u014d Kalaniana'ole, Queen Lili'uokalani and many others, before returning to his ranch in July 1916. He was suffering from kidney failure, but he continued to work.\nThe ranch (abutting stone remnants of Wolf House) is now a National Historic Landmark and is protected in Jack London State Historic Park.\nAnimal activism.\nLondon witnessed animal cruelty in the training of circus animals, and his subsequent novels \"Jerry of the Islands\" and \"Michael, Brother of Jerry\" included a foreword entreating the public to become more informed about this practice. In 1918, the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the American Humane Education Society teamed up to create the Jack London Club, which sought to inform the public about cruelty to circus animals and encourage them to protest this establishment. Support from Club members led to a temporary cessation of trained animal acts at Ringling\u2013Barnum and Bailey in 1925.\nDeath.\nLondon died November 22, 1916, in a sleeping porch in a cottage on his ranch. London had been a robust man but had suffered several serious illnesses, including scurvy in the Klondike. Additionally, during travels on the \"Snark\", he and Charmian picked up unspecified tropical infections and diseases, including yaws. At the time of his death, he suffered from dysentery, late-stage alcoholism, and uremia; he was in extreme pain and taking morphine and opium, both common over-the-counter drugs at the time.\nLondon's ashes were buried on his property not far from the Wolf House. London's funeral took place on November 26, 1916, attended only by close friends, relatives, and workers of the property. In accordance with his wishes, he was cremated and buried next to some pioneer children, under a rock that belonged to the Wolf House. After Charmian's death in 1955, she was also cremated and then buried with her husband in the same spot that her husband chose. The grave is marked by a mossy boulder. The buildings and property were later preserved as Jack London State Historic Park, in Glen Ellen, California.\nSuicide debate.\nBecause he was using morphine, many older sources describe London's death as a suicide, and some still do. This conjecture appears to be a rumor, or speculation based on incidents in his fiction writings. His death certificate gives the cause as uremia, following acute renal colic.\nThe biographer Clarice Stasz writes, \"Following London's death, for a number of reasons, a biographical myth developed in which he has been portrayed as an alcoholic womanizer who committed suicide. Recent scholarship based upon firsthand documents challenges this caricature.\" Most biographers, including Russ Kingman, now agree he died of uremia aggravated by an accidental morphine overdose.\nLondon's fiction features several suicides. In his autobiographical memoir \"John Barleycorn\", he claims, as a youth, to have drunkenly stumbled overboard into the San Francisco Bay, \"some maundering fancy of going out with the tide suddenly obsessed me.\" He said he drifted and nearly succeeded in drowning before sobering up and being rescued by fishermen. In the d\u00e9nouement of \"The Little Lady of the Big House\", the heroine, confronted by the pain of a mortal gunshot wound, undergoes a physician-assisted suicide by morphine. Also, in \"Martin Eden\", the principal protagonist, who shares certain characteristics with London, drowns himself.\nPlagiarism accusations.\nLondon was vulnerable to accusations of plagiarism, both because he was such a conspicuous, prolific, and successful writer and because of his methods of working. He wrote in a letter to Elwyn Hoffman, \"expression, you see\u2014with me\u2014is far easier than invention.\" He purchased plots and novels from the young Sinclair Lewis and used incidents from newspaper clippings as writing material.\nIn July 1901, two pieces of fiction appeared within the same month: London's \"Moon-Face\", in the \"San Francisco Argonaut,\" and Frank Norris' \"The Passing of Cock-eye Blacklock\", in \"Century Magazine\". Newspapers showed the similarities between the stories, which London said were \"quite different in manner of treatment, [but] patently the same in foundation and motive.\" London explained both writers based their stories on the same newspaper account. A year later, it was discovered that Charles Forrest McLean had published a fictional story also based on the same incident.\nEgerton Ryerson Young claimed \"The Call of the Wild\" (1903) was taken from Young's book \"My Dogs in the Northland\" (1902). London acknowledged using it as a source and claimed to have written a letter to Young thanking him.\nIn 1906, the \"New York World\" published \"deadly parallel\" columns showing eighteen passages from London's short story \"Love of Life\" side by side with similar passages from a nonfiction article by Augustus Biddle and J. K. Macdonald, titled \"Lost in the Land of the Midnight Sun\". London noted the \"World\" did not accuse him of \"plagiarism\", but only of \"identity of time and situation\", to which he defiantly \"pled guilty\".\nThe most serious charge of plagiarism was based on London's \"The Bishop's Vision\", Chapter 7 of his novel \"The Iron Heel\" (1908). The chapter is nearly identical to an ironic essay that Frank Harris published in 1901, titled \"The Bishop of London and Public Morality\". Harris was incensed and suggested he should receive 1/60th of the royalties from \"The Iron Heel,\" the disputed material constituting about that fraction of the whole novel. London insisted he had clipped a reprint of the article, which had appeared in an American newspaper, and believed it to be a genuine speech delivered by the Bishop of London.\nViews.\nAtheism.\nLondon was an atheist. He is quoted as saying, \"I believe that when I am dead, I am dead. I believe that with my death I am just as much obliterated as the last mosquito you and I squashed.\"\nPolitical views.\nLondon wrote from a socialist viewpoint, which is evident in his novel \"The Iron Heel\". Neither a theorist nor an intellectual socialist, London's socialism grew out of his life experience. As London explained in his essay \"How I Became a Socialist\", his views were influenced by his experience with people at the bottom of the social pit. His optimism and individualism faded, and he vowed never to do more hard physical work than necessary. He wrote that his individualism was hammered out of him, and he was politically reborn. He often closed his letters \"Yours for the Revolution\".\nLondon joined the Socialist Labor Party in April 1896. In the same year, the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" published a story about the twenty-year-old London's giving nightly speeches in Oakland's City Hall Park, an activity he was arrested for a year later. In 1901, he left the Socialist Labor Party and joined the new Socialist Party of America. He ran unsuccessfully as the high-profile Socialist candidate for mayor of Oakland in 1901 (receiving 245 votes) and 1905 (improving to 981 votes), toured the country lecturing on socialism in 1906, and published two collections of essays about socialism: \"War of the Classes\" (1905) and \"Revolution, and other Essays\" (1906).\nStasz notes: \"London regarded the Wobblies as a welcome addition to the Socialist cause, although he never joined them in going so far as to recommend sabotage.\" Stasz mentions a personal meeting between London and Big Bill Haywood in 1912. In his 1913 book \"The Cruise of the Snark\", London writes about appeals to him for membership of the \"Snark\"'s crew from office workers and other \"toilers\" who longed for escape from the cities, and of being cheated by workmen.\nIn his Glen Ellen ranch years, London felt some ambivalence toward socialism and complained about the \"inefficient Italian labourers\" in his employ. In 1916, he resigned from the Glen Ellen chapter of the Socialist Party. In an unflattering portrait of London's ranch days, California cultural historian Kevin Starr refers to this period as \"post-socialist\" and says that \"[...] by 1911 [...] London was more bored by the class struggle than he cared to admit.\"\nGeorge Orwell, however, identified a fascist strain in London's outlook:But temperamentally he was very different from the majority of Marxists. With his love of violence and physical strength, his belief in 'natural aristocracy', his animal-worship and exaltation of the primitive, he had in him what one might fairly call a Fascist strain.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nThe Jack London Online Collection"}
{"id": "42980", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42980", "title": "Suzuki (disambiguation)", "text": "Suzuki may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42981", "revid": "43844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42981", "title": "The Dukes of Hazard", "text": ""}
{"id": "42986", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42986", "title": "Alternating current", "text": "Electric current that periodically reverses direction\nAlternating current (AC) is an electric current that periodically reverses direction and changes its magnitude continuously with time, in contrast to direct current (DC), which flows only in one direction. Alternating current is the form in which electric power is delivered to businesses and residences, and it is the form of electrical energy that consumers typically use when they plug kitchen appliances, televisions, fans and electric lamps into a wall socket. The abbreviations \"AC\" and \"DC\" are often used to mean simply \"alternating\" and \"direct\", respectively, as when they modify \"current\" or \"voltage\".\nThe usual waveform of alternating current in most electric power circuits is a sine wave, whose positive half-period corresponds with positive direction of the current and vice versa (the full period is called a \"cycle\"). \"Alternating current\" most commonly refers to power distribution, but a wide range of other applications are technically alternating current although it is less common to describe them by that term. In many applications, like guitar amplifiers, different waveforms are used, such as triangular waves or square waves. Audio and radio signals carried on electrical wires are also examples of alternating current. These types of alternating current carry information such as sound (audio) or images (video) sometimes carried by modulation of an AC carrier signal. These currents typically alternate at higher frequencies than those used in power transmission.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTransmission, distribution, and domestic power supply.\nElectrical energy is distributed as alternating current because AC voltage may be increased or decreased with a transformer. This allows the power to be transmitted through power lines efficiently at high voltage, which reduces the energy lost as heat due to resistance of the wire, and transformed to a lower, safer voltage for use. Use of a higher voltage leads to significantly more efficient transmission of power. The power losses (formula_1) in the wire are a product of the square of the current ( I ) and the resistance (R) of the wire, described by the formula:\nformula_2\nThis means that when transmitting a fixed power on a given wire, if the current is halved (by doubling the voltage), the power loss due to the wire's resistance will be reduced by a factor of four.\nThe power transmitted is equal to the product of the current and the voltage (assuming no phase difference); that is,\nformula_3\nConsequently, power transmitted at a higher voltage requires less loss-producing current than for the same power at a lower voltage. Power is often transmitted at hundreds of kilovolts on pylons, and transformed down to tens of kilovolts to be transmitted on lower level lines, and finally transformed down to 100\u00a0V \u2013 240\u00a0V for domestic use.\nHigh voltages have disadvantages, such as the increased insulation required, and generally increased difficulty in their safe handling. In a power plant, energy is generated at a convenient voltage for the design of a generator, and then stepped up to a high voltage for transmission. Near the loads, the transmission voltage is stepped down to the voltages used by equipment. Consumer voltages vary somewhat depending on the country and size of load, but generally motors and lighting are built to use up to a few hundred volts between phases. The voltage delivered to equipment such as lighting and motor loads is standardized, with an allowable range of voltage over which equipment is expected to operate. Standard power utilization voltages and percentage tolerance vary in the different mains power systems found in the world.\nHigh-voltage direct-current (HVDC) electric power transmission systems have become more viable as technology has provided efficient means of changing the voltage of DC power. Transmission with high voltage direct current was not feasible in the early days of electric power transmission, as there was then no economically viable way to step the voltage of DC down for end user applications such as lighting incandescent bulbs.\nThree-phase electrical generation is very common. The simplest way is to use three separate coils in the generator stator, physically offset by an angle of 120\u00b0 (one-third of a complete 360\u00b0 phase) to each other. Three current waveforms are produced that are equal in magnitude and 120\u00b0 out of phase to each other. If coils are added opposite to these (60\u00b0 spacing), they generate the same phases with reverse polarity and can be wired together. In practice, higher \"pole orders\" are commonly used. For example, a 12-pole machine would have 36 coils (10\u00b0 spacing). The advantage is that lower rotational speeds can be used to generate the same frequency. For example, a 2-pole machine running at 3600\u00a0rpm and a 12-pole machine running at 600\u00a0rpm produce the same frequency; the lower speed is preferable for larger machines. If the load on a three-phase system is balanced equally among the phases, no current flows through the neutral point. Even in the worst-case unbalanced (linear) load, the neutral current will not exceed the highest of the phase currents. Non-linear loads (e.g. the switch-mode power supplies widely used) may require an oversized neutral bus and neutral conductor in the upstream distribution panel to handle harmonics. Harmonics can cause neutral conductor current levels to exceed that of one or all phase conductors.\nFor three-phase at utilization voltages a four-wire system is often used. When stepping down three-phase, a transformer with a Delta (3-wire) primary and a Star (4-wire, center-earthed) secondary is often used so there is no need for a neutral on the supply side. For smaller customers (just how small varies by country and age of the installation) only a single phase and neutral, or two phases and neutral, are taken to the property. For larger installations, all three phases and neutral are taken to the main distribution panel. From the three-phase main panel, both single and three-phase circuits may lead off. Three-wire single-phase systems, with a single center-tapped transformer giving two live conductors, is a common distribution scheme for residential and small commercial buildings in North America. This arrangement is sometimes incorrectly referred to as \"two phase\". A similar method is used for a different reason on construction sites in the UK. Small power tools and lighting are supposed to be supplied by a local center-tapped transformer with a voltage of 55\u00a0V between each power conductor and earth. This significantly reduces the risk of electric shock in the event that one of the live conductors becomes exposed through an equipment fault whilst still allowing a reasonable voltage of 110\u00a0V between the two conductors for running the tools.\nAn additional wire, called the bond (or earth) wire, is often connected between non-current-carrying metal enclosures and earth ground. This conductor provides protection from electric shock due to accidental contact of circuit conductors with the metal chassis of portable appliances and tools. Bonding all non-current-carrying metal parts into one complete system ensures there is always a low electrical impedance path to ground sufficient to carry any fault current for as long as it takes for the system to clear the fault. This low impedance path allows the maximum amount of fault current, causing the overcurrent protection device (breakers, fuses) to trip or burn out as quickly as possible, bringing the electrical system to a safe state. All bond wires are bonded to ground at the main service panel, as is the neutral/identified conductor if present.\nAC power supply frequencies.\nThe frequency of the electrical system varies by country and sometimes within a country; most electric power is generated at either 50 or . Some countries have a mixture of 50\u00a0Hz and 60\u00a0Hz supplies, notably electricity power transmission in Japan. \nLow frequency.\nA low frequency eases the design of electric motors, particularly for hoisting, crushing and rolling applications, and commutator-type traction motors for applications such as railways. However, low frequency also causes noticeable flicker in arc lamps and incandescent light bulbs. The use of lower frequencies also provided the advantage of lower transmission losses, which are proportional to frequency. \nThe original Niagara Falls generators were built to produce 25\u00a0Hz power, as a compromise between low frequency for traction and heavy induction motors, while still allowing incandescent lighting to operate (although with noticeable flicker). Most of the 25\u00a0Hz residential and commercial customers for Niagara Falls power were converted to 60\u00a0Hz by the late 1950s, although some 25\u00a0Hz industrial customers still existed as of the start of the 21st century. 16.7\u00a0Hz power (formerly 16 2/3\u00a0Hz) is still used in some European rail systems, such as in Austria, Germany, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.\nHigh frequency.\nOff-shore, military, textile industry, marine, aircraft, and spacecraft applications sometimes use 400\u00a0Hz, for benefits of reduced weight of apparatus or higher motor speeds. Computer mainframe systems were often powered by 400\u00a0Hz or 415\u00a0Hz for benefits of ripple reduction while using smaller internal AC to DC conversion units.\nEffects at high frequencies.\nA direct current flows uniformly throughout the cross-section of a homogeneous electrically conducting wire. An alternating current of any frequency is forced away from the wire's center, toward its outer surface. This is because an alternating current (which is the result of the acceleration of electric charge) creates electromagnetic waves (a phenomenon known as electromagnetic radiation). Electric conductors are not conducive to electromagnetic waves (a perfect electric conductor prohibits all electromagnetic waves within its boundary), so a wire that is made of a non-perfect conductor (a conductor with finite, rather than infinite, electrical conductivity) pushes the alternating current, along with their associated electromagnetic fields, away from the wire's center. The phenomenon of alternating current being pushed away from the center of the conductor is called skin effect, and a direct current does not exhibit this effect, since a direct current does not create electromagnetic waves. \nAt very high frequencies, the current no longer flows \"in\" the wire, but effectively flows \"on\" the surface of the wire, within a thickness of a few skin depths. The skin depth is the thickness at which the current density is reduced by 63%. Even at relatively low frequencies used for power transmission (50\u00a0Hz \u2013 60\u00a0Hz), non-uniform distribution of current still occurs in sufficiently thick conductors. For example, the skin depth of a copper conductor is approximately 8.57\u00a0mm at 60\u00a0Hz, so high-current conductors are usually hollow to reduce their mass and cost. This tendency of alternating current to flow predominantly in the periphery of conductors reduces the effective cross-section of the conductor. This increases the effective AC resistance of the conductor since resistance is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area. A conductor's AC resistance is higher than its DC resistance, causing a higher energy loss due to Ohmic heating (also called I2R loss).\nTechniques for reducing AC resistance.\nFor low to medium frequencies, conductors can be divided into stranded wires, each insulated from the others, with the relative positions of individual strands specially arranged within the conductor bundle. Wire constructed using this technique is called Litz wire. This measure helps to partially mitigate skin effect by forcing more equal current throughout the total cross section of the stranded conductors. Litz wire is used for making high-Q inductors, reducing losses in flexible conductors carrying very high currents at lower frequencies, and in the windings of devices carrying higher radio frequency current (up to hundreds of kilohertz), such as switch-mode power supplies and radio frequency transformers.\nTechniques for reducing radiation loss.\nAs written above, an alternating current is made of electric charge under periodic acceleration, which causes radiation of electromagnetic waves. Energy that is radiated is lost. Depending on the frequency, different techniques are used to minimize the loss due to radiation.\nTwisted pairs.\nAt frequencies up to about 1\u00a0GHz, pairs of wires are twisted together in a cable, forming a twisted pair. This reduces losses from electromagnetic radiation and inductive coupling. A twisted pair must be used with a balanced signaling system so that the two wires carry equal but opposite currents. Each wire in a twisted pair radiates a signal, but it is effectively canceled by radiation from the other wire, resulting in almost no radiation loss.\nCoaxial cables.\nCoaxial cables are commonly used at audio frequencies and above for convenience. A coaxial cable has a conductive wire inside a conductive tube, separated by a dielectric layer. The current flowing on the surface of the inner conductor is equal and opposite to the current flowing on the inner surface of the outer tube. The electromagnetic field is thus completely contained within the tube, and (ideally) no energy is lost to radiation or coupling outside the tube. Coaxial cables have acceptably small losses for frequencies up to about 5\u00a0GHz. For microwave frequencies greater than 5\u00a0GHz, the losses (due mainly to the dielectric separating the inner and outer tubes being a non-ideal insulator) become too large, making waveguides a more efficient medium for transmitting energy. Coaxial cables often use a perforated dielectric layer to separate the inner and outer conductors in order to minimize the power dissipated by the dielectric.\nWaveguides.\nWaveguides are similar to coaxial cables, as both consist of tubes, with the biggest difference being that waveguides have no inner conductor. Waveguides can have any arbitrary cross section, but rectangular cross sections are the most common. Because waveguides do not have an inner conductor to carry a return current, waveguides cannot deliver energy by means of an electric current, but rather by means of a \"guided\" electromagnetic field. Although surface currents do flow on the inner walls of the waveguides, those surface currents do not carry power. Power is carried by the guided electromagnetic fields. The surface currents are set up by the guided electromagnetic fields and have the effect of keeping the fields inside the waveguide and preventing leakage of the fields to the space outside the waveguide. Waveguides have dimensions comparable to the wavelength of the alternating current to be transmitted, so they are feasible only at microwave frequencies. In addition to this mechanical feasibility, electrical resistance of the non-ideal metals forming the walls of the waveguide causes dissipation of power (surface currents flowing on lossy conductors dissipate power). At higher frequencies, the power lost to this dissipation becomes unacceptably large.\nFiber optics.\nAt frequencies greater than 200\u00a0GHz, waveguide dimensions become impractically small, and the ohmic losses in the waveguide walls become large. Instead, fiber optics, which are a form of dielectric waveguides, can be used. For such frequencies, the concepts of voltages and currents are no longer used.\nFormulation.\nAlternating currents are accompanied (or caused) by alternating voltages. An AC voltage \"v\" can be described mathematically as a function of time by the following equation:\nformula_4,\nwhere\nThe peak-to-peak value of an AC voltage is defined as the difference between its positive peak and its negative peak. Since the maximum value of formula_10 is +1 and the minimum value is \u22121, an AC voltage swings between formula_11 and formula_12. The peak-to-peak voltage, usually written as formula_13 or formula_14, is therefore formula_15.\nRoot mean square voltage.\nBelow an AC waveform (with no DC component) is assumed.\nThe RMS voltage is the square root of the mean over one cycle of the square of the instantaneous voltage.\n.&lt;/math&gt;\n formula_16\nwhere the trigonometric identity formula_17 has been used and the factor formula_18 is called the crest factor, which varies for different waveforms.\n formula_19\n formula_20\nPower.\nThe relationship between voltage and the power delivered is:\nformula_21,\nwhere formula_22 represents a load resistance.\nRather than using instantaneous power, formula_23, it is more practical to use a time-averaged power (where the averaging is performed over any integer number of cycles). Therefore, AC voltage is often expressed as a root mean square (RMS) value, written as formula_24, because\nformula_25\nFor this reason, AC power's waveform becomes Full-wave rectified sine, and its fundamental frequency is double that of the voltage's.\nExamples of alternating current.\nTo illustrate these concepts, consider a 230\u00a0V AC mains supply used in many countries around the world. It is so called because its root mean square value is 230\u00a0V. This means that the time-averaged power delivered formula_27 is equivalent to the power delivered by a DC voltage of 230\u00a0V. To determine the peak voltage (amplitude), we can rearrange the above equation to:\nformula_28\nformula_29\nFor 230\u00a0V AC, the peak voltage formula_5 is therefore formula_31, which is about 325\u00a0V, and the peak power formula_32 is formula_33, that is 460\u00a0RW. During the course of one cycle (two cycle as the power) the voltage rises from zero to 325\u00a0V, the power from zero to 460\u00a0RW, and both falls through zero. Next, the voltage descends to reverse direction, \u2212325\u00a0V, but the power ascends again to 460\u00a0RW, and both returns to zero.\nInformation transmission.\nAlternating current is used to transmit information, as in the cases of telephone and cable television. Information signals are carried over a wide range of AC frequencies. POTS telephone signals have a frequency of about 3\u00a0kHz, close to the baseband audio frequency. Cable television and other cable-transmitted information currents may alternate at frequencies of tens to thousands of megahertz. These frequencies are similar to the electromagnetic wave frequencies often used to transmit the same types of information over the air.\nHistory.\nThe first alternator to produce alternating current was an electric generator based on Michael Faraday's principles constructed by the French instrument maker Hippolyte Pixii in 1832. Pixii later added a commutator to his device to produce the (then) more commonly used direct current. The earliest recorded practical application of alternating current is by Guillaume Duchenne, inventor and developer of electrotherapy. In 1855, he announced that AC was superior to direct current for electrotherapeutic triggering of muscle contractions. Alternating current technology was developed further by the Hungarian Ganz Works company in the 1870s, and, in the 1880s, by Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti, Lucien Gaulard, and Galileo Ferraris.\nIn 1876, Russian engineer Pavel Yablochkov invented a lighting system where sets of induction coils were installed along a high-voltage AC line. Instead of changing voltage, the primary windings transferred power to the secondary windings which were connected to one or several electric candles (arc lamps) of his own design, used to keep the failure of one lamp from disabling the entire circuit. In 1878, the Ganz factory, Budapest, Hungary, began manufacturing equipment for electric lighting and, by 1883, had installed over fifty systems in Austria-Hungary. Their AC systems used arc and incandescent lamps, generators, and other equipment.\nTransformers.\nThe development of the alternating current transformer to change voltage from low to high level and back, allowed generation and consumption at low voltages and transmission, over great distances, at high voltage, with savings in the cost of conductors and energy losses. A bipolar open-core power transformer developed by Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs was demonstrated in London in 1881, and attracted the interest of Westinghouse. They exhibited an AC system powering arc and incandescent lights was installed along five railway stations for the Metropolitan Railway in London and a single-phase multiple-user AC distribution system Turin in 1884. These early induction coils with open magnetic circuits were inefficient at transferring power to loads. Until about 1880, the paradigm for AC power transmission from a high voltage supply to a low voltage load was a series circuit. Open-core transformers with a ratio near 1:1 were connected with their primaries in series to allow use of a high voltage for transmission while presenting a low voltage to the lamps. The inherent flaw in this method was that turning off a single lamp (or other electric device) affected the voltage supplied to all others on the same circuit. Many adjustable transformer designs were introduced to compensate for this problematic characteristic of the series circuit, including those employing methods of adjusting the core or bypassing the magnetic flux around part of a coil. The direct current systems did not have these drawbacks, giving it significant advantages over early AC systems.\nIn the UK, Sebastian de Ferranti, who had been developing AC generators and transformers in London since 1882, redesigned the AC system at the Grosvenor Gallery power station in 1886 for the London Electric Supply Corporation (LESCo) including alternators of his own design and open core transformer designs with serial connections for utilization loads - similar to Gaulard and Gibbs. In 1890, he designed their power station at Deptford and converted the Grosvenor Gallery station across the Thames into an electrical substation, showing the way to integrate older plants into a universal AC supply system.\nIn the autumn of 1884, K\u00e1roly Zipernowsky, Ott\u00f3 Bl\u00e1thy and Miksa D\u00e9ri (ZBD), three engineers associated with the Ganz Works of Budapest, determined that open-core devices were impractical, as they were incapable of reliably regulating voltage. Bl\u00e1thy had suggested the use of closed cores, Zipernowsky had suggested the use of parallel shunt connections, and D\u00e9ri had performed the experiments; In their joint 1885 patent applications for novel transformers (later called ZBD transformers), they described two designs with closed magnetic circuits where copper windings were either wound around a ring core of iron wires or else surrounded by a core of iron wires. In both designs, the magnetic flux linking the primary and secondary windings traveled almost entirely within the confines of the iron core, with no intentional path through air (see toroidal cores). The new transformers were 3.4 times more efficient than the open-core bipolar devices of Gaulard and Gibbs. The Ganz factory in 1884 shipped the world's first five high-efficiency AC transformers. This first unit had been manufactured to the following specifications: 1,400 W, 40\u00a0Hz, 120:72 V, 11.6:19.4 A, ratio 1.67:1, one-phase, shell form. In 1885 they used their system to illuminate the Hungarian National Exhibition in Budapest using 75 transformers in parallel connection to supply 1,067 incandescent Edison lamps from an AC generator that provided 1,350\u00a0V.\nThe ZBD patents included two other major interrelated innovations: one concerning the use of parallel connected, instead of series connected, utilization loads, the other concerning the ability to have high turns ratio transformers such that the supply network voltage could be much higher (initially 140 to 2000\u00a0V) than the voltage of utilization loads (100\u00a0V initially preferred). When employed in parallel connected electric distribution systems, closed-core transformers finally made it technically and economically feasible to provide electric power for lighting in homes, businesses and public spaces.\nThe other essential milestone was the introduction of 'voltage source, voltage intensive' (VSVI) systems' by the invention of constant voltage generators in 1885. In early 1885, the three engineers also eliminated the problem of eddy current losses with the invention of the lamination of electromagnetic cores. Ott\u00f3 Bl\u00e1thy also invented the first AC electricity meter.\nAdoption.\nThe AC power system was developed and adopted rapidly after 1886. In March of that year, Westinghouse engineer William Stanley, designing a system based on the Gaulard and Gibbs transformer, demonstrated a lighting system in Great Barrington: A Siemens generator's voltage of 500 volts was converted into 3000 volts, and then the voltage was stepped down to 500 volts by six Westinghouse transformers. With this setup, the Westinghouse company successfully powered thirty 100-volt incandescent bulbs in twenty shops along the main street of Great Barrington. By the fall of that year Ganz engineers installed a ZBD transformer power system with AC generators in Rome.\nBased on Stanley's success, the new Westinghouse Electric went on to develop alternating current (AC) electric infrastructure throughout the United States. The spread of Westinghouse and other AC systems triggered a push back in late 1887 by Thomas Edison (a proponent of direct current), who attempted to discredit alternating current as too dangerous in a public campaign called the \"war of the currents\". \nIn 1888, alternating current systems gained further viability with the introduction of a functional AC motor, something these systems had lacked up till then. The design, an induction motor, was independently invented by Galileo Ferraris and Nikola Tesla (with Tesla's design being licensed by Westinghouse in the US). This design was independently further developed into the modern practical three-phase form by Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky and Charles Eugene Lancelot Brown in Germany on one side, and Jonas Wenstr\u00f6m in Sweden on the other, though Brown favored the two-phase system.\nThe Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant, constructed in 1890, was among the first hydroelectric alternating current power plants. A long-distance transmission of single-phase electricity from a hydroelectric generating plant in Oregon at Willamette Falls sent power fourteen miles downriver to downtown Portland for street lighting in 1890. In 1891, another transmission system was installed in Telluride Colorado. The first three-phase system was established in 1891 in Frankfurt, Germany. The Tivoli\u2013Rome transmission was completed in 1892. The San Antonio Canyon Generator was the third commercial single-phase hydroelectric AC power plant in the United States to provide long-distance electricity. It was completed on December 31, 1892, by Almarian William Decker to provide power to the city of Pomona, California, which was 14 miles away. Meanwhile, the possibility of transferring electrical power from a waterfall at a distance was explored at the Gr\u00e4ngesberg mine in Sweden. A fall at H\u00e4llsj\u00f6n, Smedjebackens kommun, where a small iron work had been located, was selected. In 1893, a three-phase system was used to transfer 400 horsepower a distance of , becoming the first commercial application. In 1893, Westinghouse built an alternating current system for the Chicago World Exposition. In 1893, Decker designed the first American commercial three-phase power plant using alternating current\u2014the hydroelectric Mill Creek No. 1 Hydroelectric Plant near Redlands, California. Decker's design incorporated 10\u00a0kV three-phase transmission and established the standards for the complete system of generation, transmission and motors used in USA today. The original Niagara Falls Adams Power Plant with three two-phase generators was put into operation in August 1895, but was connected to the remote transmission system only in 1896. The Jaruga Hydroelectric Power Plant in Croatia was set in operation two days later, on 28 August 1895. Its generator (42\u00a0Hz, 240\u00a0kW) was made and installed by the Hungarian company Ganz, while the transmission line from the power plant to the City of \u0160ibenik was long, and the municipal distribution grid 3000\u00a0V/110\u00a0V included six transforming stations.\nAlternating current circuit theory developed rapidly in the latter part of the 19th and early 20th century. Notable contributors to the theoretical basis of alternating current calculations include Charles Steinmetz, Oliver Heaviside, and many others. Calculations in unbalanced three-phase systems were simplified by the symmetrical components methods discussed by Charles LeGeyt Fortescue in 1918. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42987", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42987", "title": "Elve", "text": ""}
{"id": "42988", "revid": "241822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42988", "title": "Orcs", "text": ""}
{"id": "42990", "revid": "1018034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42990", "title": "Convoy", "text": "Group of vehicles traveling together\nA convoy is a group of vehicles, typically motor vehicles or ships, traveling together for mutual support and protection. Often, a convoy is organized with armed defensive support and can help maintain cohesion within a unit. It may also be used in a non-military sense, for example when driving through remote areas.\nNaval convoys.\nAge of Sail.\nNaval convoys have been in use for centuries, with examples of merchant ships traveling under naval protection dating to the 12th century. The use of organized naval convoys dates from when ships began to be separated into specialist classes and national navies were established.\nBy the French Revolutionary Wars of the late 18th century, effective naval convoy tactics had been developed to ward off pirates and privateers. Some convoys contained several hundred merchant ships. The most enduring system of convoys were the Spanish treasure fleets, that sailed from the 1520s until 1790.\nWhen merchant ships sailed independently, a privateer could cruise a shipping lane and capture ships as they passed. Ships sailing in convoy presented a much smaller target: a convoy was as hard to find as a single ship. Even if the privateer found a convoy and the wind was favourable for an attack, it could still hope to capture only a handful of ships before the rest managed to escape, and a small escort of warships could easily thwart it. As a result of the convoy system's effectiveness, wartime insurance premiums were consistently lower for ships that sailed in convoys.\nMany naval battles in the Age of Sail were fought around convoys, including:\nBy the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Royal Navy had in place a sophisticated convoy system to protect merchant ships. Losses of ships travelling out of convoy, however, were so high that no merchant ship was allowed to sail unescorted.\nWorld War I.\nIn the early 20th century, the dreadnought changed the balance of power in convoy battles. Steaming faster than merchant ships and firing at long ranges, a single battleship could destroy many ships in a convoy before the others could scatter over the horizon. To protect a convoy against a capital ship required providing it with an escort of another capital ship, at very high opportunity cost (i.e. potentially tying down multiple capital ships to defend different convoys against one opponent ship).\nBattleships were the main reason that the British Admiralty did not adopt convoy tactics at the start of the first Battle of the Atlantic in World War I. But the German capital ships had been bottled up in the North Sea, and the main threat to shipping came from U-boats. From a tactical point of view, World War I\u2013era submarines were similar to privateers in the age of sail. These submarines were only a little faster than the merchant ships they were attacking, and capable of sinking only a small number of vessels in a convoy because of their limited supply of torpedoes and shells. The Admiralty took a long time to respond to this change in the tactical position, and in April 1917 convoys were trialled, before being officially introduced in the Atlantic in September 1917.\nOther arguments against convoys were raised. The primary issue was the loss of productivity, as merchant shipping in convoy has to travel at the speed of the slowest vessel in the convoy and spent a considerable amount of time in ports waiting for the next convoy to depart. Further, large convoys were thought to overload port resources.\nActual analysis of shipping losses in World War I disproved all these arguments, at least so far as they applied to transatlantic and other long-distance traffic. Ships sailing in convoys were far less likely to be sunk, even when not provided with an escort. The loss of productivity due to convoy delays was small compared with the loss of productivity due to ships being sunk. Ports could deal more easily with convoys because they tended to arrive on schedule and so loading and unloading could be planned.\nIn his book \"On the Psychology of Military Incompetence\", Norman Dixon suggested that the hostility towards convoys in the naval establishment were in part caused by a (sub-conscious) perception of convoys as effeminating, due to warships having to care for civilian merchant ships. Convoy duty also exposes the escorting warships to the sometimes hazardous conditions of the North Atlantic, with only rare occurrences of visible achievement (i.e. fending off a submarine assault).\nWorld War II.\nAtlantic.\nThe British adopted a convoy system, initially voluntary and later compulsory for almost all merchant ships, the moment that World War II was declared. Each convoy consisted of between 30 and 70 mostly unarmed merchant ships. Canadian, and later American, supplies were vital for Britain to continue its war effort. The course of the Battle of the Atlantic was a long struggle as the Germans developed anti-convoy tactics and the British developed counter-tactics to thwart the Germans.\nThe capability of a heavily armed warship against a convoy was dramatically illustrated by the fate of Convoy HX 84. On November 5, 1940, the German heavy cruiser encountered the convoy. \"Maiden\", \"Trewellard\", and \"Kenbame Head\" were quickly sunk, with \"Beaverford\" and \"Fresno City\" suffering the same fate later. Only the sacrifices of the armed merchant cruiser and the freighter \"Beaverford\" to stall the \"Scheer\", in addition to failing light, allowed the rest of the convoy to escape.\nThe deterrence value of a battleship in protecting a convoy was also dramatically illustrated when the German light battleships (referred by some as battlecruisers) and , mounting guns, came upon an eastbound British convoy (HX 106, with 41 ships) in the North Atlantic on February 8, 1941. When the Germans detected the slow but well-protected battleship escorting the convoy, they fled the scene rather than risk damage from her guns.\nThe enormous number of vessels involved and the frequency of engagements meant that statistical techniques could be applied to evaluate tactics: an early use of operational research in war.\nPrior to overt participation in World War II, the US was actively engaged in convoys with the British in the North Atlantic Ocean, primarily supporting British activities in Iceland.\nAfter Germany declared war on the US, the US Navy decided not to organize convoys on the American eastern seaboard. US Fleet Admiral Ernest King ignored advice on this subject from the British, as he had formed a poor opinion of the Royal Navy early in his career. The result was what the U-boat crews called their Second Happy Time, which did not end until convoys were introduced.\nPacific.\nIn the Pacific Theater of World War II, Japanese merchant ships rarely traveled in convoys. Japanese destroyers were generally deficient in antisubmarine weaponry compared to their Allied counterparts, and the Japanese navy did not develop an inexpensive convoy escort like the Allies' destroyer escort/frigate until it was too late. In the early part of the conflict, American submarines in the Pacific were ineffective as they suffered from timid tactics, faulty torpedoes, and poor deployment, while there were only small numbers of British and Dutch boats. U.S. Admiral Charles A. Lockwood's efforts, coupled with strenuous complaints from his captains, rectified these problems and U.S. submarines became much more successful by war's end. As a result, the Japanese merchant fleet was largely destroyed by the end of the war. Japanese submarines, unlike their U.S. and German equivalents, focused on U.S. battle fleets rather than merchant convoys, and while they did manage some early successes, sinking two U.S. carriers, they failed to significantly inhibit the invasion convoys carrying troops and equipment in support of the U.S. island-hopping campaign.\nSeveral notable battles in the South Pacific involved Allied bombers interdicting Japanese troopship convoys which were often defended by Japanese fighters, notable Guadalcanal (13 November 1942), Rabaul (5 January 1943), and the Battle of the Bismarck Sea (2\u20134 March 1943).\nAt the Battle off Samar, the effectiveness of the U.S. Navy's escorts was demonstrated when they managed to defend their troop convoy from a much larger and more powerful Japanese battle-fleet. The Japanese force comprised four battleships and numerous heavy cruisers, while the U.S. force consisted of escort carriers, destroyers, and destroyer escorts. Large numbers of American aircraft (albeit without much anti-ship ordnance other than torpedoes) and aggressive tactics of the destroyers (with their radar-directed gunfire) allowed the U.S. to sink three Japanese heavy cruisers at the cost of one escort carrier and three destroyers.\nTactics.\nThe German anti-convoy tactics included:\nThe Allied responses included:\nThey were also aided by\nConvoy battles.\nMany naval battles of World War II were fought around convoys, including:\nThe convoy prefix indicates the route of the convoy. For example, 'PQ' would be Iceland to Northern Russia and 'QP' the return route.\nAnalysis.\nThe success of convoys as an anti-submarine tactic during the world wars can be ascribed to several reasons related to U-boat capabilities, the size of the ocean and convoy escorts.\nIn practice, Type VII and Type IX U-boats were limited in their capabilities. Submerged speed and endurance was limited and not suited for overhauling many ships. Even a surfaced U-boat could take several hours to gain an attack position. Torpedo capacity was also restricted to around fourteen (Type VII) or 24 (Type IX), thus limiting the number of attacks that could be made, particularly when multiple firings were necessary for a single target. There was a real problem for the U-boats and their adversaries in finding each other; with a tiny proportion of the ocean in sight, without intelligence or radar, warships and even aircraft would be fortunate in coming across a submarine. The Royal Navy and later the United States Navy each took time to learn this lesson. Conversely, a U-boat's radius of vision was even smaller and had to be supplemented by regular long-range reconnaissance flights.\nFor both major allied navies, it had been difficult to grasp that, however large a convoy, its \"footprint\" (the area within which it could be spotted) was far smaller than if the individual ships had traveled independently. In other words, a submarine had less chance of finding a single convoy than if it were scattered as single ships. Moreover, once an attack had been made, the submarine would need to regain an attack position on the convoy. If, however, an attack were thwarted by escorts, even if the submarine had escaped damage, it would have to remain submerged for its own safety and might only recover its position after many hours' hard work. U-boats patrolling areas with constant and predictable flows of sea traffic, such as the United States Atlantic coast in early 1942, could dismiss a missed opportunity in the certain knowledge that another would soon present itself.\nThe destruction of submarines required their discovery, an improbable occurrence on aggressive patrols, by chance alone. Convoys, however, presented irresistible targets and could not be ignored. For this reason, the U-boats presented themselves as targets to the escorts with increasing possibility of destruction. In this way, the Ubootwaffe suffered severe losses, for little gain, when pressing pack attacks on well-defended convoys.\nPost-World War II.\nThe largest convoy effort since World War II was Operation Earnest Will, the U.S. Navy's 1987\u201388 escort of reflagged Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf during the Iran\u2013Iraq War.\nIn the present day, convoys are used as a tactic by navies to deter pirates off the coast of Somalia from capturing unarmed civilian freighters who would otherwise pose easy targets if they sailed alone.\nRoad convoys.\nHumanitarian aid convoys.\nThe word \"convoy\" is also associated with groups of road vehicles being driven, mostly by volunteers, to deliver humanitarian aid, supplies, and\u2014a stated objective in some cases\u2014\"solidarity\".\nIn the 1990s these convoys became common traveling from Western Europe to countries of the former Yugoslavia, in particular Bosnia and Kosovo, to deal with the aftermath of the wars there. They also travel to countries where standards of care in institutions such as orphanages are considered low by Western European standards, such as Romania; and where other disasters have led to problems, such as around the Chernobyl disaster in Belarus and Ukraine.\nThe convoys are made possible partly by the relatively small geographic distances between the stable and affluent countries of Western Europe, and the areas of need in Eastern Europe and, in a few cases, North Africa and even Iraq. They are often justified because although less directly cost-effective than mass freight transport, they emphasise the support of large numbers of small groups, and are quite distinct from multinational organisations such as United Nations humanitarian efforts.\nTruckers' convoys.\nTruckers' convoys consisting of semi-trailer trucks and/or petrol tankers are more similar to a caravan than a military convoy.\nTruckers' convoys were created as a byproduct of the U.S.' national 55\u00a0mph speed limit and 18-wheelers becoming the prime targets of speed traps. Most truckers had difficult schedules to keep and as a result had to maintain a speed above the posted speed limit to reach their destinations on time. Convoys were started so that multiple trucks could run together at a high speed with the rationale being that if they passed a speed trap the police would only be able to pull over one of the trucks in the convoy. When driving on a highway, convoys are also useful to conserve fuel by drafting.\nThe film \"Convoy\", inspired by a 1975 song of the same name, explores the camaraderie between truck drivers, where the culture of the CB radio encourages truck drivers to travel in convoys.\nTruck convoys are sometimes organized for fundraising, charity, or promotional purposes. They can also be used as a form of protest, such as the Canada convoy protest in 2022.\nSpecial convoy rights.\nThe Highway Code of several European countries (Norway, Italy, Greece, Netherlands, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, possibly more) includes special rights for marked convoys. They have to be treated like a single vehicle. If the first vehicle has passed an intersection, all others may do so without interruption. If other road users overtake the convoy, they are not allowed to split into the queue. Clear and uniform marking has been required in court decisions for these rights to apply. Operating such convoy usually needs special permission, but there are exemptions for emergency and catastrophe intervention. Common practice is, to operate with the same style of marking as NATO convoys: STANAG 2154 marking plus country-specific augmentation listed in Annex B to the STANAG.\nDuring the Cold War with its high number of military exercises, the military was the main user of convoy rights. Today, catastrophes like large-scale flooding might bring a high number of flagged convoys to the roads. Large-scale evacuations for the disarming of World War II bombs are another common reason for non-governmental organization (NGO) unit movements under convoy rights.\nStorm convoys.\nIn Norway, \"convoy driving\" () is used during winter in case weather is too bad for vehicles to pass on their own. Convoy driving is initiated when the strong wind quickly fills the road with snow behind snowplows, particularly on mountain passes. Only a limited number of vehicles are allowed for each convoy and convoy leader is obliged to decline vehicles not fit for the drive. Storm convoys are prone to multiple-vehicle collision. Convoy driving is used through Hardangervidda pass on road 7 during blizzards. Convoy is sometimes used on road E134 at the highest and most exposed sections during bad weather. On European route E6 through Saltfjellet pass convoy driving is often used when wind speed is over 15\u201320\u00a0m/s (fresh or strong gale) in winter conditions. During the winter of 1990 there was convoy driving for almost 500 hours at Saltfjellet\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42991", "revid": "49871587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42991", "title": "Sugar glider", "text": "Species of Australian marsupial\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe sugar glider (Petaurus breviceps) is a small, omnivorous, arboreal, and nocturnal gliding possum. The common name refers to its predilection for sugary foods such as sap and nectar and its ability to glide through the air, much like a flying squirrel. They have very similar habits and appearance to the flying squirrel, despite not being closely related\u2014an example of convergent evolution. The scientific name, \"Petaurus breviceps\", translates from Latin as \"short-headed rope-dancer\", a reference to their canopy acrobatics.\nThe sugar glider is characterised by its pair of gliding membranes, known as patagia, which extend from its forelegs to its hindlegs. Gliding serves as an efficient means of reaching food and evading predators. The animal is covered in soft, pale grey to light brown fur which is countershaded, being lighter in colour on its underside.\nThe sugar glider, as strictly defined in a recent analysis, is only native to a small portion of southeastern Australia, corresponding to southern Queensland and most of New South Wales east of the Great Dividing Range; the extended species group, including populations which may or may not belong to \"P. breviceps\", occupies a larger range covering much of coastal eastern and northern Australia, New Guinea, and nearby islands. Members of \"Petaurus\" are popular exotic pets; these pet animals are also frequently referred to as \"sugar gliders\", but recent research indicates, at least for American pets, that they are not \"P. breviceps\" but a closely related species, ultimately originating from a single source near Sorong in West Papua. This would possibly make them members of the Krefft's glider (\"P. notatus\"), but the taxonomy of Papuan \"Petaurus\" populations is still poorly resolved.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe genus \"Petaurus\" is believed to have originated in New Guinea during the mid Miocene epoch, approximately 18 to 24 million years ago. The modern Australian \"Petaurus\", along with New Guinean members of what were formerly considered \"P. breviceps\", diverged from their closest living New Guinean relatives ~9-12 mya. They probably dispersed from New Guinea to Australia between 4.8 and ~8.4 mya, with the oldest \"Petaurus\" fossils in Australia being dated to 4.46 million years. This may have been possible due to sea level lowering from about 7 to 10 mya, resulting in land bridges between New Guinea and Australia.\nThe taxonomy of the species is complex, and is still not fully resolved. It was formerly understood to have a wide range across Australia and New Guinea, being the only glider to have this distribution, and to be divided into seven subspecies, with three occurring in Australia and four in New Guinea. This traditional subspecific division was based on small morphological differences, such as colour and body size. However, a 2010 genetic analysis using mitochondrial DNA indicates that these morphologically defined subspecies may not represent genetically unique populations. \nFurther studies have found significant genetic variation within populations traditionally classified in \"P. breviceps\", sufficient to warrant splitting the species into multiple. The subspecies \"P. b. biacensis\", from Biak Island off of New Guinea, was reclassified as a separate species, the Biak glider (\"Petaurus biacensis\"). In 2020, a landmark study suggested that \"P. breviceps\" actually comprised three cryptic species: the Krefft's glider (\"Petaurus notatus\"), found throughout most of eastern Australia and introduced to Tasmania, the savanna glider (\"Petaurus ariel\"), native to northern Australia, and a more narrowly defined \"P. breviceps\", restricted to a small section of coastal forest in southern Queensland and most of New South Wales. In addition, other sugar glider populations throughout this range (such as those on New Guinea and the Cape York Peninsula) may represent undescribed species or be conspecific with previously described species. This indicates that contrary to previous findings of a large range (which in fact applied to \"P. notatus\" and, to a lesser extent, to \"P. ariel\"), \"P. breviceps\" is a range-restricted species that is sensitive to ecological disasters, such as the 2019-20 Australian bushfires, which significantly affected large portions of its habitat.\n\"P. breviceps\" and \"P. notatus\" are estimated to have diverged ~1 million years ago, and may have originated from long term geographic isolation. The early-mid Pleistocene saw an uplifting of the Great Dividing Range, contributing to and coinciding with aridification of the interior of Australia, including on the western side of the range. This, as well as other climactic and geographic factors, may have isolated the ancestors of \"P. breviceps\" to refugia on the eastern, coastal side of the Great Dividing Range. This would be an example of allopatric speciation.\nDistribution and habitat.\nSugar gliders are distributed in the coastal forests of southeastern Queensland and most of New South Wales. Their distribution extends to altitudes of 2000m in the eastern ranges. In parts of its range, it may overlap with Krefft's glider (\"P. notatus\").\nThe sugar glider occurs in sympatry with the squirrel glider and yellow-bellied glider; and their coexistence is permitted through niche partitioning where each species has different patterns of resource use.\nLike all arboreal, nocturnal marsupials, sugar gliders are active at night, and they shelter during the day in tree hollows lined with leafy twigs.\nThe average home range of sugar gliders is , and is largely related to the abundance of food sources; density ranges from two to six individuals per hectare (0.8\u20132.4 per acre).\nNative owls (\"Ninox\" sp.) are their primary predators; others in their range include kookaburras, goannas, snakes, and quolls. Feral cats (\"Felis catus\") also represent a significant threat.\nAppearance and anatomy.\nThe sugar glider has a squirrel-like body with a long, partially (weakly) prehensile tail. The length from the nose to the tip of the tail is about , and males and females weigh respectively. Heart rate range is 200\u2013300 beats per minute, and respiratory rate is 16\u201340 breaths per minute. The sugar glider is a sexually dimorphic species, with males typically larger than females. Sexual dimorphism has likely evolved due to increased mate competition arising through social group structure; and is more pronounced in regions of higher latitude, where mate competition is greater due to increased food availability.\nThe fur coat on the sugar glider is thick, soft, and is usually blue-grey; although some have been known to be yellow, tan or (rarely) albino. A black stripe is seen from its nose to midway on its back. Its belly, throat, and chest are cream in colour. Males have four scent glands, located on the forehead, chest, and two paracloacal (associated with, but not part of the cloaca, which is the common opening for the intestinal, urinal and genital tracts) that are used for marking of group members and territory. Scent glands on the head and chest of males appear as bald spots. Females also have a paracloacal scent gland and a scent gland in the pouch, but do not have scent glands on the chest or forehead.\nThe sugar glider is nocturnal; its large eyes help it to see at night and its ears swivel to help locate prey in the dark. The eyes are set far apart, allowing more precise triangulation from launching to landing locations while gliding. Sugar gliders have demonstrated trichromacy in behavioral testing with sensitivity in the ultraviolet/blue, green, and red ranges. Ultraviolet sensitivity is corroborated by genetic evidence. The physiological source of their middle wavelength sensitivity is not yet confirmed.\nEach foot on the sugar glider has five digits, with an opposable toe on each hind foot. These opposable toes are clawless, and bend such that they can touch all the other digits, like a human thumb, allowing it to firmly grasp branches. The second and third digits of the hind foot are partially syndactylous (fused together), forming a grooming comb. The fourth digit of the forefoot is sharp and elongated, aiding in extraction of insects under the bark of trees.\nThe gliding membrane extends from the outside of the fifth digit of each forefoot to the first digit of each hind foot. When the legs are stretched out, this membrane allows the sugar glider to glide a considerable distance. The membrane is supported by well developed tibiocarpalis, humerodorsalis and tibioabdominalis muscles, and its movement is controlled by these supporting muscles in conjunction with trunk, limb and tail movement.\nLifespan in the wild is up to 9 years; is typically up to 12 years in captivity, and the maximum reported lifespan is 17.8 years.\nBiology and behaviour.\nGliding.\nThe sugar glider is one of a number of volplane (gliding) possums in Australia. It glides with the fore- and hind-limbs extended at right angles to the body, with feet flexed upwards. The animal launches itself from a tree, spreading its limbs to expose the gliding membranes. This creates an aerofoil enabling it to glide or more. For every travelled horizontally when gliding, it falls . Steering is controlled by moving limbs and adjusting the tension of the gliding membrane; for example, to turn left, the left forearm is lowered below the right.\nThis form of arboreal locomotion is typically used to travel from tree to tree; the species rarely descends to the ground. Gliding provides three dimensional avoidance of arboreal predators, and minimal contact with ground dwelling predators; as well as possible benefits in decreasing time and energy consumption spent foraging for nutrient poor foods that are irregularly distributed. Young carried in the pouch of females are protected from landing forces by the septum that separates them within the pouch.\nTorpor.\nSugar gliders can tolerate ambient air temperatures of up to through behavioural strategies such as licking their coat and exposing the wet area, as well as drinking small quantities of water.\nIn cold weather, sugar gliders will huddle together to avoid heat loss, and will enter torpor to conserve energy. Huddling as an energy conserving mechanism is not as efficient as torpor. Before entering torpor, a sugar glider will reduce activity and body temperature normally in order to lower energy expenditure and avoid torpor. With energetic constraints, the sugar glider will enter into daily torpor for 2\u201323 hours while in rest phase. \nTorpor differs from hibernation in that torpor is usually a short-term daily cycle. Entering torpor saves energy for the animal by allowing its body temperature to fall to a minimum of to . When food is scarce, as in winter, heat production is lowered in order to reduce energy expenditure. With low energy and heat production, it is important for the sugar glider to peak its body mass by fat content in the autumn (May/June) in order to survive the following cold season. In the wild, sugar gliders enter into daily torpor more often than sugar gliders in captivity. The use of torpor is most frequent during winter, likely in response to low ambient temperature, rainfall, and seasonal fluctuation in food sources.\nDiet and nutrition.\nSugar gliders are seasonally adaptive omnivores with a wide variety of foods in their diet, and mainly forage in the lower layers of the forest canopy. Sugar gliders may obtain up to half their daily water intake through drinking rainwater, with the remainder obtained through water held in its food. In summer they are primarily insectivorous, and in the winter when insects (and other arthropods) are scarce, they are mostly exudativorous (feeding on acacia gum, eucalyptus sap, manna, honeydew or lerp). Sugar gliders have an enlarged caecum to assist in digestion of complex carbohydrates obtained from gum and sap.\nTo obtain sap or gum from plants, sugar gliders will strip the bark off trees or open bore holes with their teeth to access stored liquid. Little time is spent foraging for insects, as it is an energetically expensive process, and sugar gliders will wait until insects fly into their habitat, or stop to feed on flowers.\nGliders consume approximately 11 g of dry food matter per day. This equates to roughly 8% and 9.5% of body weight for males and females, respectively.\nThey are opportunistic feeders and can be carnivorous, preying mostly on lizards and small birds. They eat many other foods when available, such as nectar, acacia seeds, bird eggs, pollen, fungi and native fruits. Pollen can make up a large portion of their diet, therefore sugar gliders are likely to be important pollinators of \"Banksia\" species.\nReproduction.\nLike most marsupials, female sugar gliders have two ovaries and two uteri; they are polyestrous, meaning they can go into heat several times a year. The female has a marsupium (pouch) in the middle of her abdomen to carry offspring. The pouch opens anteriorly, and two lateral pockets extend posteriorly when young are present. Four nipples are usually present in the pouch, although reports of individuals with two nipples have been recorded. Male sugar gliders have two pairs of bulbourethral glands and a bifurcated penis to correspond with the two uteri of females.\nThe age of sexual maturity in sugar gliders varies slightly between the males and females. Males reach maturity at 4 to 12 months of age, while females require from 8 to 12 months. In the wild, sugar gliders breed once or twice a year depending on the climate and habitat conditions, while they can breed multiple times a year in captivity as a result of consistent living conditions and proper diet.\nA sugar glider female gives birth to one (19%) or two (81%) babies (joeys) per litter. The gestation period is 15 to 17 days, after which the tiny joey will crawl into a mother's pouch for further development. They are born largely undeveloped and furless, with only the sense of smell being developed. The mother has a scent gland in the external marsupium to attract the sightless joeys from the uterus. Joeys have a continuous arch of cartilage in their shoulder girdle which disappears soon after birth; this supports the forelimbs, assisting the climb into the pouch. Young are completely contained in the pouch for 60 days after birth, wherein mammae provide nourishment during the remainder of development. Eyes first open around 80 days after birth, and young will leave the nest around 110 days after birth. By the time young are weaned, the thermoregulatory system is developed, and in conjunction with a large body size and thicker fur, they are able to regulate their own body temperature.\nBreeding is seasonal in southeast Australia, with young only born in winter and spring (June to November). Unlike animals that move along the ground, the sugar glider and other gliding species produce fewer, but heavier, offspring per litter. This allows female sugar gliders to retain the ability to glide when pregnant.\nSocialisation.\nSugar gliders are highly social animals. They live in family groups or colonies consisting of up to seven adults, plus the current season's young. Up to four age classes may exist within each group, although some sugar gliders are solitary, not belonging to a group. They engage in social grooming, which in addition to improving hygiene and health, helps bond the colony and establish group identity.\nWithin social communities, there are two codominant males who suppress subordinate males, but show no aggression towards each other. These co-dominant pairs are more related to each other than to subordinates within the group; and share food, nests, mates, and responsibility for scent marking of community members and territories.\nTerritory and members of the group are marked with saliva and a scent produced by separate glands on the forehead and chest of male gliders. Intruders who lack the appropriate scent marking are expelled violently. Rank is established through scent marking; and fighting does not occur within groups, but does occur when communities come into contact with each other. Within the colony, no fighting typically takes place beyond threatening behaviour. Each colony defends a territory of about where eucalyptus trees provide a staple food source.\nSugar gliders are one of the few species of mammals that exhibit male parental care. The oldest codominant male in a social community shows a high level of parental care, as he is the probable father of any offspring due to his social status.\nThis paternal care evolved in sugar gliders as young are more likely to survive when parental investment is provided by both parents. In the sugar glider, biparental care allows one adult to huddle with the young and prevent hypothermia while the other parent is out foraging, as young sugar gliders aren't able to thermoregulate until they are 100 days old (3.5 months).\nCommunication in sugar gliders is achieved through vocalisations, visual signals and complex chemical odours. Chemical odours account for a large part of communication in sugar gliders, similar to many other nocturnal animals. Odours may be used to mark territory, convey health status of an individual, and mark rank of community members. Gliders produce a number of vocalisations including barking and hissing.\nHuman relations.\nConservation.\nUnder the prior taxonomy, the sugar glider was not considered endangered, and its conservation rank was \"Least Concern (LC)\" on the IUCN Red List. However, with newer taxonomic studies indicating that it has a small and restricted range, it is now thought to be far more sensitive to potential threats. For example, the species' native range was hit hard by the 2019-20 Australian bushfires, which occurred just a few months prior to the publishing of the study indicating the true extent of its range. Sugar gliders use tree hollows, making them especially sensitive to intense fires. However, despite the loss of natural habitat in Australia over the last 200 years, it is adaptable and capable of living in small patches of remnant bush, particularly if it does not have to cross large expanses of cleared land to reach them. Sugar gliders may persist in areas that have undergone mild-moderate selective logging, as long as three to five hollow bearing trees are retained per hectare. Although not currently threatened by habitat loss, the ability of sugar gliders to forage and avoid predators successfully may be decreased in areas of high light pollution.\nConservation in Australia is enacted at the federal, state and local levels, where sugar gliders are protected as a native species. The central conservation law in Australia is the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act). The National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 is an example of conservation law in the state of South Australia, where it is legal to keep (only) one sugar glider without a permit, provided it was acquired legally from a source with a permit. A permit is required to obtain or possess more than one glider, or if one wants to sell or give away any glider in their possession. It is illegal to capture or sell wild sugar gliders without a permit.\nIn captivity.\nIn captivity, the sugar glider can suffer from calcium deficiencies if not fed an adequate diet. A lack of calcium in the diet causes the body to leach calcium from the bones, with the hind legs first to show noticeable dysfunction. Calcium to phosphorus ratios should be 2:1 to prevent hypocalcemia, sometimes known as hind leg paralysis (HLP). Their diet should be 50% insects (gut-loaded) or other sources of protein, 25% fruit and 25% vegetables. Some of the more recognised diets are Bourbon's Modified Leadbeaters (BML), High Protein Wombaroo (HPW) and various calcium rich diets with Leadbeaters Mixture (LBM). Iron storage disease (hemochromatosis) is another dietary problem that has been reported in captive gliders and can lead to fatal complications if not diagnosed and treated early.\nA large amount of attention and environmental enrichment may be required for the highly social species, especially for those kept as individuals. Inadequate social interaction can lead to depression and behavioural disorders such as loss of appetite, irritability and self-mutilation.\nAs a pet.\nIn several countries, the sugar glider (or what was formerly considered to be the sugar glider) is popular as an exotic pet, and is sometimes referred to as a pocket pet. In Australia, there is opposition to keeping native animals as pets from Australia's largest wildlife rehabilitation organisation (WIRES), and concerns from Australian wildlife conservation organisations regarding animal welfare risks including neglect, cruelty and abandonment.\nIn Australia, sugar gliders can be kept in Victoria, South Australia, and the Northern Territory. However, they are not allowed to be kept as pets in Western Australia, New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland or Tasmania.\nDNA analysis indicates that \"the USA (sugar) glider population originates from West Papua, Indonesia with no illegal harvesting from other native areas such as Papua New Guinea or Australia\". Given that the West Papuan gliders have been tentatively classified as Krefft's gliders (albeit to be changed in the future), this indicates that at least the captive gliders kept in the United States are Krefft's gliders, not sugar gliders.\nNotes.\nSpecies notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42993", "revid": "50976446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42993", "title": "Back to the Future", "text": "1985 film by Robert Zemeckis\nBack to the Future is a 1985 American science fiction film directed by Robert Zemeckis and written by Zemeckis and Bob Gale. It stars Michael J.\u00a0Fox, Christopher Lloyd, Lea Thompson, Crispin Glover, and Thomas F. Wilson. Set in 1985, it follows Marty McFly (Fox), a teenager accidentally sent back to 1955 in a time-traveling DeLorean automobile built by his eccentric scientist friend Emmett \"Doc\" Brown (Lloyd), where he inadvertently prevents his future parents from falling in love\u00a0\u2013 threatening his own existence\u00a0\u2013 and is forced to reconcile them and somehow get back to the future.\nGale and Zemeckis conceived the idea for \"Back to the Future\" in 1980. They were desperate for a successful film after numerous collaborative failures, but the project was rejected more than forty times by various studios because it was not considered raunchy enough to compete with the successful comedies of the era. A development deal was secured with Universal Pictures following Zemeckis's success directing \"Romancing the Stone\" (1984). Fox was the first choice to portray Marty but was unavailable; Eric Stoltz was cast instead. Shortly after principal photography began in November 1984, Zemeckis determined Stoltz was not right for the part and made the concessions necessary to hire Fox, including re-filming scenes already shot with Stoltz and adding $4million to the budget. \"Back to the Future\" was filmed in and around California and on sets at Universal Studios, and concluded the following April.\nAfter highly successful test screenings, the release date was brought forward to July3, 1985, giving the film more time in theaters during the busiest period of the theatrical year. The change resulted in a rushed post-production schedule and some incomplete special effects. Nevertheless, \"Back to the Future\" was a critical and commercial success, earning $398million to become the highest-grossing film of 1985 worldwide. Critics praised the story, humor, and the cast, particularly Fox, Lloyd, Thompson, and Glover. It received multiple award nominations and won an Academy Award, three Saturn Awards, and a Hugo Award. Its theme song, \"The Power of Love\" by Huey Lewis and the News, was also a success.\n\"Back to the Future\" has since grown in esteem and is now considered by critics and audiences to be one of the greatest science fiction films and among the best films ever made. In 2007, the United States Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. The film was followed by two sequels, \"Back to the Future Part\u00a0II\" (1989) and \"Back to the Future Part\u00a0III\" (1990). Spurred by the film's dedicated fan following and effect on popular culture, Universal Studios launched a multimedia franchise, which now includes video games, , an animated television series, and . Its enduring popularity has prompted numerous books about its production, documentaries, and commercials.\nPlot.\nIn 1985, teenager Marty McFly lives in Hill Valley, California, with his depressed alcoholic mother, Lorraine; his older siblings, who are professional and social failures; and his meek father, George, who is bullied by his supervisor, Biff Tannen. After Marty's band fails a music audition, he confides in his girlfriend, Jennifer Parker, that he fears becoming like his parents despite his ambitions.\nThat night, Marty meets his eccentric scientist friend, Emmett \"Doc\" Brown, in the Twin Pines mall parking lot. Doc unveils a time machine built from a modified DeLorean, powered by plutonium he swindled from Libyan terrorists. After Doc inputs a destination time of November 5, 1955 (the day he conceived his time travel invention), the terrorists arrive unexpectedly and gun him down. Marty flees in the DeLorean, inadvertently activating time travel when reaching .\nArriving in 1955, Marty discovers he has no plutonium, so he cannot return to 1985. While exploring a burgeoning Hill Valley, Marty encounters his teenage father, discovering Biff was bullying George even then. George falls into the path of an oncoming car while spying on the teenage Lorraine changing clothes, and Marty is knocked unconscious while saving him. He wakes to find himself tended to by Lorraine, who becomes infatuated with him. Marty tracks down and convinces a younger Doc that he is from the future. Doc explains the only source available in 1955 capable of generating the 1.21 gigawatts of power required for time travel is a lightning bolt. Marty shows Doc a flyer from the future that documents an upcoming lightning strike at the town's courthouse. As Marty's siblings begin to fade from a photo he carries with him, Doc realizes Marty's actions are altering the future and jeopardizing his existence: Lorraine was supposed to tend to George instead of Marty after the car accident. Early attempts to get his parents acquainted fail, and Lorraine's infatuation with Marty deepens.\nLorraine asks Marty to the school dance, and he plots to feign inappropriate advances on her, allowing George to intervene and rescue her, but the plan goes awry when Biff's gang locks Marty in the trunk of the performing band's car, while Biff forces himself onto Lorraine. George arrives expecting to find Marty but is assaulted by Biff. After Biff hurts Lorraine, an enraged George knocks him unconscious and escorts the grateful Lorraine to the dance. The band frees Marty from their car, but the lead guitarist injures his hand in the process, so Marty takes his place, performing while George and Lorraine share their first kiss. With his future no longer in jeopardy, Marty hurries to the courthouse to meet Doc.\nDoc discovers a letter from Marty warning him about his future and rips it up, worried about the consequences. To save Doc, Marty recalibrates the DeLorean to return ten minutes before he had left the future. The lightning strikes, sending Marty back to 1985, but the DeLorean breaks down, forcing Marty to run back to the mall. He arrives as Doc is being shot. While Marty grieves at his side, Doc sits up, revealing he had pieced Marty's note back together and is wearing a bulletproof vest. He takes Marty home and departs to 2015 in the DeLorean. Marty wakes the next morning, discovering his father is now a confident and successful science fiction author, his mother is fit and happy, his siblings are successful, and Biff is a servile valet in George's employ. As Marty reunites with Jennifer, Doc suddenly reappears in the DeLorean, insisting they return with him to the future to save their children from terrible fates.\nCast.\nThe 1985 portion of the film features a cast including Claudia Wells as Marty's girlfriend Jennifer Parker, and Marc McClure and Wendie\u00a0Jo Sperber as Marty's siblings Dave McFly and Linda McFly. Elsa Raven plays the Clocktower Lady. Singer Huey Lewis has a cameo role as a judge for the Battle of the Bands contest. RichardL. Duran and Jeff O'Haco portray the Libyan terrorists.\nCast appearing in the 1955 portion includes George DiCenzo and Frances Lee McCain as Lorraine's parents, Sam and Stella Baines, and Jason Hervey as Lorraine's younger brother Milton. Biff's gang includes Jeffrey Jay Cohen as Skinhead, Casey Siemaszko as 3-D, and Billy Zane as Match. Norman Alden plays cafe owner Lou, and Donald Fullilove appears as his employee (and future mayor) Goldie Wilson. Harry Waters\u00a0Jr. portrays Chuck Berry's cousin Marvin Berry; Will Hare appears as PaPeabody; and Courtney Gains portrays Dixon, the youth who interrupts George's and Lorraine's dance. James Tolkan portrays Hill Valley high school principal Strickland in both 1955 and 1985.\nProduction.\nConception and writing.\nLong-time collaborators Bob Gale and Robert Zemeckis conceived \"Back to the Future\" in 1980. They wanted to develop a film about time travel but struggled to create a satisfying narrative, and were desperate for a successful project after the critical or commercial failures of their recent efforts in collaboration with Zemeckis's mentor, Steven Spielberg.\nFollowing the release of their comedy \"Used Cars\" (1980), Gale visited his parents and came across his father's high school yearbook. He wondered if he and his father would have been friends had they attended school together. He did not think so, but realized he could test his theory if he could travel back to a time when he and his parents were a similar age. He shared the idea with Zemeckis, who recalled his mother's childhood stories were often contradictory.\nGale and Zemeckis began a draft in late 1980. They sketched and acted out each scene to help develop the dialogue and actions. They believed many time-travel films focused on the past being immutable and wanted to show the past being altered and the effect those changes would have on the future. In the draft, video pirate Professor Brown builds a time machine that sends his young friend Marty back to the 1950s where he interrupts his parents' first meeting. In September 1980, Gale and Zemeckis pitched their idea to Columbia Pictures president Frank Price, who had liked \"Used Cars\" and was keen to work with the pair. Gale recalled having to rein in Zemeckis's enthusiastic pitch before Price had time to change his mind. Gale and Zemeckis completed the first draft for Price on February21, 1981, but Price believed it needed significant refinement.\nSome early concepts were abandoned. Originally, Marty's actions in 1955 had a more significant impact on the future, making 1985 more futuristic and advanced, but every person who read the script took issue with the idea. Marty's father also became a boxer, a result of his knockout punch on Biff. The time machine was a stationary object moved around on the back of a truck. Inspired by the documentary \"The Atomic Cafe\", the drained time machine was written to be powered by Marty driving it into a nuclear explosion, combined with an additional ingredient: Coca-Cola. Gale and Zemeckis took inspiration from tales of legendary scientists, opting to make the time machine's creator an individual instead of a faceless corporation or government. The pair wanted the inciting time-travel incident to be an accident so that it would not appear that the hero was seeking personal gain.\nGale and Zemeckis drew humor from the cultural contrasts between 1955 and 1985, such as Marty entering a 1955 soda shop in 1985 clothing; the shop owner asks Marty if he is a sailor because his down vest resembles a life preserver. They also identified conveniences of 1985 that Marty had taken for granted, but would be denied in 1955. Gale and Zemeckis struggled with the writing, as they were in their 30s and did not particularly identify with either era. They were inspired by the All-American aesthetic of films by Frank Capra featuring white picket fences and exaggerated characters similar to Biff, \"The Twilight Zone\", science fiction films, and books by Robert Silverberg and Robert Heinlein. The romantic relationship between 1955 Lorraine and her future son was one of the more difficult writing challenges. Gale and Zemeckis attempted to take the concept as far as possible to keep the audience on edge. They believed it had to be Lorraine who stopped the relationship; she remarks that kissing Marty feels like kissing her brother. Gale jokingly said no one asked how she could make that comparison, but that audiences would accept it because they did not want the relationship to happen. The second draft was completed by April7, 1981.\nDevelopment.\nPrice opted not to green-light the second draft; although he liked it, he did not believe it would appeal to anyone else. The most successful comedies at the time, such as \"Animal House\" (1978), \"Porky's\" (1981), and \"Fast Times at Ridgemont High\" (1982), featured sexual and bawdy elements; \"Back to the Future\" was considered too tame in comparison. Columbia put the project into turnaround (a process allowing other studios to purchase the idea). The script was rejected some forty times, sometimes multiple times by the same studios. Reasons given included the concept being unappealing to contemporary rebellious youth and the failures of other time travel films, such as \"The Final Countdown\" (1980) and \"Time Bandits\" (1981). Walt Disney Productions turned it down because they considered Marty's fighting off his future mother's advances too risqu\u00e9 for their brand. The only supporter of the project was Spielberg, but with their previous collaborations considered relative failures, Gale and Zemeckis feared another misstep would suggest they could get work only through being friends with Spielberg.\nZemeckis accepted the next project offered to him, \"Romancing the Stone\" (1984). Against expectations, the film was a significant success and gave Zemeckis enough credibility to return to \"Back to the Future\". Zemeckis held a grudge against the studios that had rejected the project and turned to Spielberg, who had set up his own production company, Amblin Entertainment, at Universal Pictures, where Price now worked. Spielberg disliked Price because he had rejected \"E.T.\u00a0the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982) and demanded his involvement in \"Back to the Future\" be minimal. Sidney Sheinberg installed himself as chief executive to oversee the studio's investment in the project. Amblin executives Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall joined Spielberg as the film's executive producers.\nHowever, rights to \"Back to the Future\" remained with Columbia Pictures. Price's successor at Columbia, Guy McElwaine, was developing a satire of the Universal-owned noir film \"Double Indemnity\" (1944) called \"Big Trouble\" (1986). Its similarities to \"Double Indemnity\" meant the studio would violate Universal's copyright. With production imminent, McElwaine asked for the rights from Price; in exchange, Price obtained the rights to \"Back to the Future\".\nSheinberg suggested modifications to the film, including changing the title to \"Space Man from Pluto\", believing \"Back to the Future\" would not resonate with audiences. Gale and Zemeckis did not know how to reject Sheinberg's suggestions without risking his ire. Spielberg intervened, sending Sheinberg a memo reading: \"Hi Sid, thanks for your most humorous memo, we all got a big laugh out of it, keep 'em coming.\" Spielberg knew Sheinberg would be too embarrassed to admit his memo was to be taken seriously. Sheinberg later claimed the story was \"bullshit\". Sheinberg also wanted to change the name of Marty's mother from Meg to Lorraine (a tribute to his wife Lorraine Gary), and rename Professor Brown to Doc Brown because he considered it more accessible. The third draft was completed by July 1984. The lengthy development allowed Gale and Zemeckis to refine the script's jokes, especially ones that had become dated since 1980. The joke about former actor Ronald Reagan becoming President of the United States remained following his re-election in 1984.\nCasting.\nMichael J. Fox was the first choice to portray Marty McFly. Gale and Zemeckis believed his acting timing in the NBC sitcom \"Family Ties\" (1982\u20131989) as the sophisticated Alex P. Keaton could be translated to Marty's clumsiness. Spielberg asked the show's producer Gary David Goldberg to have Fox read the script. Concerned Fox's absence would damage \"Family Ties\"' success, especially with fellow star Meredith Baxter on maternity leave, Goldberg did not give Fox the script. Other young stars were considered, including: John Cusack, C.\u00a0Thomas Howell, Johnny Depp, Ralph Macchio, Charlie Sheen, Jon Cryer, Ben Stiller, Peter DeLuise, Billy Zane, George Newbern, Robert Downey\u00a0Jr., Christopher Collet, Matthew Modine, and Corey Hart (who declined to audition). Howell was the frontrunner, but Sheinberg preferred Eric Stoltz, who had impressed with his portrayal of Rocky Dennis in an early screening of the drama film \"Mask\" (1985). With the filming date approaching, Zemeckis opted for Stoltz. Sheinberg promised that if Stoltz did not work out, they could reshoot the film. The character's name was derived from \"Used Cars\" production assistant Marty Casella. Zemeckis suggested McFly because it sounded \"All-American\".\nAmong others, Jeff Goldblum, John Lithgow, Dudley Moore, Ron Silver, Robin Williams, John Cleese, Mandy Patinkin, Gene Hackman, James Woods, and Mark Mothersbaugh were considered for the role of Doc Brown. Producer Neil Canton suggested Lithgow, having worked with him and Christopher Lloyd on \"Buckaroo Banzai\" (1984). Lithgow was unavailable, and the role was offered to Lloyd. He was reluctant to join the production until a friend encouraged him to take the part. Albert Einstein and conductor Leopold Stokowski inspired Lloyd's wild, white hair. Lloyd affected a hunched posture to lower his height closer to the tall Fox.\nThe filmmakers became aware of Lea Thompson while researching Stoltz in the comedy-drama \"The Wild Life\" (1984). Crispin Glover used many of his own mannerisms in portraying George McFly. Gale described his performance as \"nuts\", and Zemeckis was reportedly unhappy with Glover's performance choices, instructing him to be more restrained as the older George. Glover lost his voice during filming and later dubbed in some lines. According to Fox, Glover refused to follow blocking\u2014preferring to move freely on whim regardless of camera placement\u2014to the frustration of the crew.\nDeLuise, Zane, Tim Robbins, and J. J. Cohen were considered to play Biff Tannen. Cohen was not considered intimidating enough against Stoltz, and the role went to ThomasF. Wilson, his first feature starring role. Zane and Cohen were cast as Biff's minions Match and Skinhead instead. Tannen's name was taken from Universal Studios executive Ned Tanen, who had been unpleasant with Gale and Zemeckis.\nMelora Hardin was cast as Jennifer Parker on a two-film contract. After Stoltz's replacement, the crew were polled about Hardin being taller than Fox; the female crew overwhelmingly voted Marty should not be shorter than his girlfriend. Hardin was replaced by Claudia Wells, who had previously declined the role because of her commitment to the short-lived television series \"Off the Rack\" (1984). Actresses Kyra Sedgwick and Jill Schoelen were also considered; Schoelen was told she looked too \"exotic\" and not sufficiently All-American. Doc Brown's pet, a dog named Einstein, was originally scripted as a chimpanzee named Shemp. Sheinberg insisted films featuring chimps never did well. James Tolkan was the first choice for Principal Strickland after Zemeckis saw him in the crime drama \"Prince of the City\" (1981). Singer and soundtrack contributor Huey Lewis cameos as a Battle of the Bands judge. Lewis agreed to appear as long as he was uncredited and could wear a disguise. Gale cameos as the hand in the radiation suit tapping the DeLorean time display.\nFilming with Stoltz.\nPrincipal photography began on November26, 1984, on a 14-week schedule set to conclude on February28, 1985, with an estimated $14million budget. Filming took place mainly at the Universal Studios Lot and on location in California. Dean Cundey served as the cinematographer; he and Zemeckis had collaborated on \"Romancing the Stone\". Editor Arthur Schmidt was hired after Zemeckis saw his work on \"Firstborn\" (1984); Schmidt recommended hiring Harry Keramidas as co-editor. Frank Marshall also served as a second unit director.\nOwing to the tight schedule, editing occurred concurrently with filming. On December30, 1984, Zemeckis reviewed the existing scenes with Schmidt and Keramidas. Zemeckis was reluctant to review the footage because he would be self-critical, but he believed Stoltz's acting was not working and had already listed several scenes he wanted to reshoot. Zemeckis called in Gale and the producers to show them the footage; they agreed Stoltz was not right for the part. Stoltz was performing the role with an intense and serious tone, not the \"screwball\" energy they desired. Gale characterized Stoltz as a good actor in the wrong role.\nStoltz used method acting and stayed in character as Marty when not filming, refusing to answer to his own name. This resulted in feuding with some of the cast and crew, including Wilson. Stoltz put his full strength into pushing Wilson rather than imitating doing so, despite Wilson's protests. Spielberg said Zemeckis needed a replacement in place before firing Stoltz, or he risked the production being canceled. Zemeckis and the producers asked Sheinberg for permission to do whatever was necessary to accommodate Fox's participation; Spielberg made another call to Goldberg. On January3, 1985, Goldberg told Fox about withholding the \"Back to the Future\" script from him, and the filmmakers wanted to know if he was interested. Baxter had returned to the show, and they could be more flexible with Fox as long as \"Family Ties\" took priority. Fox agreed to join without reading the script. The transition could not take place immediately and filming continued with Stoltz in the lead role, unaware he was to be replaced.\nOn January 10, 1985, Zemeckis informed Stoltz that he was being fired. Zemeckis described it as \"the hardest meeting I've ever had in my life and it was all my fault. I broke [Stoltz's] heart.\" Stoltz was reported to have told his makeup artist he was not a comedian and did not understand why he was cast. The producers informed the principal cast and the rest of the crew much of the film would be re-shot. Cundey said most of the crew saw Stoltz's removal as \"good news\". Crew members later said there were obvious signs Stoltz would be replaced; the set designers were told not to change the 1955 set, and a scene involving a discussion between Marty and Doc was filmed showing only Doc. Stoltz had shot numerous key scenes including Marty traveling to 1955 in the DeLorean, its breaking down as he prepares to return to 1985, and his final scene was Marty's return to 1985. Filming fell behind schedule, with 34days of filming lost and an additional cost of $3.5\u2013$4.0million, including Stoltz receiving his salary in full. Universal's marketing team was tasked with mitigating the negative publicity from a project replacing its main star.\nFilming with Fox.\nFox's first day on set was January15, 1985. The first scene he filmed was with Lea Thompson, when their characters first meet in Lorraine's bedroom in 1955. Fox filmed \"Family Ties\" during the day before traveling to the \"Back to the Future\" filming location. Often, he would not return home until early the following morning, and on weekends, the schedule was pushed back further as \"Family Ties\" was filmed in front of a live audience. The teamster drivers entrusted with dropping off Fox at home often had to carry the actor to bed. This continued until April, when \"Family Ties\" finished filming. Gale said Fox's youth meant he could cope with less sleep than usual; Fox described it as exhausting, but worth the effort. Further into the filming schedule, Fox was energetic during his scenes but struggled to stay awake off set. He ad-libbed some lines when he forgot the intended dialogue, and recalled looking for a camcorder on the \"Family Ties\" set, before realizing it was a prop on \"Back to the Future\". He also had to learn to mimic playing the guitar and choreographed skateboarding routines taught by Per Welinder and Bob Schmelzer.\nTo compensate for his conflicting schedules and reduce production costs, some scenes involving Marty were shot without Fox, who filmed his part separately. Re-shooting scenes allowed the filmmakers to identify problems and implement new ideas. To avoid building an additional classroom set, the opening pan across the array of clocks in Doc Brown's laboratory replaced an opening scene where Marty sets off a fire alarm to get out of detention. The height differences between Stoltz and Fox necessitated other changes, such as a scene of Fox teaching George how to punch because Fox could not reach the necessary prop. According to Gale, once Fox replaced Stoltz, the atmosphere on set improved. Thompson anecdotally said while Stoltz ate lunch alone in his trailer, Fox ate lunch with the cast and crew.\nThe production used many locations in and around Los Angeles. The clock tower and town square are structures on the Universal Studios Lot in Universal City, California. When filmed from below, Lloyd was positioned on a recreation of the clock tower closer to the ground, but when filmed from above, Lloyd stood atop the tower itself. Production designer Lawrence\u00a0G. Paull insisted on using the Universal backlot sets because of the difficulties and costs involved in making an on-location area look 1955-appropriate. Whittier High School in the city of Whittier is the Hill Valley high school. Marty's home and the surrounding Lyon estates are in Arleta, Los Angeles. Several of the residential locations were filmed in Pasadena: Lorraine's and George's 1955 homes, and Doc Brown's 1955 home. (Its exterior is the Gamble House; interiors were shot at the historic Blacker House.) Puente Hills Mall in City of Industry, California serves as the Twin Pines mall, which later becomes the Lone Pine mall after Marty knocks over one of the trees at Twin Pines ranch in 1955, which was filmed at Disney's Golden Oak Ranch in Newhall, Santa Clarita, California. Other locations include the basement of the Hollywood United Methodist Church where the school dance was filmed, and Griffith Park, where Marty begins his drive to the courthouse to return to 1985, passing by a lamp post outside the Greek Theatre.\nFilming concluded after 107 days on April26, 1985. The final day of filming included pick-up shots of Marty and Einstein the dog in the DeLorean.\nPost-production.\nArthur F. Repola served as the post-production supervisor, but he became responsible for many aspects outside his role, including budgets, storyboarding, and general problem-solving. Those roles belonged to Kennedy and Marshall, but both were occupied on other films. Schmidt found editing the film difficult because he had to imagine where the special effects would later be added; there was no time or budget to re-edit afterward.\nA rough version of the movie was cut together for a test screening at the Century 22 theater in San Jose, California, in mid-May 1985, just three weeks after filming concluded. The audience was seemingly uninterested at the exposition-heavy opening but became engaged after the DeLorean appeared. At a test screening in Long Beach, California, 94% of the audience responded they would recommend the film; 99% rated it very good or excellent. Gale said there was some concern when Doc's dog Einstein was sent through time, as the audience believed he had been killed. But Gale said when they came to the cafe scene where Marty sees his father, the audience \"got it\". The film was re-cut and screened again at the Alfred Hitchcock Theater at the Universal lot for executives, including Sheinberg. He was so impressed he moved the scheduled release date forward to July3, 1985, to give it more time in theaters during the peak summer season. The new date reduced the post-production schedule to just nine weeks for special effects and editing. Zemeckis spent much of June rushing to finish the film.\nDeleted scenes include: Doc looking at an issue of \"Playboy\", remarking the future looks better; a scene of 1985 George being coerced into buying a large amount of peanut brittle from a young girl; a scene of young George trapped in a phone booth by the man who interrupts his dance with Lorraine; and the scene of Marty pretending to be \"Darth Vader\", which was shortened. Zemeckis considered cutting the \"JohnnyB. Goode\" performance because it did not advance the story, but test audiences reacted well to it. There is a dispute if a shot of Stoltz's hand is in the finished film in the scene where Marty punches Biff. Gale noted it is impossible to tell without checking the original film negative, which would risk damaging it. The final 116\u2011minute cut was completed on June 23, 1985. Universal took out a full-page advertisement in \"Variety\" magazine, thanking the post-production crew for completing their work on time. The final budget was $19million.\nMusic.\nAlan Silvestri composed the score for \"Back to the Future\"; he had worked with Zemeckis on \"Romancing the Stone\". The only direction Zemeckis gave him was \"it's got to be big\". Silvestri used an orchestral score to create a sound that contrasted with the small-town setting and the significant time-changing events occurring within it. He wanted a heroic theme that would be instantly recognizable.\nHuey Lewis was approached to write a theme song for the film; he was coming off the success of his recent album \"Sports\". He met with Gale, Spielberg, and Zemeckis, who intended that Huey Lewis and the News be Marty's favorite band. Though flattered, Lewis did not want to participate because he did not know how to write film songs and did not want to write one called \"Back to the Future\". Zemeckis assured Lewis he could write any song he wanted. Lewis agreed to submit the next song he wrote, which was \"The Power of Love\". Lewis maintains \"Power of Love\" was his first submission, but Zemeckis recalled a different first song that was rejected. Lewis later acquiesced to Zemeckis's request for a second song, \"Back in Time\".\nMusician Eddie Van Halen performed the guitar riff Marty (dressed as \"Darth Vader\") uses to wake George. The filmmakers wanted to use Van Halen's music, but the band refused to take part, so Eddie took part on his own. Mark Campbell provided Marty's singing voice, but did not receive credit, as the filmmakers wanted to pretend Fox was singing. When music supervisor Bones Howe learned of this, he secured Campbell a small percentage of the soundtrack revenue as compensation. Paul Hanson taught Fox how to use a guitar to play \"Johnny\u00a0B. Goode\", and choreographer Brad Jeffries spent four weeks teaching Fox to replicate various rock star moves popularized by artists like Pete Townshend, Jimi Hendrix, and Chuck Berry. Berry withheld permission to use \"Johnny B. Goode\" until the day before filming, receiving $50,000 for the rights. Harry WatersJr. provided the vocals on \"Earth Angel\".\nDesign.\nSpecial effects.\nIndustrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM) developed the film's special effects under the supervision of Ken Ralston and Kevin Pike. It contains approximately 27\u201332 special effects shots, compared to the 300 such shots typical in contemporaneous higher-budget films. Despite working simultaneously on \"The Goonies\" and \"Cocoon\", Ralston took on the additional project because it required relatively few effects, and he wanted to realize the planned ending of Marty driving the time machine into a nuclear explosion. The team had a nine-and-a-half-week schedule, reduced to less than nine once Universal moved up the release date. ILM was working on \"Back to the Future\" up to the moment it had to be handed over to print the theatrical film reels.\nThe tight schedule affected the special effects' quality. Ralston was disappointed by the scene where Marty's hand fades away as his future is altered. Fox was filmed separately from his hand and the two were composited together; the hand was filmed with a wide-angle lens, making it appear too large, and it had to be scaled down. Zemeckis wanted a subtle fade, but it resulted in a small circle of the hand fading away and there was no time to fix it. In the same scene, Marty and his siblings fade away from a photo. ILM found it difficult to fade the photo's individual aspects, especially as it was moving on the neck of a guitar. A replica of the guitar neck was constructed at four times the normal size; the guitar strings were made of cable up to a quarter-inch thick. An 11-by-14 aluminum plate was attached to hold the enlarged photograph. ILM used a version of the photo without Marty or his siblings and individually pasted each character into the photo. When this failed, four different photos were used: one containing the background, and one for each McFly sibling. A mechanical camera cycled through each photo and printed it to the film. The enlarged guitar was moved around to add to the realism.\nThe original nuclear explosion ending was considered too complicated and expensive, with an estimated cost of $1million. Art director Andrew Probert storyboarded the scene, which would have been created using sets and miniatures. With the ending moved to the clock tower, ILM researched storms to achieve the right aesthetic. Clouds were constructed from polyester fiberfill, suspended in a net, and filmed from above while Ralston shone a powerful light from below. He used a rheostat to rapidly change the lights' intensity to imitate lightning.\nDeveloped by Wes Takahashi's animation department, the lightning bolt that strikes the clock tower was described as \"the largest bolt of lightning in cinematic history\". It was intended to originate in the distance and move closer, but the footage was filmed too close to the tower and there was insufficient space between it and the top of the frame. There was also an issue with showing the bolt onscreen for too long as it made it more obviously animated. The frame count was reduced, but the bolt did not look chaotic enough. Zemeckis picked out a single frame of the bolt in an \"S\"formation and asked that the effect focus on that shape and be reduced to twenty frames. The bolt was drawn in black ink on white paper; diffusion effects and a glow were added by the optical department.\nThe DeLorean time machine.\nThe DeLorean was developed under the supervision of Lawrence Paull, who designed it with artist Ron Cobb and illustrator Andrew Probert. They intended for the vehicle to look fixed together from common parts. The time machine was originally conceived as a stationary device; at one point it was a refrigerator. Spielberg vetoed the idea, concerned child viewers might attempt to climb into one. Zemeckis suggested the DeLorean because it offered mobility and a unique design; the gull-wing doors would appear like an alien UFO to a 1950s family. The Ford Motor Company offered $75,000 to use a Ford Mustang instead; Gale responded, \"Doc Brown doesn't drive a fucking Mustang\". Michael Fink was hired as the art department liaison and tasked with realizing Cobb's sketches and overseeing the car's construction. He was recruited by Paull and Canton, who had worked with him on \"Blade Runner\" (1982) and \"Buckaroo Banzai\", respectively. Fink had a project lined up but agreed to help in the free weeks he had remaining. Three DeLoreans used were purchased from a collector: one for stunts, one for special effects, and a more detailed hero version for close-up shots. They were unreliable and often broke down. was chosen as the time travel speed because it was easy to remember and looked \"cool\" on the speedometer.\nThe flying DeLorean in the final scene used a combination of live-action footage, animation, and a 1:5 scale (approximately long) model built by Steve Gawley and the model shop crew. The act of the DeLorean traveling through time was called the 'time slice' effect. Zemeckis knew only that he wanted the transition to be violent. He described it as a \"Neanderthal sitting on the hood of the DeLorean and chipping away the fabric of time in front of him\". The effect is so quick as to be imperceptible. Zemeckis preferred this, as he did not want the audience to think too much about how everything worked.\nArt direction and makeup.\nActual brand names, such as Texaco, were used to make the sets more realistic, and the producers mandated the inclusion of certain brands that had paid to appear in the film. An unidentified gas company offered a large sum to be included, but Paull used Texaco because it reminded him of a joke from \"The Milton Berle Show\". This choice led to some disputes, such as Pepsi parent company, PepsiCo, wanting to omit a joke about the Tab drink made by its rival Coca-Cola. Twenty clock wranglers were needed to synch up the many clocks in the opening scene, and pulleys were used to start them simultaneously. Drew Struzan produced the film's poster. The producers hoped his in-demand poster artwork would generate further interest in the film.\nThe film uses a stylized adaptation of the 1950s aesthetics, closer to television show interpretations than an exact recreation. Modern technologies such as contemporary fabrics were used because the designers believed the fashions of the time were not interesting. To represent characters across three decades, the filmmakers did not want to have older actors stand in for the younger ones, believing the change would be obvious and distracting. Special effects artist Ken Chase performed makeup tests on the young actors to age them; initial results were discouraging. He created a prosthetic neck and a bald cap with a receding hairline for Glover but considered them excessive. Chase found it difficult to balance aging the actors and retaining enough of their natural appearance to remain recognizable.\nCasts were made of the actors' faces, from which plaster molds were made. Chase sculpted more subtle effects over the plaster molds using latex. For Lorraine, he crafted jowls and eye bags, plus body padding to reflect her increased weight and alcohol abuse. Instead of a receding hairline, Chase changed the style of George's hair; he used prosthetics only to give him a less-defined jawline. Biff's character changed more significantly because Chase wanted him to look \"obnoxious\"; he was fattened, given sideburns, and a comb over hairstyle to hide a growing bald spot. The prosthetics were combined with makeup and lighting to further age the characters.\nChase found the work frustrating compared to his experiences with more fantastical prostheses that made it easier to hide defects. The rubber latex did not reflect light the same way as natural skin, so Chase used a stippling process (creating a pattern with small dots) to variegate the actors' faces to better conceal where the skin and prosthetics met; close-up shots were avoided. Doc's appearance was not altered significantly. Chase painted latex on Lloyd which, when removed, caused crinkles in the skin, onto which other elements, such as liver spots and shadows, were painted.\nRelease.\nContext.\nBy June 1985, the theatrical industry had experienced a 14% decline in ticket sales over the previous year's $4billion record sales. The summer period (beginning the final week of May) had 45films scheduled for release, including \"\", \"The Goonies\", \"Brewster's Millions\", \"Fletch\", and the latest James Bond film \"A View to a Kill\". This 25% increase over the previous year's releases led to concerns among industry professionals the competition would divide audiences and limit financial returns, at a time when the average cost of making and marketing a film had increased to $14.5million and $7million, respectively. A higher budget to secure a popular, and thus profitable, cast was considered a suitable risk. Most films scheduled for release were aimed at younger audiences, focusing on fantasy and the supernatural. Reflecting the times, these fantasy elements often employed a technological source instead of a magical one. Only a few films, like \"Cocoon\" and \"Prizzi's Honor\", targeted adults.\nInitially, \"Back to the Future\" was scheduled to be released in May 1985, but was pushed back to June21, the earliest Zemeckis could have the film ready. The delay caused by Stoltz's replacement pushed the release back to July19, and later to August. Sheinberg moved the release date forward to July3, giving it an extra sixteen days of theatrical screen time during the industry's most profitable period of the year. The move offered about 100,000 extra screenings, together worth an estimated $40million. He said he also wanted to avoid the negative perception of films released later in the summer period; other blockbuster films were usually released early. The change required renegotiations with theater owners to secure screens in an already-crowded marketplace. In some cities, it was legally required that exhibitors be shown a film before purchase; an unfinished cut of the film was shown to theater owners and young test audiences. They described it as lesser than \"E.T.the Extra-Terrestrial\" or \"Ghostbusters\", but still a guaranteed box office hit. Fox was unavailable for promotional work because he was filming \"Family Ties Vacation\" (1985) in London.\nBox office.\nIn the United States (U.S.) and Canada, \"Back to the Future\" received a wide release on July3, 1985, ahead of the Independence Day holiday weekend. The film earned $3.6million during the opening Wednesday and Thursday, and a further $11.3million during its inaugural weekend from 1,420 theaters\u00a0\u2013 an average of $7,853 per theater. \"Back to the Future\" finished as the number one film of the weekend ahead of Western \"Pale Rider\" ($7million), in its second weekend, and \"Rambo: First Blood PartII\" ($6.4million) in its seventh. It retained the number one position in its second weekend with a further gross of $10.6million, ahead of the debuting action film \"Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome\" ($7.8million) and \"Cocoon\" ($5million), and in its third weekend, ahead of the re-release of \"E.T.the Extra-Terrestrial\" ($8.8million) and \"Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome\" ($5.4million). Although it fell to number two in its fourth weekend, behind the debuting \"National Lampoon's European Vacation\" ($12.3million), \"Back to the Future\" regained the number one position in its fifth weekend and remained there for the following eight weeks. Recalling the opening weeks, Gale said, \"our second weekend was higher than our first weekend, which is indicative of great word of mouth.\"\nThe film remained a steady success, earning $155million by October, surpassing \"Rambo: First Blood PartII\"'s $149million box office earnings to become the year's highest-grossing film. In total, \"Back to the Future\" was the number one film for eleven of its twelve first weeks and remained in the top ten highest-grossing films for a total of twenty-four. By the end of its theatrical run, \"Back to the Future\" earned an approximate box office gross of $210.6million, making it the highest-grossing film of 1985, ahead of \"Rambo: First Blood PartII\" ($150.4million), the sports drama \"Rocky\u00a0IV\" ($127.9million), and the drama \"The Color Purple\" ($94.2million). Box Office Mojo estimated more than 59million tickets were sold. Industry experts suggest that as of 1997 the box office returns to the studio (minus the theaters' share) was $105.5million.\nThe year was considered an unsuccessful one for film. Despite a record number of film releases, ticket sales were down 17% compared with 1984. Industry executives blamed the problem, in part, on a lack of originality, and a glut of youth-oriented films targeted at those under18. Only \"Back to the Future\" and \"Rambo: First Blood PartII\" were considered blockbusters, earning more than double the box office of \"Cocoon\". Films offering escapism and pro-America themes also fared well. After years of poor performances, \"Back to the Future\", alongside \"Fletch\", \"Brewster's Millions\", and \"Mask\", reversed Universal Pictures' fortunes.\nOutside the United States and Canada, the film earned a further estimated $170.5million, making it the third-highest-grossing film of the year, behind the romantic drama \"Out of Africa\" ($179.1million) and \"RockyIV\" ($172.6million). Cumulatively, \"Back to the Future\" earned a worldwide gross of $381.1million, making it the highest-grossing film of 1985, ahead of \"RockyIV\" ($300.5million) and \"Rambo: First Blood PartII\" ($300.4million). \"Back to the Future\" has received several theatrical re-releases to celebrate anniversaries, including a remastered version screened in 2010 and 2025. These releases have raised the film's worldwide total to $398million.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Back to the Future\" received generally positive reviews from critics. Most reviewers agreed \"Back to the Future\" was among the year's most entertaining films, partly because of its focus on storytelling instead of pure spectacle. Paul Attanasio and Gene Siskel argued that while \"Back to the Future\" appeared to be \"everything wrong\" with youth-targeted films, it successfully subverted expectations by focusing on a relatable narrative with an emotional core, and employed irreverent, good-natured humor. They, alongside Richard Corliss, agreed that it would endure because it offered something for children and adults. Some reviewers, such as Corliss and Leonard Maltin agreed that the exposition-heavy opening was \"Back to the Future\"'s weakest part, but led into a stronger half filled with \"wit\", \"wonder\", \"comic epiphany\", and original ideas.\nDave Kehr remarked that Gale and Zemeckis were among the first generation of filmmakers openly influenced by growing up on televised entertainment, and their inspirations are evident throughout. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said that despite Spielberg's producer role, it was Zemeckis's vision, being more subtle, gentler, and \"less noisy\". Some reviewers compared it favorably to the 1946 fantasy drama \"It's a Wonderful Life\", which offered a similar premise of a central character changing his future. Roger Ebert said the film offered humanity, charm, humor, and many surprises that were among its \"greatest pleasures\". Sheila Benson was more critical; she found \"Back to the Future\" to be overproduced and underdeveloped, featuring a hollow ending focused on materialistic rewards and lacking tension because Marty's success never seemed in doubt. Siskel countered that the tension came from defying the expectations of a typical time travel film by making the past mutable and the future uncertain. Paul Attanasio criticized some aspects that seemed to be \"mechanically\" designed to create the broadest audience appeal.\nThe cast performances were generally well received, particularly those of Fox, Lloyd, Thompson, and Glover. Reviewers consistently praised Fox's \"appealing\" performance, although some believed Lloyd's performance outshone the rest. Kehr and Attanasio considered his uncontrolled performance and unique \"intensity\" a tribute to mad scientist characters, portrayed by the likes of Sid Caesar and John Belushi, while creating the definitive scientist archetype for modern audiences. In contrast, Vincent Canby and \"Variety\"'s review said that Thompson's \"deceptively passionate\" performance and Glover's bumbling-to-confident character provided \"Back to the Future\"'s standout performances. Some reviewers considered the use of Libyan terrorists, an actual fear at the time, to be in poor taste.\nAudiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nAccolades.\n\"Back to the Future\" received four nominations at the 43rd Golden Globe Awards, for Best Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy), Best Actor in a Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy) (Fox), Best Original Song (\"The Power of Love\"), and Best Screenplay (Gale and Zemeckis). The film was also named Favorite Motion Picture at the 12th People's Choice Awards. At the 1986 Academy Awards, \"Back to the Future\" received one award for Best Sound Effects Editing (CharlesL. Campbell and Robert Rutledge). It received a further three nominations: Best Original Screenplay (Gale and Zemeckis); Best Sound (Bill Varney, B.\u00a0Tennyson Sebastian\u00a0II, Robert Thirlwell, and William\u00a0B. Kaplan); and Best Original Song (\"The Power of Love\").\nAt the 39th British Academy Film Awards, \"Back to the Future\" received five nominations, including Best Film, Best Original Screenplay (Gale and Zemeckis), Best Visual Effects (Pike and Ralston), Best Production Design (Paull), and Best Editing (Schmidt and Keramidas). At the 13th\u00a0Saturn Awards, the film won three awards: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Actor (Fox), and Best Special Effects (Pike). It also won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation. \"Back to the Future\" performed well internationally: it won Best Foreign Producer (Spielberg) and Best Foreign Screenplay at the David di Donatello awards (Italy), Outstanding Foreign Film from the Japan Academy, and the Goldene Leinwand (Germany) for selling more than three million tickets in its first eighteen months.\nPost-release.\nHome media.\n\"Back to the Future\" was released on VHS on May 22, 1986, priced at $79.95, becoming the first film to sell 450,000 units at that price point, and was also the most-rented cassette of the year. A sequel was not planned until after \"Back to the Future\"'s theatrical release, and a \"ToBe Continued...\" graphic was appended to the end of the home release to promote awareness of future films. When \"Back to the Future\" was released on DVD in 2002, the graphic was removed because Gale and Zemeckis wanted it to be faithful to an in-theater experience. It debuted on Blu-ray in 2010 for the film's 25thanniversary. The release featured a six-part documentary including interviews with the cast and crew, behind-the-scenes footage, deleted scenes, and associated music videos from all three films. The release also included the public debut of footage of Stoltz portraying Marty McFly. For its 35thanniversary in 2020, a remastered 4K Ultra HD version was released on Blu-ray and Ultra HD Blu-ray. Along with extras included in previous releases, this edition included audition footage and an exploration of the film's props hosted by Gale. Limited edition steel bookcases and a display replicate of the levitating hoverboard from \"Back to the Future PartII\" were also available.\nThe was released in July 1985 on cassette tape, LP record, and compact disc (CD). The soundtrack's lead single, \"The Power of Love\", peaked at number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Sales were initially slow, but it eventually peaked at number twelve on the \"Billboard\" 200, in part because of the success of \"The Power of Love\". received a limited release in 2009 onCD, containing the film score and unreleased variations. The scores for all three \"Back to the Future\" films were first released on LPrecord in 2016, individually and as a collection. Silvestri supervised the remaster of the original master recordings, including previously unreleased tracks, and Gale contributed liner notes.\nOther media.\nIn 1985, film merchandising was a relatively new concept, popularized by the original \"Star Wars\" film trilogy (1977\u20131983). As \"Back to the Future\" was not specifically aimed at children, there was no significant merchandising accompanying its release. Although a novelization by George Gipe was released in 1985, one of the earliest items for children, a rideable DeLorean, was not released until 1986. The film and its sequels have since been represented across a wide variety of merchandise including: Playmobil, playing cards, clothing, pottery, posters, board games, sculpted figures, plush toys, Funko POP! figures, action figures, Hot Wheels and die-cast vehicles, books, music albums, and Christmas ornaments.\n\"Back to the Future\" received several video game adaptations. \"Back to the Future\" was released alongside the film for the Amstrad\u00a0CPC, Commodore\u00a064, and ZX\u00a0Spectrum. An arcade-adventure game, \"Back to the Future\", was released in 1989 for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Gale called it one of the worst games ever made and advised people against purchasing it. ' was released in 1990, although Fox refused permission for the game to use his likeness. An episodic graphic adventure game, ', was released in 2010. Gale contributed to the game's narrative, which takes place after the events of the third film. An area in \"Lego Dimensions\" is based on \"Back to the Future\" and features voice work by Lloyd.\n\"\", a simulator ride, ran from 1991 to 2007 at Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Florida. The ride's development was supervised by Spielberg and featured Doc Brown (Lloyd) chasing down Biff (Wilson) who has stolen the DeLorean. A version of the ride at Universal Studios Japan ran from 2001 to 2016. A \"Back to the Future\"-themed Monopoly board game was released in 2015. A Funko board game was released in 2020. It casts players as one of the main characters from the films to battle different Tannens across history.\nThere have been several books about the making of the film series. \"We Don't Need Roads: The Making of the Back to the Future Trilogy\" is an oral history by those involved in the production. \"Back to the Future: The Ultimate Visual History\", a book chronicling the development of the entire \"Back to the Future\" franchise, was released in 2015. The British Film Institute released \"BFI Film Classics: Back to the Future\" about the film's background. The series also includes comic books detailing Doc's and Marty's adventures before and after the events depicted in the films. A crossover between the \"Back to the Future\" and \"Transformers\" franchises included a transforming DeLorean toy and associated comic books.\nThematic analysis.\nParental relationships and fate.\nThe main theme of \"Back to the Future\" concerns taking control and personal responsibility over one's destiny: a situation can be changed even if it seems otherwise impossible to overcome. Thompson said the film represents how one moment can have a significant and lasting impact on a person's life. Gale believed Doc provided the perfect summary of the series' running theme, when in \"Back to the Future Part\u00a0III\" he said: \"Your future is whatever you make it, so make it a good one.\"\nAt the start of the film, Marty is rejected at Battle of the Bands and admits he fears his ambitions will remain unrealized. He worries he will end up like his parents and sees direct evidence in 1955 of George, also afraid of rejection, and being unable to approach Lorraine; his fears risk Marty's future. Marty sets about manipulating the past to ensure his survival without concern for what impact his presence in 1955 is having on others. On his return to 1985, he is rewarded with wealthier parents and a nicer car, but he has simultaneously damaged Biff's future, reducing him to a valet for the McFlys. Glover criticized the morality of the film's ending, believing Marty's reward should be happy parents in love with each other, and considered it a result of the film serving corporate interests, promoting the accumulation of wealth and purchasing material objects. In 2015, Zemeckis said the ending was perfect for its time but would be different if he made it now, although Gale disagreed and said he did not apologize for the scene. American audiences generally had no issue with this ending, but it was criticized by some international audiences.\nDespite rejection by film studios for not being raunchy enough, \"Back to the Future\" alludes to sexual assault, racism, and the Oedipus complex\u00a0\u2013 a psychiatric theory suggesting a child holds an unconscious sexual desire for their opposite-sexed parent, as in the relationship between Marty and his future mother Lorraine in 1955. The relationships between parents and children are the basis of many elements of the film. Thompson believed the film had remained relevant to new generations because of its core idea that Marty's and the viewer's parents were once children and had the same dreams and ambitions they do.\nReaganism and American anxieties.\nCritics Justin Chang and Mark Olsen suggest the film can be seen as promoting Reaganism\u00a0\u2013 the political positions of president Ronald Reagan\u00a0\u2013 which endorses older values of the American dream, initiative, and technological advancement. The Hill Valley of 1985 is depicted as run down and in decay, while in 1955 it is presented as a more simplistic and seemingly safer time, seen through a nostalgic lens. Marty's future is bettered because he goes back to 1955 and teaches George to be more assertive and self-reliant; his initiative leads to a more prosperous future for Marty with materialistic rewards. The film uses many brand names of the time, ostensibly to make the setting more realistic, e.g. Mountain Dew, Pepsi, and Texaco, but the filmmakers received financial compensation from the brand owners, making their inclusion promotional and commercialistic instead of artistic.\nFilm studies lecturer SorchaN\u00ed Fhlainn argues that many 1980s films resulted from the American public's desire for escapism from cultural anxieties and fears, including nuclear proliferation, unemployment, crime, growing inequality, and the AIDS crisis. In her view, films like those of the \"Star Wars\" series and \"Back to the Future\" offered a childlike reassurance of safety and comfort, emphasizing idealized American values and the positive effects of instilling power in a patriarchal figure like George McFly or Darth Vader. English professor Susan Jeffords considered Doc Brown to be an analog for Reagan, a man who embraces technological advancement, who conflicts with Libyan terrorists and provides the means for a failing family to better themselves.\nThe song \"Johnny B. Goode\" by Chuck Berry is used during the film's final act. Berry initially resisted allowing the song to be used in the film. NPR argued that while Berry's resistance may have been a matter of money, there are underlying racial issues involved in Marty, a white male, seemingly rewriting history to invent the rock and roll music genre, which was heavily influenced by African-American music. The 1955 segment also presents a distorted view of America, showing an African-American band playing at the high school dance, which would have been disallowed. Similarly, the African-American character Goldie Wilson is seemingly inspired to work towards becoming mayor by Marty's intervention, inspiring a Reagan-style initiative and self-reliance.\nInfluences.\nAs film fans, Gale and Zemeckis's influences are seen throughout \"Back to the Future\". There are references to \"The Wizard of\u00a0Oz\" (1939), \"The Shaggy Dog\" (1959), \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964), \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977), the \"Star Wars\" film series, and television shows including \"Mister Peabody\", \"\", \"The Outer Limits\", and \"The Twilight Zone\". There are also allusions to 1960's \"The Time Machine\" (based on H.\u00a0G. Wells's 1895 novella of the same name) and \"A\u00a0Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court\" by Mark Twain, in which the central character seemingly moves through time. The DeLorean dashboard chronometer uses the same color scheme as the time device of \"The Time Machine\". Critic Ray Loynd opined that Doc can be seen as a King Arthur-type, with Marty serving as his knight.\nLegacy.\nCultural influence.\nSince its release, \"Back to the Future\" has remained an enduring popular culture touchstone, and in 2007, the United States Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the National Film Registry for being culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant. The film elevated Fox from a financially struggling actor to one of the most in-demand and globally recognized stars in Hollywood, and Gale received fan mail for decades after its release. He said he understood the continuing appreciation for the original film as it was the \"purest\" and \"most complete\" in the series. Fox compared it to \"The Wizard ofOz\" (1939), saying it still appeals to children because they do not think of it as an old film. In 2012, Thompson called it the greatest role of her career. Dean Cundey believed it resonated with fans because it offers the fantasy of going back in time to change things and make the present better. Lloyd described being approached by fans from around the world, who have said the film inspired them to become a scientist.\nMany of the principal cast have reunited since the film's release. Often these reunions are for charity, including The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's disease (Fox was diagnosed with the disease at age29), and Project HOPE. A 2019 reunion for the TCM Classic Film Festival featured the 4Krestoration premiere of \"Back to the Future\". During the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, Josh Gad hosted a \"Back to the Future\" retrospective featuring many cast and crew. The cast has also appeared in advertisements only loosely related to \"Back to the Future\", trading on their associated popularity.\nThe film has global popular appeal, particularly in the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Argentina, the Netherlands, and Japan. On October21, 2015 (the day Doc and Marty travel to at the end of \"Back to the Future\", as depicted in \"Back to the FutureII\") an estimated 27million social media users discussed the films; the most active users were in the United States, Mexico, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Brazil. Ronald Reagan was also a fan, referring to the film during his 1986 State of the Union Address to appeal to America's young voters, saying, \"Never has there been a more exciting time to be alive, a time of rousing wonder and heroic achievement. As they said in the film \"Back to the Future\", 'Where we're going, we don't need roads.'\" Although Gale has said that Reagan, after enjoying the joke about Doc Brown's incredulous response to him becoming president, ordered the theater's projectionist to stop the film, roll it back, and run it again, this is disputed by Reagan's advisor, Mark Weinberg. \"Back to the Future\" is also seen as responsible for a resurgence of skateboarding in the 1980s. It made skateboarding a mainstream pastime acceptable for all, not just rebellious teenagers.\n\"Back to the Future\" has been referred to in a variety of media, including television, films, and video games. Doc and Marty, respectively, inspired the eponymous characters of the 2013 animated television show \"Rick and Morty\". The British pop rock band McFly are named for Marty McFly. The 2011 novel \"Ready Player One\" by Ernest Cline and the 2018 film adaptation (directed by Spielberg) both heavily refer to the film, including the central character using a DeLorean for transport. Filmmaker J.\u00a0J. Abrams has also cited it as an inspiration.\nThe 2015 crowdfunded documentary \"Back in Time\" follows various fans of the series and details the impact it has had on their lives, interspersed with interviews from the crew including Fox and Lloyd. The DeLorean is considered one of the most iconic vehicles in film history. DeLorean's creator John DeLorean was a fan of the film and sent personal letters to Gale and Zemeckis, thanking them for using his vehicle. The DeLorean was not a popular vehicle before the film's release. However, in the years since it has become a popular collector's item, the DeLorean Motor Company issued kits enabling fans to make their vehicle look like the DeLorean time machine. Gale led a restoration of one of the original screen-used DeLoreans in 2011, documented in \"Out of Time: Saving the DeLorean Time Machine\".\nModern reception.\n\"Back to the Future\" is considered a landmark of American cinema, and one of the greatest films ever made. In 2004, \"The New York Times\" listed it as one of the 1,000 Best Movies Ever, and the following year its screenplay was listed as the 56th greatest screenplay of the preceding 75 years by the Writers Guild of America. Throughout the rest of the 2000s, it appeared on Film4's \"50 Films to See Before You Die\" (number10), \"Empire\"'s 500 Greatest Movies of All Time (number23), behind the 1977 space opera \"Star Wars\", and the American Film Institute listed it as the number10 best science fiction film, based on a poll of fifteen hundred people from the creative community. In 2010, \"Total Film\" named it one of the 100 greatest movies ever made, and the following year it was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their fourth favorite film of all time. It is also listed in the film reference book \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\". A 2014 poll of 2,120 entertainment-industry members by \"The Hollywood Reporter\" ranked it as the 12th best film of all time, again behind \"Star Wars\". In 2015, the screenplay was listed as the 67th funniest on the WGA's 101 Funniest Screenplays list, and \"Rotten Tomatoes\" also listed the film at number84 on its list of 200 essential movies to watch.\nSeveral publications have named it as one of the best science fiction films ever made, and one of the best films of the 1980s. \"Popular Mechanics\" and \"Rolling Stone\" listed it as the numberone and numberfour best time-travel film ever made respectively. \"Entertainment Weekly\" named it the 40th most essential film to be watched by pre-teens and the 28th best high-school movie. Marty McFly appeared at number39 on \"Empire\"'s 2006 list of its \"100 Greatest Movie Characters\"; Doc Brown followed at number76.\n\"Rotten Tomatoes\" assesses approval rating from the aggregated reviews of critics, with an average rating of . The site's consensus reads: \"Inventive, funny, and breathlessly constructed, \"Back to the Future\" is a rousing time-travel adventure with an unforgettable spirit.\" Based on this score, Rotten Tomatoes also listed it as the 87th best Action and Adventure film. The film has a score of 87 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 15 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In the United Kingdom, readers of \"Empire\" voted the film as 11th on their 2017 list of \"The 100 Greatest Movies\".\nSequels and adaptations.\nA sequel was not initially planned, and the teaser ending of Doc, Marty, and Jennifer flying off in the DeLorean suggested their adventures would continue off-screen. Universal Pictures was eager to pursue a sequel based on the significant financial and critical success of \"Back to the Future\". However, Zemeckis and Gale were reluctant to participate, believing sequels often retread the best elements of the original film. They were also concerned that a poor follow-up could alienate \"Back to the Future\"'s passionate fan base, and undermine the pair after their first major joint success. Zemeckis and Gale acquiesced by 1987, once Universal Pictures clarified they would, if necessary, make a sequel without them. The pair's sequel script was so long it was split into two films, \"Back to the Future PartII\" (1989) and \"Back to the Future PartIII\" (1990); the films were shot back to back.\n\"Part II\" depicts Marty and Doc traveling to 2015, inadvertently enabling the now-elderly Biff Tannen to steal the DeLorean and return to 1955, rewriting history in his favor. Wells and Glover did not return for the sequels. \"PartII\" was a financial success but was criticized for its complex, convoluted narrative. Zemeckis has said it is his least favorite film in the series. The final film, \"PartIII\" follows Marty as he travels to 1885 to rescue a time-stranded Doc. While the film fared less well financially than the two earlier films, it was more critically well-received than \"PartII\". A 2018 poll by \"The Hollywood Reporter\" of 2,200 people found 71% wanted a \"Back to the Future\" sequel, ahead of another \"Toy Story\" or \"Indiana Jones\" film. Gale has said there will never be a fourth film, likening it to \"selling your kids into prostitution\". He added a \"Back to the Future\" film could never happen without Fox, who could not participate because of the effects of his Parkinson's disease.\nAn animated television series, \"Back to the Future\", aired on CBS between 1991 and 1992. It follows Doc's and Marty's adventures through various historical periods, intercut with live-action segments featuring Doc (Lloyd), performing science experiments alongside Bill Nye. A short film, \"Doc Brown Saves the World\" (2015), celebrated the film's 30th anniversary. Lloyd reprised his role as Doc, who must travel to the future to prevent a nuclear holocaust in 2045. A musical theater production, \"Back to the Future\", debuted in February 2020 at the Manchester Opera House, England, to positive reviews. The musical was written by Gale and Zemeckis, with music written by Silvestri and Glen Ballard. Gale described it as the best way to give fans more \"Back to the Future\" without adding to the film series. In 2024, Zemeckis said he was interested in adapting the musical into a movie. Overall, the \"Back to the Future\" franchise is considered one of the most successful film franchises in history.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42994", "revid": "1317212378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42994", "title": "Chain letter", "text": "Letter written in succession by a group of people\nA chain letter is a message that attempts to convince the recipient to make a number of copies and pass them on to a certain number of recipients. The \"chain\" is an exponentially growing pyramid (a tree graph) that cannot be sustained indefinitely.\nCommon methods used in chain letters include emotionally manipulative stories, get-rich-quick pyramid schemes, and the exploitation of superstition to threaten the recipient with misfortune or promise good luck. Originally, chain letters were letters sent by mail; today, chain letters are often sent electronically via email, social network sites, and text messages.\nTypes.\nThere are two main types of chain letter:\nIn the United States, chain letters that request money or other items of value and promise a substantial return to the participants (such as the infamous Make Money Fast scheme) are illegal. Some colleges and military bases have passed regulations stating that in the private mail of college students and military personnel, respectively, chain letters are not authorized and will be thrown out. However, it is often difficult to distinguish chain letters from genuine correspondence.\nChannels.\nPrint.\nThe oldest known channel for chain letters is written, or printed, on letters on paper. These might be exchanged hand-to-hand or distributed through the mail.\nEarly examples and precursors.\nIn Europe, letters known as \"Himmelsbrief\" (; ) existed, with examples dating back as early as the 6th century. Purported to have fallen from heaven, delivered by God or an agent thereof, they often urged adherence to Christian teachings and promised protection from misfortune to those who possessed the letter. By the 20th century, these evolved to include instructions: copying the letter and sending it to a set number of people would bring good fortune, while failing to do so would bring misfortune. Eventually, the religious elements faded, leaving simple instructions to circulate the letter for good luck or face bad luck. Already in the nineteenth century, similar chain letters were known to have circulated among Muslim pilgrims going on the hajj to Mecca. Those chain letters promised blessings or curses and required replication.\nOne notorious early example of a money-based chain letter was the \"Prosperity Club\" or \"Send-a-Dime\" letter. This letter started in Denver, Colorado in 1935, based on an earlier luck letter. It instructed recipients to send a dime to the person at the top of a list of names, remove that name, add their own to the bottom, and mail the letter to five others, warning of misfortune for breaking the chain. It soon swamped the Denver post office with up to 100,000 letters per day before spilling into St. Louis and other cities. Some consider this a precursor to the Japanese \"Fukou no Tegami\" (Unlucky Letter).\nIn 1964, the head of the United States Postal Inspection Service ordered a nationwide crackdown on violators of postal fraud and lottery laws due to an increase of chain letters reported around college towns in the United States. The typical letters included a list of names and instructed the recipient to send money to the name at the top of the list, remove that name, add their own name to the bottom of the list, and forward the letters to two more people.\nChain letters in Japan.\nJapan has a long history of practices resembling chain letters, often tied to warding off misfortune or attracting good luck through specific, shared actions. During the Edo period (Bunsei era, 1818\u20131830), sending printed images of Daikokuten with instructions to distribute them to 100 homes for good luck became popular, eventually banned by the shogunate but resurfacing in the early Meiji period. Other historical examples include rumors in 1813 that seeing a specific star meant death unless one ate botamochi, and rumors during World War II involving the mythical creature Kudan predicting protection from air raids if one ate azuki rice or ohagi, or Takami Jun's diary entry about eating only rakky\u014d for breakfast to avoid bombings, provided the information was shared. This cultural background of sharing methods to attract luck or avoid disaster is seen as a foundation for the later popularity of chain letters in Japan.\nK\u014dun no Tegami (\u5e78\u904b\u306e\u624b\u7d19 - Lucky Letter).\nBeginning around 1922 in Tokyo, \"K\u014dun no Tegami\" (\u5e78\u904b\u306e\u624b\u7d19 - Lucky Letter), also called \"K\u014dun no Hagaki\" (Lucky Postcard), became popular. Believed to originate from the \"Lucky Chain\" game popular in Europe during World War I or similar chain letters in the US, these letters were translated into Japanese. A 30 January 1922, Tokyo Asahi Shimbun article mentions a postcard mailed from London, suggesting foreign origins.\nThese letters promised great fortune if the recipient copied the text onto a certain number of postcards (e.g., nine) and sent them to others within a time limit (e.g., 24 hours), but threatened \"great misfortune\" (\u5927\u60aa\u904b, dai-aku'un) if the chain was broken. Some included harsh warnings like \"great disaster within 24 hours\" for breaking the chain. The letters often mentioned the chain needing to circle the globe a certain number of times (e.g., nine times), reflecting the era of mail transport by ship. An example from the 27 January 1922, Tokyo Asahi Shimbun reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For Good Fortune\nPlease write these exact words on nine postcards and send them to people from whom you wish good fortune.\nAfter nine days, great fortune will surely come your way. However, if you break this postcard chain, great misfortune will come instead.\nPlease write these within twenty-four hours of seeing this postcard.\nThis venture was started by an American officer and must circle the globe nine times.\u2014\u200a\nThe phenomenon became a social issue, frequently reported in newspapers. Politicians used them for campaigns, and businesses created advertisements mimicking the format, leveraging the free distribution network. Writer and social critic Miyatake Gaikotsu documented the trend in his 1922 book \"Kitai Ry\u016bk\u014dshi\" (History of Strange Fads), noting people sent them out of fear of misfortune. (Gaikotsu stated his interest in the Lucky Letter phenomenon inspired him to write the book.) Unlike later \"Unlucky Letters,\" the focus was theoretically on gaining luck, but the fear of incurring bad luck by breaking the chain often dominated. While Western interpretations often focused on monetary gain/loss, Japanese interpretations tended towards physical harm, illness, or death as the consequence of misfortune. Newspaper accounts described people overcome with anxiety, sending the letters despite skepticism. The potential for exponential growth (one person sending nine, repeated ten times, yielding over 3.4 billion letters) was also noted as problematic. The trend spread, appearing in Fengtian (now Shenyang), Manchuria in May 1922, where authorities attempted, unsuccessfully, to ban them. The 1923 Great Kant\u014d earthquake later led some to view the letter craze as an ill omen.\nIn 1926, a Lucky Letter incident involved prominent figures. Imakita Sakunosuke, head of the government's Monopoly Bureau, received an English letter via an American acquaintance and a Japanese scholar. Imakita translated it, added instructions to send to nine friends, and mailed it to influential figures in politics and finance, causing a stir. Police investigated, finding recipients including former Tokyo mayor Got\u014d Shinpei. The Tokyo Nichi Nichi Shimbun reported the event on 1 August 1926. Imakita claimed his daughter sent them playfully, but some analysts question this, suggesting it might have been a pre-arranged excuse or even an early experiment in information diffusion, given the involvement of military figures and Got\u014d Shinpei (then president of NHK's predecessor). Political scientist Yoshino Sakuz\u014d also received one in August 1926, dismissing it as foolish but criticizing police intervention as overreach. Despite suppression efforts, senders were sometimes punished.\nAlthough some sources claim Lucky Letters died out after the Great Kanto Earthquake due to crackdowns, they continued to appear. In 1935, a man was arrested for attempting a money-making scheme similar to the Denver \"Send-a-Dime\" letter, using the phone book to mail 350 letters asking for small cash contributions.\nDuring World War II (1943), an anti-war chain letter circulated, stating \"We are already tired of war. Let us pray to God for peace to come soon,\" instructing recipients to send copies to two acquaintances (the small number possibly reflecting wartime shortages). Post-war examples include a \"Fuku'un no Tegami\" (\u798f\u904b\u306e\u624b\u7d19 - Fortune Letter) in 1948\u20131949, promising large sums of money (e.g., \u00a516 million or \u00a5200,000) if recipients sent a small amount (e.g., \u00a52 or \u00a520) to the first name on a list, updated the list, and forwarded it to others (e.g., 7 or 15 people). By 1954, newspapers reported on the anxiety these letters caused, with a middle school girl terrified by a threat of death for not forwarding within 12 hours, and a man seeking advice after receiving a letter claiming someone died for ignoring it. Some letters used famous foreign figures, claiming Franklin D. Roosevelt became president by sending one, or Thomas Edison died for not sending one.\nFukou no Tegami (\u4e0d\u5e78\u306e\u624b\u7d19 - Unlucky Letter).\nThe \"Fukou no Tegami\" (\u4e0d\u5e78\u306e\u624b\u7d19 - Unlucky Letter) phenomenon is thought to have emerged when the \"good luck\" aspect of earlier letters disappeared, leaving only the threat of misfortune. Some suggest it began as a simple prank, replacing \"good luck\" with \"bad luck\" in existing templates. Research suggests it started trending around 1969 or 1970. Newspaper articles from late 1970 and 1972 trace its spread from Kyushu through Osaka, Nagoya, and Tokyo starting around 1969. Other accounts place the start slightly earlier, around 1965.\nBy summer 1970, it was prevalent in Tokyo, spreading to the Kinki region (centering on Kyoto) by November 1970, and becoming a nationwide phenomenon that same month. A Yomiuri Shimbun article on 26 November 1970 reported receiving over a hundred complaints since early October. Typical wording included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is an Unlucky Letter, a death god that came to me sequentially from Okinawa. A Canadian supposedly thought of it. If you stop it with you, misfortune will certainly visit. A person in Texas stopped it and died five years later. You too, please send this letter to twenty-nine people within thirty hours without changing the text. I am number XXX.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is an Unlucky Letter.The person who receives it must send the same letter to ten people within one week.Ms./Mr. \u25a0\u25a0 in Class 6-2 at \u25a0\u25a0 Elementary School stopped the letter and died in a traffic accident ten days later.If you ignore this, disaster will surely befall you too.\u2014\u200a\nVariations included different time limits (e.g., 50 hours) and recipient counts (e.g., 29 or 10). The letters often personified themselves (\"I am an Unlucky Letter\") or invoked a \"death god\" (\u6b7b\u795e, \"shinigami\"), suggesting the letter itself possessed supernatural power. Many included instructions not to tell anyone about receiving the letter, threatening death if revealed, likely to prevent consultation. They were sent anonymously, sometimes as letters in envelopes, sometimes as postcards. Some 1990s versions replaced \"Okinawa\" with \"\u014cita,\" lacked foreign references, used Japanese names for victims, and ended with \"I am also a victim.\" Like earlier Lucky Letters, some invoked famous foreigners, such as claiming Napoleon Bonaparte died for not sending one.\nRecipients were often chosen randomly from phone books or sometimes from alumni or company directories, though senders often expressed reluctance to target people they knew. In the 1970s, before widespread access to photocopiers, recipients had to hand-copy the entire text.\nA key difference from earlier Lucky Letters was the anonymity; Lucky Letters often included the sender's name and sometimes a list of previous senders, making the chain's path somewhat traceable. Fukou no Tegami's power was also portrayed as inherent to the letter itself (\"this is a death god\"), whereas Lucky Letters typically threatened misfortune only as a consequence of *breaking the chain*. Furthermore, while Lucky Letters circulated mainly among adults, Fukou no Tegami spread widely among children (elementary and middle school students) as well, possibly linked to schools becoming hubs for ghost stories during Japan's high-growth period.\nAfter a period of police activity led to a decline in early 1971, the letters resurged in Tokyo by late 1971 and spread nationwide again by May 1972, with letters reported arriving from various regions. The phenomenon persisted into the 1990s, adapting to use photocopiers and fax machines. Minor resurgences occurred from 1990\u20131992 and again in 1998. In 1993, a Portuguese version circulated within Japan's Brazilian Japanese community, printed via word processor, mixing promises of lottery wins with threats of job loss or spousal death.\nSocial reaction and impact in Japan.\nFukou no Tegami became a significant social problem, widely covered by media and even becoming a buzzword in 1970. Police stations received numerous inquiries and complaints, with people bringing in letters, demanding action, or expressing fear. A 1970 Sankei Shimbun survey found 75.6% of people knew about the letters, and 20.5% had received one. While nearly half (45.8%) dismissed them as \"absurd\", significant portions found them \"infuriating\" (28.9%), \"creepy\" (12.9%), or \"anxiety-inducing\" (4.4%). About half (49.3%) discarded them, but 17.4% admitted to forwarding them, particularly women (45% of female office workers surveyed).\nAnecdotes highlighted the distress caused: a woman forwarded one despite her husband's objections, leading to marital strife; another developed chronic hives after discarding one and becoming anxious; people angrily confronted police or postal workers. Magazine pen pal sections were inundated, leading some, like the manga magazine Ribon, to shut down columns listing readers' addresses. Occult magazine Mu received so many it started a \"Fukou no Tegami Grand Collection\" feature. In Saitama Prefecture alone, over 400 cases were reported to police by late 1986, with some individuals reportedly suffering nervous breakdowns.\nWhile many dismissed the letters, others were deeply troubled, caught between the fear of personal misfortune and the guilt of potentially inflicting it on others by forwarding the letter \u2013 a dilemma described as highlighting selfishness (\"as long as I'm okay\") versus conscience. Some admitted forwarding out of a \"better safe than sorry\" mentality, while others likely sent them maliciously to disliked individuals or simply out of boredom or curiosity about the recipient's reaction.\nProminent figures also received them. Actress Kimiko Ikegami received one in 1975, shortly before her grandfather, Bando Mitsugoro VIII, died unexpectedly, fueling public outrage against the letters. In 1978, Koseki Kinko, wife of composer Y\u016bji Koseki, wrote a widely publicized newspaper column urging people to simply destroy the letters, sharing her own experience of doing so without consequence and encouraging readers to face adversity positively.\nExpert opinions on the Japanese phenomenon.\nExperts offered various interpretations. Shinto scholar Kato Takahisa saw it revealing underlying societal anxiety despite modernization. Psychiatrist Shigeta Sait\u014d called it symptomatic of the times, criticizing the \"self-centered\" impulse to pass on misfortune compared to earlier Lucky Letters. Sociologist Mita Munesuke termed it the \"pass the buck\" (\u30d0\u30d0\u629c\u304d, \"babanuki\", like the card game Old Maid) mentality amplified. Writer Nada Inada linked it to persistent superstition in modern society and the fear triggered by confronting the taboo subject of unhappiness. Social psychologist Akira Tsujimura noted the unsettling effect of anonymity, the resonance with the ever-present reality of death, and its alignment with modern egoism. Writer Kenichi Hatsumi recalled playing \"unlucky letter games\" as a child, suggesting a parody element existed alongside genuine fear. Shrine priest Ishikawa Masayasu pointed out how the letters exploit psychological weakness, trapping people between spreading harm and fearing personal consequences.\nResponses by organizations in Japan.\nVarious organizations stepped in to handle the letters and alleviate public anxiety:\nVariations and transformations in print.\nBesides the standard Fukou no Tegami, variations emerged:\nEmail.\nSome email messages sent as chain letters may seem fairly harmless; for example, a school student wishing to see how many people can receive their email for a science project, but they can grow exponentially and be hard to stop. Infamously, the salacious Claire Swire email spread in a chain-like fashion when its recipient sought to learn Swire's identity.\nMessages sometimes include phony promises from companies or wealthy individuals (such as Bill Gates) promising a monetary reward to everyone who receives the message. They may also be politically motivated, such as \"Save the Scouts, forward this to as many friends as possible\" or a warning that a popular TV or radio show may be forced off the air. Some, such as the \"Hawaiian Good Luck Totem\", which has spread in thousands of forms, threaten users with bad luck if not forwarded. One chain letter distributed on MSN Hotmail began, \"Hey it's Tara and John the directors of MSN...\" and subsequently claimed readers' accounts would be deleted if they did not pass on the message.\nAnother common form of email chain letter is the virus hoax and a form of cyberbullying.\nEmail chain letters in Japan.\nWith the rise of email and mobile phones, digital versions of Fukou no Tegami, known as \"Fukou no Mail\" (\u4e0d\u5e78\u306e\u30e1\u30fc\u30eb - Unlucky Mail), emerged. Early versions in the 1990s often lacked the elaborate justifications of printed letters, simply threatening death (\"\u30b3\u30ed\u30b5\u30ec\u30eb,\" \"korosareru\") or dire consequences (\"\u30bf\u30a4\u30d8\u30f3\u30ca\u30b3\u30c8\u30cb\u30ca\u30eb,\" \"taihen na koto ni naru\") for not forwarding. By 1995, they were reported spreading within corporate email systems. In 1999, widespread circulation via mobile phones and PHS was noted, with messages like \"Send this mail to 6 people within 5 days or die,\" \"16 people who ignored this are dead,\" or \"You will definitely die if you read this mail to the end.\"\nLater examples reported by the Japan Data Communication Association (DEKYO) include threats like: \"My girlfriend disappeared. Forward this to 20 people to help find her. Anyone who stops the mail is the culprit and I will come kill them in 8 days,\" \"A girl named \u25a0\u25a0 was bullied and committed suicide. Her ghost still wanders. If you don't send this to 15+ people, she will attack you,\" or \"My best friend \u25a0\u25a0 betrayed me. I was hit by a car and lost both legs. Send this to 10 people in 10 hours, or I will come steal your legs.\" Particularly notorious were the \"Kikuchi Ayane chain mail\" (featuring a murdered girl's ghost seeking friends and her killer) and the \"Tachibana Ayumi chain mail\" (claiming a friend was murdered and the sender would use phone location data to find and kill anyone who didn't forward the mail to enough people, assuming they were the culprit), the latter appearing as early as 2001. Emails invoking revenge or ghosts seeking killers became common from late 1999 onwards, sometimes influenced by popular horror like the movie \"Ring\", leading to \"Sadako mail\" threatening curses from the film's antagonist. A lighter(?) example was the \"Fukou no Takagi Boo\" (Unlucky Takagi Boo) mail circulating among high school girls in 1998, claiming to reveal comedian Takagi Boo's phone number and threatening weight gain if not forwarded.\nForwarding such emails could have legal consequences; in 2000, a university student in Yamaguchi Prefecture was questioned by police on suspicion of intimidation for forwarding a threatening chain mail.\nIn response to the prevalence of these emails, in 2005 the Japan Data Communication Association set up dedicated email addresses (advertised as a \"digital trash can\") where people could forward unwanted chain mails for deletion. Within months, they received tens of thousands of emails, the majority being superstition-based chain letters. Analysis in 2008 found that 78% of emails received fell into the \"luck/unluck\" category (though many contained links to dating or adult sites). These disposal addresses remain active. Sh\u014dz\u014d-ji temple in Tokyo also accepts unlucky emails, printing them out for ritual disposal.\nWeb communities.\nChain letters within social media platforms became widespread on Myspace (in the form of Myspace bulletins) and YouTube (in the form of video comments) as well as on Facebook through messages or applications. For instance, the chain post/email of Carmen Winstead, supposedly about a girl from Indiana who was pushed down a sewage drain in a fire drill, states that, \"if you do not repost/send this to 10 people, Carmen will find you and kill you.\" Chain letters are often coupled with intimidating hoaxes or the promise of providing the sender with \"secret\" information once they have forwarded the message.\nSNS and forum chain messages in Japan.\nFrom around 2011, email chain letters declined in Japan, while similar messages spread via SNS. On Twitter (now X), this often takes the form of pressured retweets (now reposts), while on LINE, messages urge forwarding to a specific number of contacts. Common LINE examples since 2016 include: \"Copy this and send to 10 people or misfortune will befall you,\" or \"You received this because you're important to me. Send this to 20 people you truly like. If you don't, friends or lovers will leave you.\" The latter type, leveraging friendship anxiety, reportedly caused real friction when recipients felt pressured to forward, annoying their contacts. Some include phone numbers to call \"if you think it's fake,\" but these are often unrelated third-party numbers used for harassment, or sometimes linked to organized crime. Surveys indicate high exposure among Japanese teenagers, with many admitting to forwarding them. Online forums like Yahoo! Chiebukuro and Nifty Kids receive numerous\u76f8\u8ac7 (s\u014ddan - consultation) requests about these messages.\nOn Japanese imageboards and forums like 2channel (now 5channel), copy-paste chain messages also appear. One notable type emerged around 2002, involving narratives where the poster claims to be possessed or hunted by a malevolent entity (e.g., \"Are\" - \"That Thing\") and urges readers to spread the story to dilute the entity's focus, ending with statements like \"If you want to increase your own survival probability, I recommend exposing this text to as many eyes as possible.\" These are sometimes called \"self-responsibility type\" (\u81ea\u5df1\u8cac\u4efb\u7cfb, \"jiko sekinin kei\") stories.\nSince around 2007, an image known as the \"Hand of God\" (\u795e\u306e\u624b, \"Kami no Te\")\u2014depicting a hand-shaped cloud with sunbeams\u2014has circulated frequently on Twitter and LINE in Japan. Typically accompanied by text claiming that sending it to people you wish happiness upon will bring them good luck and grant wishes, the image has been flagged by security firms like G DATA Software as potentially linked to malware. (Meteorologists state such cloud formations are impossible; the image likely originated as a doctored version of a shock image from Goatse.cx.) The image gained renewed attention in 2021 when celebrities posted it on Instagram, prompting warnings. This \"Hand of God\" image represents a shift back towards positive \"good luck\" chains, albeit with potential security risks.\nOn TikTok, sounds tagged \"#\u3044\u3044\u3053\u3068\u304c\u8d77\u304d\u308b\" (#GoodThingsWillHappen) gained popularity around 2022-2023, particularly among Japanese high school students, promising fulfilled wishes if used in posts. These represent a further evolution towards positive, low-stakes chain-like phenomena, contrasting with the anxiety-inducing nature of Fukou no Tegami.\nWhile digital copying allows perfect replication, potentially halting the mutation seen in handwritten letters like the \"Stick Letter,\" new forms and variations continue to emerge across different platforms, suggesting the underlying mechanisms of chain letters constantly adapt to new media.\nReasons for popularity.\nThe enduring appeal and periodic surges in chain letter popularity have been linked to various factors:\nRelationship to urban legends.\nChain letters often function as vectors for urban legends. The structure \"learn this story/break this rule, suffer misfortune unless you pass it on to X people within Y time\" is common to both.\nIn Japan, specific urban legends are thought to be influenced by or derived from Fukou no Tegami:\nThe structural similarity\u2014a contagious curse requiring propagation for the host's salvation\u2014strongly suggests these legends adapted the chain letter mechanism.\nIn popular culture.\nChain letters, particularly the Fukou no Tegami type, have appeared in various fictional works, often reflecting societal awareness and anxieties surrounding them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42996", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42996", "title": "Rebecca", "text": "Rebecca commonly refers to:\nRebecca, Rebekah or similar, may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42997", "revid": "6209078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42997", "title": "Flevoland", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nFlevoland () is the twelfth and newest province of the Netherlands, established in 1986, when the southern and eastern Flevopolders, together with the Noordoostpolder, were merged into one provincial entity. It is in the centre of the country in the former Zuiderzee, which was turned into the freshwater IJsselmeer by the closure of the Afsluitdijk in 1932. Almost all of the land belonging to Flevoland was reclaimed in the 1950s and 1960s while splitting the Markermeer and bordering lakes from the IJsselmeer. As to dry land, it is the smallest province of the Netherlands at , but not gross land as that includes much of the waters of the fresh water lakes (meres) mentioned.\nThe province had a population of about 445,000 as of January 2023 and consists of six municipalities. Its capital is Lelystad and its most populous city is Almere, which forms part of the Randstad and has grown to become the seventh largest city of the country. Flevoland is bordered in the extreme north by Friesland, in the northeast by Overijssel, and in the northwest by the lakes Markermeer and IJsselmeer. In the southeast, the province borders on Gelderland; in the southwest on Utrecht and North Holland. Outside urban areas, the land in Flevoland is predominantly used for agriculture.\nEtymology.\nFlevoland was named after Lacus Flevo, a name recorded in Roman sources for a large inland lake at the southern end of the later-formed Zuiderzee; it was mentioned by the Roman geographer Pomponius Mela in his \"De Chorographia\" in 44 AD. Due to the slowly rising sea level, a number of lakes gradually developed in the Zuiderzee region, which eventually became contiguous. Pomponius wrote about this: \"The northern branch of the Rhine extends to Lake Flevo, which encloses an island of the same name and then flows to the sea like a normal river.\" Other sources speak of Flevum, which means 'flow'. The process continued and gradually the Zuiderzee arose from this lake. The names \"Flevoland\" and \"Vlieland\" have the same origin.\nHistory.\nBetween 790 and 1250, Lake Flevo became connected with the North Sea. As a result, a number of villages were swallowed by the sea. The newly created inland sea was called Almere.\nAfter a flood in 1916, the decision was made to enclose and reclaim the Zuiderzee, an inland sea within the Netherlands, and thus the Zuiderzee Works started. Other sources indicate other times and reasons, but also agree that in 1932, the Afsluitdijk was completed, which closed off the sea completely. The Zuiderzee was later divided into IJsselmeer (mere at the end of the river IJssel) and Markermeer, planned to be mostly drained to make the Markerwaard. The Markerwaard was never built due to post-War fiscal austerity.\nThe first land reclaimed was the northeast polder (\"Noordoostpolder\") in 1942. This took in the former small islands Urk and Schokland. It was at first added to the Province of Overijssel.\nIn the southwest the Flevopolder \u2013 larger than the above \u2013 was then reclaimed; its northeastern half in 1957 and its southwestern half in 1968.\nA key feature of the latter is a narrow body of water kept at three metres below sea level along the former coastline, to stabilize the water table and prevent coastal towns from losing their waterfront and access to the sea. Thus, the Flevopolder became an artificial island joined to the mainland by bridges. The municipalities on the three parts voted to become a province, shortly before this was effected in 1986.\nSince that time, Flevoland is the youngest of the 12 provinces of the Netherlands, having been granted this status in 1986. Its current sources of revenue are the cultivation of flowers, farming and tourism. In recent times, it has built many wind turbines as a source of renewable energy.\nGeography.\nZuiderzee Works.\nEastern Flevoland (\"Oostelijk Flevoland\" or \"Oost-Flevoland\") and Southern Flevoland (\"Zuidelijk Flevoland\" or \"Zuid-Flevoland\"), unlike the Noordoostpolder, have broad channel between them and the mainland: the Veluwemeer and Gooimeer, respectively, making them, together, the world's largest artificial island.\nThey are two polders with a joint hydrological infrastructure, with a dividing dike in the middle, the \"Knardijk\", that will keep one polder safe if the other is flooded. The two main drainage canals that traverse the dike can be closed by floodgates in such an event. The pumping stations are the \"Wortman\" (diesel powered) at Lelystad-Haven, the \"Lovink\" near Harderwijk on the eastern dike and the \"Colijn\" (both electrically powered) along the northern dike beside the Ketelmeer.\nA new element in the design of Eastern Flevoland is the larger city Lelystad (1966), named after Cornelis Lely, the man who had played a crucial role in designing and realising the Zuiderzee Works. Other more conventional settlements already existed by then; Dronten, the major local town, was founded in 1962, followed by two smaller satellite villages, Swifterbant and Biddinghuizen, in 1963. These three were incorporated in the new municipality of Dronten on 1 January 1972.\nSouthern Flevoland has only one pumping station, the diesel-powered \"De Blocq van Kuffeler\". Because of the hydrological union of the two Flevolands, it simply joins the other three in maintaining the water level of both polders. Almere relieves the housing shortage and increasing overcrowding on the old land. Its name is derived from the early medieval name for Lake Almere. Almere was to be divided into three major settlements initially; the first, \"Almere-Haven\" (1976) situated along the coast of the Gooimeer (one of the peripheral lakes), the second and largest was to fulfill the role of city centre as \"Almere-Stad\" (1980), and the third was \"Almere-Buiten\" (1984) to the northwest towards Lelystad. In 2003, the municipality made a new \"Structuurplan\" which started development of three new settlements: \"Overgooi\" in the southeast, \"Almere-Hout\" in the east, and \"Almere-Poort\" in the West. In time, \"Almere-Pampus\" could be developed in the northwest, with possibly a new bridge over the IJmeer towards Amsterdam.\nThe Oostvaardersplassen is a landscape of shallow pools, islets, and swamps. Originally, this low part of the new polder was destined to become an industrial area. Spontaneous settlement of interesting flora and fauna turned the area into a nature park, of such importance that the new railway line was diverted. The recent decline in agricultural land use will in time make expanding \"natural\" land use possible, and connect the Oostvaardersplassen to the Veluwe.\nThe centre of the polder most closely resembles the prewar polders in that it is almost exclusively agricultural. In contrast, the southeastern part is dominated by extensive forests. Here is also found the only other settlement of the polder, Zeewolde (1984), again a more conventional town acting as the local centre. Zeewolde became a municipality at the same time as Almere, on 1 January 1984, which in the case of Zeewolde meant that the municipality existed before the town itself, with only farms in the surrounding land to be governed until the town started to grow.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOn 1 January 2023, Flevoland had a total population of 444,701 and a population density of . It is the 2nd least populous province of the Netherlands, with only Zeeland having fewer people. The city of Almere is the most populous municipality in the province.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2015, 15.5% of the population belonged to the Protestant Church in the Netherlands while 12.3% was Roman Catholic, 7.2% was Muslim and 9.9% belonged to other churches or faiths. Over half (55.2%) of the population identified as non-religious.\nPolitics.\nSince 2023, the King's Commissioner of Flevoland is Arjen Gerritsen, who is a member of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD).\nThe Provincial Council of Flevoland has 41 seats. At the provincial elections in March 2023, the Farmer\u2013Citizen Movement (BBB) became the largest party with 10 seats. The People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) is second largest with 4 seats, after which the Party for Freedom (PVV), Labour Party (PvdA) and Green Left (, GL) won 3 seats each. Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), Democrats 66 (D66), Party for the Animals (PvdD), Socialist Party (SP), Christian Union (CU), Reformed Political Party (SGP), JA21 and Forum for Democracy (FVD) all won 2 seats each. 50PLUS and Strong Local Flevoland (SLP), a regional party, both won 1 seat each.\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was \u20ac14 billion in 2018, accounting for 1.8% of the Netherlands' economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac29,500 or 98% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nTransport.\nRail.\nThe Flevopolder is served by the Flevolijn, running from Weesp to Lelystad, and the Hanzelijn, continuing from Lelystad towards Zwolle. The two railways stations of the province with intercity services are Almere Centrum and Lelystad Centrum.\nFurthermore, Lelystad Zuid is a planned railway station between Almere Oostvaarders and Lelystad Centrum. It has been partially constructed preceding the opening of the railway in 1988, but construction has been put on indefinite hold because of slower-than-expected development of the city of Lelystad.\nAmongst the cities with direct train connections to Flevoland are Amsterdam, Utrecht, The Hague, Zwolle, Groningen, Leeuwarden and Schiphol Airport.\nAirport.\nThere is one airport in the province: Lelystad Airport. A second airport, Noordoostpolder Airport near Emmeloord, was closed in the late 1990s due to town expansion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43000", "revid": "28457446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43000", "title": "Sucre", "text": "Sucre (; ) is the \"de jure\" capital city of Bolivia, the capital of the Chuquisaca Department and the sixth most populous city in Bolivia. Located in the south-central part of the country, Sucre lies at an elevation of . This relatively high altitude gives the city a subtropical highland climate with cool temperatures year-round. Over the centuries, the city has received various names, including La Plata, Charcas, and Chuquisaca. Today, the region is of predominantly Quechua background, with some Aymara communities and influences.\nSucre holds major national importance and is an educational and government center, as well as the location of the Bolivian Supreme Court. Its pleasant climate and low crime rates have made the city popular amongst foreigners and Bolivians alike. Notably, Sucre contains one of the best preserved Hispanic colonial and republican historic city centres in the Western Hemisphere - similar to cities such as Cuzco and Quito. This architectural heritage and the millenarian history of the Charcas region has led to Sucre's designation as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city has held an important place in Bolivian history from its place as an important center in the Real Audencia de Charcas, and later as the first capital of Bolivia before the fall of silver's importance as a global mineral commodity. Some regional tension remains from the historical transfer of capital functions to La Paz, and even today the issue features an important role in local culture and political ideology.\nHistory.\nPrior to Spanish colonization, Sucre was an Inca town called Chuquisaca, a name that remains an alternative designation for the city today. The name \"Chuquisaca\" possibly derives from the Quechua words \"chuqi\", meaning 'precious metal' or 'silver', and \"shaqa\" or \"saqa\", meaning 'abundance', 'a heap', or 'a pile of small things', thus translating to 'a heap of precious metal' or 'a pile of silver'.\nChuquisaca was the provincial capital of the wamani of Charca, established after Topa Inka Yupanqui conquered the Aymara kingdom that originally occupied the area and imposed the Quechua language on them. According to Inca Garcilaso de la Vega, the Inca ruler received ambassadors from the kingdom of Tucman (Tucum\u00e1n) while in Charca. Due to their warrior background, the Charcas were excluded from various state duties and many served as soldiers, being recruited in large numbers by Wayna Qhapaq for northern campaigns. During Wayna Qhapaq's wars in modern-day Ecuador, the Guarani-speaking Chiriguanos from Paraguay invaded the Charcas frontier, aided by a band of European explorers. Although the Chiriguanos were repelled by commanders sent by Wayna Qhapaq from Quito, the Portuguese conquistador Aleixo Garcia is believed to be the first European to make contact with Charcas in 1525.\nAlthough the Inca territories south of Cusco were assigned to the head conquistador Diego de Almagro, there is no record of him visiting Chuquisaca and the Charcas territory during his 1535 expedition to Collasuyo. After Almagro's murder in 1538, Francisco Pizarro, sent his brothers Gonzalo Pizarro and Hernando Pizarro to Charcas to claim the region. Hernando Pizarro traveled to Chuquisaca along with the Emperor Paullu Inca. During their visit, they met with Consara, the principal lord of the Charcas region. Consara provided crucial information about the resources of Charca, including silver mines in Porco, gold mines in Chiutamarca, copper mines in Aytacara, and tin mines in Chayanta. The settlement was briefly occupied by Diego M\u00e9ndez, under the orders of Diego de Almagro II, during Almagro II's uprising against Pizarro and the Spanish government.\nThe Spanish foundation of Sucre occurred on November 30, 1538, under the name \"Ciudad de la Plata de la Nueva Toledo\" (City of Silver of New Toledo) by Pedro Anzures, Marqu\u00e9s de Campo Redondo. In 1559, the Spanish King Philip II established the \"Audiencia de Charcas\" in La Plata with authority over an area which covers what is now Paraguay, southeastern Peru, northern Chile and Argentina, and much of Bolivia. The \"Real Audiencia of Charcas\" was a subdivision of the Viceroyalty of Peru until 1776, when it was transferred to the newly created Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata. In 1601 the Recoleta Monastery was founded by the Franciscans. In 1609, an archbishopric was founded in the city. In 1624 St Francis Xavier University of Chuquisaca was founded.\nVery much a Spanish city during the colonial era, the narrow streets of the city centre are organised in a grid, reflecting the Andalusian culture that is embodied in the architecture of the city's great houses and numerous convents and churches. Sucre remains the seat of the Roman Catholic Church in Bolivia, and a common sight is members of religious orders dressed in traditional habit. For much of its colonial history, Sucre's temperate climate was preferred by the Spanish royalty and wealthy families involved in silver trade coming from Potos\u00ed. Sucre's University (Universidad Mayor Real y Pontificia de San Francisco Xavier de Chuquisaca) is one of the oldest universities in the new world.\nOn May 25, 1809, the Bolivian independence movement was started with the ringing of the bell of the Basilica of Saint Francisco. This bell was rung to the point of breakage, but it can still be found in the Basilica today: it is one of the most precious relics of the city.\nUntil the 19th century, La Plata was the judicial, religious and cultural centre of the region. It was proclaimed provisional capital of the newly independent Upper Peru (later, Bolivia) in July 1826. On July 12, 1839, President Jos\u00e9 Miguel de Velasco proclaimed a law naming the city as the capital of Bolivia, and renaming it in honor of the revolutionary leader Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre. After the economic decline of Potos\u00ed and its silver industry, the Bolivian seat of government was moved from Sucre to La Paz in 1898. Many argue Sucre was the location of the beginning of the Latin American independence movement against Spain. From that point of view, Bolivia was the last Spanish imperial territory in South America to gain its independence, in 1825. In 1991, Sucre became a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nGovernment.\nTogether with La Paz, Sucre is one of two governmental centers of Bolivia: It is the seat of the judiciary, where the Supreme Court of Justice is located. As designated in the Constitution of Bolivia, Sucre is the true capital of the nation, while La Paz is the seat of government. Sucre is also the capital city of the department of Chuquisaca. The government of the City of Sucre is divided into executive and legislative branches. The Mayor of Sucre is the executive head of the city government, elected for a term of five years by general election. The legislative branch consists of the Municipal Council, which elects a President, Vice President and Secretary from a group of eleven members.\nThe mayor of Sucre is Enrique Lea\u00f1o of the Movement for Socialism, who defeated Horacio Poppe in elections held on March 3, 2021.\nThe Municipal Council is the legislative branch of the government of the municipality of Sucre, the constitutional capital of Bolivia. The council consists of eleven elected members, and it elects its own President, Vice President and Secretary. The members of the municipal council elected on May 3, 2021 are:\nGeography and territorial organization.\nSucre is divided into eight numbered districts: the first five of these are urban districts, while Districts 6, 7, and 8 are rural districts. Each is administered by a Sub-Mayor (), appointed by the Mayor of Sucre. The rural districts include numerous rural communities outside the urban area.\nSucre is served by Alcantari Airport, situated to the South.\nClimate.\nSucre features a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cwb\", Trewartha: \"Cwll\"), with mild temperatures year round. Rain generally falls in summer thunderstorms.\nThe highest record temperature was while the lowest record temperature was \nThe City of Four Names.\nEach of the well known names represent a specific era of the city's history:\nSports.\nSucre has the most important sport facilities in Bolivia, and the most practiced sport in the city is football. Sucre has the second-biggest football and Olympic stadium in the country, the Estadio Patria. As of the 2019 Apertura, the 2008 champion club Universitario de Sucre was relegated from the Bolivian professional league, leaving the city without a first-division team.\nOther sports are also practiced, such as swimming at la Piscina Bolivariana, basketball at numerous courts around the city, as well as taekwondo, kung fu, volleyball, tennis and racquetball.\nEconomy.\nThe capital's economy is based primarily on:\nEducation.\nSucre is home to the second oldest public university in the Americas, the Universidad Mayor Real y Pontificia de San Francisco Xavier de Chuquisaca; often abbreviated USFX. The university draws students both nationally and internationally, and different departments can be found scattered around the city. Degree areas at USFX include law, political science, medicine, odontology, chemistry, business administration, financial sciences, and more.\nThe city also features other academic institutions such as a campus of the private university Universidad Privada del Valle, also known as Univalle, the National Teachers School (Escuela Nacional de Maestros \"Mariscal Sucre\"), the Universidad Privada Domingo Savio, and the Universidad Andina Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar.\nArchitecture.\nThe city of Sucre contains many old and classic buildings.\nThe House of Freedom.\nBuilt in 1621, it is perhaps the most important building of the nation. The republic was founded in this building by Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar who wrote the Bolivian Constitution.\nThe \"Sal\u00f3n de la Independencia\" houses the Bolivian Declaration of Independence.\nNational Library.\nBuilt on the same year of the foundation of the Republic, it is the first and the most important historical, bibliographical and documentation center of the country. The National Library has documents that date from 16th century.\nMetropolitan Cathedral.\nBuilt between 1559 and 1712, the cathedral has the \"Museo Catedraliceo\" which is the first and most important religious museum of the country. The \"Pinacoteca\" has a vast collection of paintings by Colonial and Republican masters and also by Europeans such as Bitti, Fourchaudt and Van Dyck. The Cathedral contains a vast amount of jewelry made of gold, silver and gemstones.\nArchbishop's Palace.\nBuilt in 1609, was an important religious and historic institution during colonial times.\nDepartmental Autonomous Government of Chuquisaca.\nOne of the best buildings of republican architecture, this was completed in 1896. It was the first Palace of Government of Bolivia but when the government was moved to La Paz it became the Chuquisaca Governorship Palace.\nSupreme Court of Justice.\nOn July 16, 1827, the Supreme Court of the Nation was established. Its first president was Dr. Manuel Maria Urcullo. Others prominent in its history include Dr. Pantaleon Dalence, who was twice president of the Supreme Court and through his qualities became known as the 'Father of Bolivian Justice'. This institution was installed in several places before moving to its current building. It was designed in the neoclassical style under the canons of French academicism and was inaugurated on May 25, 1945.\nGeneral Cemetery.\nSome of the areas date from the late nineteenth century. Ornate mausoleums, tombs and gardens with magnificent old trees populate the space that is home to the graves of important people in the arts, sciences and the history both of Bolivia and of Latin America.\nTransportation.\nThe city is served by Alcantar\u00ed Airport with multiple domestic destinations on three commercial airlines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43001", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43001", "title": "Guar gum", "text": "Vegetable gum from the guar bean, Cyamopsis tetragonoloba\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nGuar gum, also called guaran, is a galactomannan polysaccharide extracted from guar beans that has thickening and stabilizing properties useful in food, feed, and industrial applications. The guar seeds are mechanically dehusked, hydrated, milled and screened according to application. It is typically produced as a free-flowing, off-white powder.\nProduction and trade.\nThe guar bean is principally grown in India, Pakistan, the United States, Australia and Africa. India is the largest producer, accounting for nearly 80% of world production. In India, Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Haryana are the main producing regions. The US has produced 4,600 to 14,000 tonnes of guar over the last 5 years. Texas acreage since 1999 has fluctuated from about 7,000 to 50,000 acres. The world production for guar gum and its derivatives is about 1.0 million tonnes. Non-food guar gum accounts for about 40% of the total demand.\nProperties.\nChemical composition.\nChemically, guar gum is an exo-polysaccharide composed of the sugars galactose and mannose. The backbone is a linear chain of \u03b2 1,4-linked mannose residues to which galactose residues are 1,6-linked at every second mannose, forming short side-branches. Guar gum has the ability to withstand temperatures of 80\u00a0\u00b0C (176\u00a0\u00b0F) for five minutes.\nSolubility and viscosity.\nGuar gum is more soluble than locust bean gum due to its extra galactose branch points. Unlike locust bean gum, it is not self-gelling. Either borax or calcium can cross-link guar gum, causing it to gel. In water, it is nonionic and hydrocolloidal. It is not affected by ionic strength or pH, but will degrade at extreme pH and temperature (e.g., pH 3 at 50\u00a0\u00b0C). It remains stable in solution over pH range 5\u20137. Strong acids cause hydrolysis, and loss of viscosity and alkalis in strong concentration also tend to reduce viscosity. It is insoluble in most hydrocarbon solvents. The viscosity attained is dependent on time, temperature, concentration, pH, rate of agitation and particle size of the powdered gum used. The lower the temperature, the lower the rate at which viscosity increases, and the lower the final viscosity. Above 80\u00b0C, the final viscosity is slightly reduced. Finer guar powders swell more rapidly than larger particle size coarse powdered gum.\nGuar gum shows a clear low shear plateau on the flow curve and is strongly shear-thinning. The rheology of guar gum is typical for a random coil polymer. It does not show the very high low shear plateau viscosities seen with more rigid polymer chains such as xanthan gum. It is very thixotropic above 1% concentration, but below 0.3%, the thixotropy is slight. Guar gum shows viscosity synergy with xanthan gum. Guar gum and micellar casein mixtures can be slightly thixotropic if a biphase system forms.\nThickening.\nOne use of guar gum is as a thickening agent in foods and medicines for humans and animals. Because it is gluten-free, it is used as an additive to replace wheat flour in baked goods.:41 It has been shown to reduce serum cholesterol and lower blood glucose levels.\nGuar gum is also economical because it has almost eight times the water-thickening ability of other agents (e.g., cornstarch) and only a small quantity is needed for producing sufficient viscosity. Because less is required, costs are reduced.\nIn addition to guar gum's effects on viscosity, its high ability to flow, or \"deform\", gives it favorable rheological properties. It forms breakable gels when cross-linked with boron. It is used in various multi-phase formulations for hydraulic fracturing, in some as an emulsifier because it helps prevent oil droplets from coalescing, and in others as a stabilizer to help prevent solid particles from settling and/or separating.\nFracking entails the pumping of sand-laden fluids into an oil or natural gas reservoir at high pressure and flow rate. This cracks the reservoir rock and then props the cracks open. Water alone is too thin to be effective at carrying proppant sand, so guar gum is one of the ingredients added to thicken the slurry mixture and improve its ability to carry proppant. There are several properties which are important 1. Thixotropic: the fluid should be thixotropic, meaning it should gel within a few hours. 2. Gelling and de-gelling: The desired viscosity changes over the course of a few hours. When the fracking slurry is mixed, it needs to be thin enough to make it easier to pump. Then as it flows down the pipe, the fluid needs to gel to support the proppant and flush it deep into the fractures. After that process, the gel has to break down so that it is possible to recover the fracking fluid but leave the proppant behind. This requires a chemical process which produces then breaks the gel cross-linking at a predictable rate. Guar+boron+proprietary chemicals can accomplish both of these goals at once.\nIce crystal growth.\nGuar gum retards ice crystal growth by slowing mass transfer across the solid/liquid interface. It shows good stability during freeze-thaw cycles. Thus, it is used in egg-free ice cream. Guar gum has synergistic effects with locust bean gum and sodium alginate. May be synergistic with xanthan: together with xanthan gum, it produces a thicker product (0.5% guar gum / 0.35% xanthan gum), which is used in applications such as soups, which do not require clear results.\nGuar gum is a hydrocolloid, hence is useful for making thick pastes without forming a gel, and for keeping water bound in a sauce or emulsion. Guar gum can be used for thickening cold and hot liquids, to make hot gels, light foams and as an emulsion stabilizer. Guar gum can be used for cottage cheeses, curds, yoghurt, sauces, soups and frozen desserts. Guar gum is also a good source of fiber, with 80% soluble dietary fiber on a dry weight basis.\nGrading.\nGuar gum is analysed for\nGuar gum powder standards are:\nManufacturing process.\nDepending upon the requirement of end product, various processing techniques are used. The commercial production of guar gum normally uses roasting, differential attrition, sieving, and polishing. Food-grade guar gum is manufactured in stages. Guar split selection is important in this process. The split is screened to clean it and then soaked to pre-hydrate it in a double-cone mixer. The prehydrating stage is very important because it determines the rate of hydration of the final product. The soaked splits, which have reasonably high moisture content, are passed through a flaker. The flaked guar split is ground and then dried. The powder is screened through rotary screens to deliver the required particle size. Oversize particles are either recycled to main ultra fine or reground in a separate regrind plant, according to the viscosity requirement.\nThis stage helps to reduce the load at the grinder. The soaked splits are difficult to grind. Direct grinding of those generates more heat in the grinder, which is not desired in the process, as it reduces the hydration of the product. Through the heating, grinding, and polishing process, the husk is separated from the endosperm halves and the refined guar split is obtained. Through the further grinding process, the refined guar split is then treated and converted into powder. The split manufacturing process yields husk and germ called \"guar meal\", widely sold in the international market as cattle feed. It is high in protein and contains oil and albuminoids, about 50% in germ and about 25% in husks. The quality of the food-grade guar gum powder is defined from its particle size, rate of hydration, and microbial content.\nManufacturers define different grades and qualities of guar gum by the particle size, the viscosity generated with a given concentration, and the rate at which that viscosity develops. Coarse-mesh guar gums will typically, but not always, develop viscosity more slowly. They may achieve a reasonably high viscosity, but will take longer to achieve. On the other hand, they will disperse better than fine-mesh, all conditions being equal. A finer mesh, such as a 200 mesh, requires more effort to dissolve. Modified forms of guar gum are available commercially, including enzyme-modified, cationic and hydropropyl guar.\nIndustrial applications.\nFracturing fluids normally consist of many additives that serve two main purposes, firstly to enhance fracture creation and proppant carrying capability and secondly to minimize formation damage. Viscosifiers, such as polymers and crosslinking agents, temperature stabilizers, pH control agents, and fluid loss control materials are among the additives that assist fracture creation. Formation damage is minimized by incorporating breakers, biocides, and surfactants. More appropriate gelling agents are linear polysaccharides, such as guar gum, cellulose, and their derivatives.\nGuar gums are preferred as thickeners for enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Guar gum and its derivatives account for most of the gelled fracturing fluids. Guar is more water-soluble than other gums, and it is also a better emulsifier, because it has more galactose branch points. Guar gum shows high low-shear viscosity, but it is strongly shear-thinning. Being non-ionic, it is not affected by ionic strength or pH but will degrade at low pH at moderate temperature (pH 3 at 50\u00a0\u00b0C). Guar's derivatives demonstrate stability in high temperature and pH environments. Guar use allows for achieving exceptionally high viscosities, which improves the ability of the fracturing liquid to transport proppant. Guar hydrates fairly rapidly in cold water to give highly viscous pseudoplastic solutions of, generally, greater low-shear viscosity than other hydrocolloids. The colloidal solids present in guar make fluids more efficient by creating less filter cake. Proppant pack conductivity is maintained by utilizing a fluid that has excellent fluid loss control, such as the colloidal solids present in guar gum.\nGuar has up to eight times the thickening power of starch. Derivatization of guar gum leads to subtle changes in properties, such as decreased hydrogen bonding, increased solubility in water-alcohol mixture, and improved electrolyte compatibility. These changes in properties result in increased use in different fields, like textile printing, explosives, and oil-water fracturing applications.\nCrosslinking guar.\nGuar molecules have a tendency to aggregate during the hydraulic fracturing process, mainly due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding. These aggregates are detrimental to oil recovery because they clog the fractures, restricting the flow of oil. Cross-linking guar polymer chains prevents aggregation by forming metal\u2013hydroxyl complexes. The first crosslinked guar gels were developed in the late 1960s. Several metal additives have been used for crosslinking; among them are chromium, aluminium, antimony, zirconium, and the more commonly used boron. Boron, in the form of B(OH)4, reacts with the hydroxyl groups on the polymer in a two-step process to link two polymer strands together to form bis-diol complexes.\n1:1 1,2 diol complex and a 1:1 1,3 diol complex, place the negatively charged borate ion onto the polymer chain as a pendant group. Boric acid itself does not apparently complex to the polymer so that all bound boron is negatively charged. The primary form of crosslinking may be due to ionic association between the anionic borate complex and adsorbed cations on the second polymer chain . The development of cross-linked gels was a major advance in fracturing fluid technology. Viscosity is enhanced by tying together the low molecular weight strands, effectively yielding higher molecular weight strands and a rigid structure. Cross-linking agents are added to linear polysaccharide slurries to provide higher proppant transport performance, relative to linear gels.\nLower concentrations of guar gelling agents are needed when linear guar chains are cross-linked. It has been determined that reduced guar concentrations provide better and more complete breaks in a fracture. The breakdown of cross-linked guar gel after the fracturing process restores formation permeability and allows increased production flow of petroleum products.\nFood applications.\nThe largest market for guar gum is in the food industry. In the US, differing percentages are set for its allowable concentration in various food applications. In Europe, guar gum has EU food additive code E412. Xanthan gum and guar gum are the most frequently used gums in gluten-free recipes and gluten-free products.\nApplications include:\nNutritional and medicinal effects.\nGuar gum, as a water-soluble fiber, acts as a bulk-forming laxative. Several studies have found it decreases cholesterol levels. These decreases are thought to be a function of its high soluble fiber content.\nMoreover, its low digestibility lends its use in recipes as a filler, which can help to provide satiety or slow the digestion of a meal, thus lowering the glycemic index of that meal. In the late 1980s, guar gum was used and heavily promoted in several weight-loss drugs. The US Food and Drug Administration eventually recalled these due to reports of esophageal blockage from insufficient fluid intake, after one brand alone caused at least 10 users to be hospitalized, and a death. For this reason, guar gum is no longer approved for use in over-the-counter weight loss drugs in the United States, although this restriction does not apply to supplements. Moreover, a meta-analysis found guar gum supplements were not effective in reducing body weight.\nGuar-based compounds, such as hydroxypropyl guar, have been used in artificial tears to treat dry eye.\nAllergies.\nSome studies have found an allergic sensitivity to guar gum developed in a few individuals working in an industrial environment where airborne concentrations of the substance were present. In those affected by the inhalation of the airborne particles, common adverse reactions were occupational rhinitis and asthma.\nDioxin contamination.\nIn July 2007, the European Commission issued a health warning to its member states after high levels of dioxins were detected in guar gum, which was used as a thickener in small quantities in meat, dairy, dessert and delicatessen products. The source was traced to guar gum from India that was contaminated with pentachlorophenol (PCP), a pesticide no longer in use. PCP contains dioxins, which damage the human immune system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43002", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43002", "title": "IBMPC", "text": ""}
{"id": "43003", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43003", "title": "Dekkers algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "43004", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43004", "title": "TAT3", "text": ""}
{"id": "43005", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43005", "title": "Rio Grande", "text": "Major river forming part of the United States and Mexico border\nThe Rio Grande ( or ) in the United States or the R\u00edo Bravo (del Norte) in Mexico (), also known as T\u00f3 Ba'\u00e1adi in Navajo, is one of the principal rivers (along with the Colorado River) in the Southwestern United States and in northern Mexico. The length of the Rio Grande is , making it the 4th longest river in the United States and in North America by main stem. It originates in south-central Colorado, in the United States, and flows to the Gulf of Mexico. The Rio Grande drainage basin (watershed) has an area of ; however, the endorheic basins that are adjacent to and within the greater drainage basin of the Rio Grande increase the total drainage-basin area to .\nThe Rio Grande with its fertile valley, along with its tributaries, is a vital water source for seven U.S. and Mexican states, and flows primarily through arid and semi-arid lands. After traversing the length of New Mexico, the Rio Grande becomes the Mexico\u2013United States border, between the U.S. state of Texas and the northern Mexican states of Chihuahua and Coahuila, Nuevo Le\u00f3n and Tamaulipas; a short segment of the Rio Grande is a partial state-boundary between the U.S. states of New Mexico and Texas. Since the mid\u2013twentieth century, only 20 percent of the Rio Grande's water reaches the Gulf of Mexico, because of the voluminous consumption of water required to irrigate farmland (e.g. the Mesilla and Lower Rio Grande Valleys) and to continually hydrate cities (e.g. Albuquerque); such water usages are additional to the reservoirs of water retained with diversion dams. of the river in New Mexico and Texas are designated as the Rio Grande Wild and Scenic River.\nGeography.\nThe Rio Grande rises in the western part of Rio Grande National Forest, in the U.S. state of Colorado, and is formed by the joining of several streams at the base of Canby Mountain, in the San Juan Mountains, due east of the Continental Divide of the Americas. From the Continental Divide, the Rio Grande flows through the San Luis Valley, then south into New Mexico, and passes through the Rio Grande Gorge, near Taos, then toward Espa\u00f1ola, afterwards collecting additional waters from the Colorado River basin via the San Juan-Chama Diversion Project and from the Rio Chama. The Rio Grande then continues southwards, irrigating the farmlands in the Middle Rio Grande Valley through the desert cities of Albuquerque and Las Cruces in New Mexico, to El Paso, Texas and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua, in Mexico. In the Albuquerque metropolitan area, the Rio Grande flows by historic Pueblo villages, such as Sandia Pueblo and Isleta Pueblo. South of El Paso, the Rio Grande is the national border between the U.S. and Mexico.\nThe segment of the river that forms the international border ranges from , depending on how the river is measured. The Rio Conchos is a major tributary of the Rio Grande, with its confluence 310\u00a0km. (193 straight air miles) southeast of El Paso near Ojinaga, in Chihuahua, Mexico. Downstream, other tributaries include the Pecos River and Devils River, both entering the Rio Grande from the north in the vicinity of Amistad Reservoir in Texas, and the Rio Salado and Rio San Juan both entering from the south with confluences in Tamaulipas, Mexico.\nThe Rio Grande rises in high mountains and flows for much of its length at high elevation; the valley floor at Albuquerque is , and El Paso above sea level. In New Mexico, the river flows through the Rio Grande rift from one sediment-filled basin to another, cutting canyons between the basins and supporting a fragile bosque ecosystem on its flood plain. From Albuquerque southward, the river flows through desert. Although irrigated agriculture exists throughout most of its stretch, it is particularly extensive in the subtropical Lower Rio Grande Valley. The river ends in a small, sandy delta at the Gulf of Mexico. During portions of 2001 and 2002, the mouth of the Rio Grande was blocked by a sandbar. In the fall of 2003, the sandbar was cleared by high river flows around .\nThe Rio Grande flows through a valley with diverse animal and plants communities. Conservation of the river and the valley is a recurring theme for people who live in the region.\nNavigation.\nAlthough the river's greatest depth is , the Rio Grande generally cannot be navigated by passenger riverboats or by cargo barges. Navigation is only possible near the mouth of the river, in rare circumstances up to Laredo, Texas.\nNavigation was active during much of the 19th century, with over 200 different steamboats operating between the river's mouth close to Brownsville and Rio Grande City, Texas. Many steamboats from the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers were requisitioned by the U.S. government and moved to the Rio Grande during the Mexican\u2013American War in 1846. They provided transport for the U.S. Army, under General Zachary Taylor, to invade Monterrey, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, via Camargo Municipality, Tamaulipas. Army engineers recommended that with small improvements, the river could easily be made navigable as far north as El Paso. Those recommendations were never acted upon.\nThe Brownsville &amp; Matamoros International Bridge, a large swing bridge, dates back to 1910 and is still in use today by automobiles connecting Brownsville with Matamoros, Tamaulipas. The swing mechanism has not been used since the early 1900s, though, when the last of the big steamboats disappeared. At one point, the bridge also had rail traffic. Railroad trains no longer use this bridge. A new rail bridge (West Rail International Crossing) connecting the U.S. and Mexico was built about 15 miles west of the Brownsville &amp; Matamoros International Bridge. It was inaugurated in August 2015. It moved all rail operations out of downtown Brownsville and Matamoros. The West Rail International Crossing is the first new international rail crossing between the U.S. and Mexico in over a century. The Brownsville &amp; Matamoros International Bridge is now operated by the Brownsville and Matamoros Bridge Company, a joint venture between the Mexican government and the Union Pacific Railroad.\nAt the mouth of the Rio Grande, on the Mexican side, was the large commercial port of Bagdad, Tamaulipas. During the American Civil War, this was the only legitimate port of the Confederacy. European warships anchored offshore to maintain the port's neutrality, and managed to do so successfully throughout that conflict, despite occasional stare-downs with blockading ships from the US Navy. It was a shallow-draft river port, with several smaller vessels that hauled cargo to and from the deeper-draft cargo ships anchored off shore. These deeper-draft ships could not cross the shallow sandbar at the mouth of the river. The port's commerce was European military supplies, in exchange for bales of cotton.\nHistory.\nAncestral Rio Grande.\nThe sedimentary basins forming the modern Rio Grande Valley were not integrated into a single river system draining into the Gulf of Mexico until relatively recent geologic time. Instead, the basins formed by the opening of the Rio Grande rift were initially bolsons, with no external drainage and a central playa. An axial river existed in the Espanola Basin as early as 13 million years ago, reaching the Santo Domingo Basin by 6.9 million years ago. However, at this time, the river drained into a playa in the southern Albuquerque Basin where it deposited the Popotosa Formation. The upper reach of this river corresponded to the modern Rio Chama, but by 5 million years ago, an ancestral Rio Grande draining the eastern San Juan Mountains had joined the ancestral Rio Chama.\nThe ancestral Rio Grande progressively integrated basins to the south, reaching the Mesilla Basin by 4.5 million years and the Palomas basin by 3.1 million years ago, forming Lake Palomas. River capture by a tributary of the Pecos River then occurred, with the Rio Grande flowing to Texas by 2.06 million years, and finally joining the Pecos River 800,000 years ago, which drained into the Gulf of Mexico. Volcanism in the Taos Plateau reduced drainage from the San Luis Basin until a spillover event 440,000 years ago that drained Lake Alamosa, forming the Rio Grande Gorge, and fully reintegrated the San Luis Basin into the Rio Grande watershed.\nPrior to European contact.\nArcheological sites from the earliest human presence in the Rio Grande Valley are scarce, due to traditional Indigenous nomadic culture, Pleistocene and Holocene river incision or burial under the Holocene floodplain. However, some early sites are preserved on West Mesa on the west side of the Rio Grande near Albuquerque. These include Folsom sites, possibly dating from around 10,800 to 9,700 BCE, that were probably short-term sites such as buffalo kill sites. Preservation is better in flanking basins of the Rio Grande Valley, where numerous Folsom sites and a much smaller number of earlier Clovis sites have been identified. Later Paleo-Indian groups included the Belen and Cody cultures, who appear to have taken advantage of the Rio Grande Valley for seasonal migrations and may have settled more permanently in the valley.\nThe Paleo-Indian cultures gave way to the Archaic Oshara tradition beginning around 5450 BCE. The Oshara began cultivation of maize between 1750 and 750 BCE, and their settlements became larger and more permanent.\nDrought induced the collapse of the Ancestral Puebloan culture, at Chaco Canyon and elsewhere across the Four Corners region, at around 1130 CE. This led to a mass migration of the Ancestral Puebloans to the Rio Grande and other more fertile valleys of the Southwest, competing with other indigenous communities such as the Apache with territory in the Rio Grande Valley. This led to decades of conflict (the Coalition Period), the eventual merging of cultures, and the establishment of most of the Tanoan and Keresan pueblos of the Rio Grande Valley. This was followed by the Classic Period, from about 1325 CE to 1600 CE and the arrival of the Spanish. The upper Rio Grande Valley was characterized by occasional periods of extreme drought, and the human inhabitants make extensive use of gridded gardens and check dams to stretch the uncertain water supply.\nSpanish exploration.\nIn 1519, a Spanish naval expedition along the northeastern coast of Mexico charted the mouths of several rivers including the Rio Grande. In 1536, the Rio Grande appeared for the first time on a map of New Spain produced by a royal Spanish cartographer. In the autumn of 1540, a military expedition of the Viceroyalty of New Spain led by Francisco V\u00e1squez de Coronado, Governor of Nueva Galicia, reached the Tiwa pueblos along the Rio Grande in the future New Mexico. On July 12, 1598, Don Juan de O\u00f1ate y Salazar established the New Spain colony of Santa Fe de Nuevo M\u00e9jico at the new village of San Juan de los Caballeros adjacent to the Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo at the confluence of the Rio Grande and the R\u00edo Chama.\nSince 1830.\nDuring the late 1830s and early 1840s, the river marked the disputed border between Mexico and the nascent Republic of Texas; Mexico marked the border at the Nueces River. The disagreement provided part of the rationale for the Mexican\u2013American War in 1846, after Texas had been admitted as a new state. Since 1848, the Rio Grande has marked the boundary between Mexico and the United States from the twin cities of El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua, to the Gulf of Mexico. As such, crossing the river was the escape route used by some Texan slaves to seek freedom. Mexico had liberal colonization policies and had abolished slavery in 1828. In 1899, after a gradual change to the river position, a channel was dug for flood control which moved the river, creating what was called Cordova Island, which became the center of the Chamizal dispute. Resolving the dispute took many years and resulted in a 1909 combined assassination attempt on the American and Mexican presidents.\nRio Grande Water Rights (1900\u2013present).\nFollowing the approval of the Rio Grande Project by federal lawmakers in 1905, the waters of the Rio Grande were to be divided between the states of New Mexico and Texas based on their respective amount of irrigable land. The project also accorded of water annually to Mexico in response to the country's demands. This was meant to put an end to the many years of disagreement concerning rights to the river's flow and the construction of a dam and reservoir at various location on the river between the agricultural interests of the Mesilla Valley and those of El Paso and Ju\u00e1rez. In the agreement provisions were made to construct Elephant Butte dam on public lands. This act was the first occurrence of congressionally directed allocation of an interstate river (although New Mexico would not achieve statehood till 1912).\nFollowing the admittance of New Mexico into the union, the increased settlement of the Rio Grande farther north in Colorado and near Albuquerque, the 1938 Rio Grande Compact developed primarily because of the necessary repeal of the Rio Grande embargo among other issues. Though both Colorado and New Mexico were initially eager to begin negotiations, they broke down over whether Texas should be allowed to join negotiations in 1928, though it had representatives present. In an effort to avoid litigation of the matter in the Supreme Court a provisional agreement was signed in 1929 which stated that negotiations would resume once a reservoir was built on the New Mexico-Colorado state line. The construction of this was delayed by the Market Crash of 1929. With negotiations remaining stagnant, Texas sued New Mexico over the issue in 1935, prompting the intervention of the president who set up the Rio Grande Joint Investigation the findings of which helped lead to the final agreement. The 1938 Rio Grande Compact provided for the creation of a compact commission, the creation of gaging stations along the river to ensure flow amounts by Colorado to New Mexico at the state line and by New Mexico to Elephant Butte Reservoir, the water once there would fall under the regulation of the Rio Grande Project which would guarantee provision to Texas and Mexico. A system of debits and credits was created to account for variations in the water provided. The compact remains in effect today, though it has been amended twice.\n In 1944, the US and Mexico signed a treaty regarding the river. Due to drought conditions which have prevailed throughout much of the 21st century, calls for a reexamination of this treaty have been made by locals in New Mexico, Mexico, and Texas. Texas, being the state with the least amount of control over the waterway, has routinely seen an under-provision of water since 1992. In 1997, the US designated the Rio Grande as one of the American Heritage Rivers. Two portions of the Rio Grande are designated National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, one in northern New Mexico and the other in Texas, at Big Bend National Park.\nIn mid-2001, a -wide sandbar formed at the mouth of the river, marking the first time in recorded history that the Rio Grande failed to empty into the Gulf of Mexico. The sandbar was dredged, but reformed almost immediately. Spring rains the following year flushed the reformed sandbar out to sea, but it returned in mid-2002. By late 2003, the river once again reached the Gulf.\nUncertain future.\nFor much of the time since water rights were introduced in the 1890s, the Rio Grande flowed through Las Cruces from February to October each year, but this is subject to climate change. In 2020, the river flowed only from March to September. As of January 2021, the Elephant Butte Irrigation District (Ebid) expected that water shortages would mean the river only flows through Las Cruces from June through July. The water shortages are affecting the local ecosystem and endangering species including cottonwood trees and the southwestern willow flycatcher. The water of the Rio Grande is over-appropriated: that is, more users for the water exist than water in the river. Because of both drought and overuse, the section from Las Cruces downstream through Ojinaga frequently runs dry and was recently tagged \"The Forgotten River\" by those wishing to bring attention to the river's deteriorated condition.\nIn 2022, due to increasing drought and water use, the water debt owed to Texas increased from 31,000 acre-feet to over 130,000 acre-feet since 2021, despite \"very significant efforts that were done on the river this year to keep water flowing downstream.\" In response, New Mexico increased its program offering to subsidize farmers who fallow their fields rather than planting crops, which uses additional water; the city of Albuquerque shut off its domestic supply diversion and switched to full groundwater pumping in 2021.\nAdditionally, in 2022, work began on El Vado Dam, during which it is unavailable for storage, reducing system capacity by about 180,000 acre-feet. MRGCD has requested storage of \"native water\" downstream at Abiquiu Reservoir, which normally only stores waters imported into the Rio Grande watershed from the Colorado River watershed via the San Juan\u2013Chama Project.\nElephant Butte Reservoir, the main storage reservoir on the Rio Grande, was reported at 13.1% of capacity as of May 1, 2022, further decreasing to only 5.9% full by November 2021. Nearly a year later, in October 2022, the reservoir had made only insignificant rebounds, resting at 6.4% of capacity.\nIn late July 2022, due to extreme drought, the Rio Grande ran dry for about 50 miles in the middle Rio Grande Valley, including five miles in Albuquerque, the first time it had done so in over 40 years. The following winter, the basin experienced above-average snowfall, leading to very high flows in the river in spring of 2023 and flooding of some of its tributaries, including the Jemez and Pecos Rivers. By that summer, after the spring runoff had concluded and due to a failed New Mexico monsoon season and record high temperatures, the river went dry in Albuquerque for a second consecutive year.\nRiver modifications.\nThe United States and Mexico share the water of the river under a series of agreements administered by the International Boundary and Water Commission (IBWC), US\u2013Mexico. The most notable of these treaties were signed in 1906 and 1944. The IBWC traces its institutional roots to 1889, when the International Boundary Committee was established to maintain the border. The IBWC today also allocates river waters between the two nations and provides for flood control and water sanitation. Use of that water belonging to the United States is regulated by the Rio Grande Compact, an interstate pact between Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas.\nThe Upper Colorado River Basin Compact allots of water from the upper Colorado River basin per year to municipalities in New Mexico. Albuquerque owns , about three-quarters of the total amount. The water is delivered to the Rio Grande via the San Juan\u2013Chama Project. The project's construction was initiated by legislation signed by President John F. Kennedy in 1962, and was completed in 1971. This diversion project transports water under the continental divide from tributaries of the San Juan River (the Navajo, the Little Navajo, and Blanco Rivers) to Heron Reservoir, which empties into the Rio Chama before this connects to the Rio Grande. Although it held rights to San Juan-Chama water for many years, it was only as of 2008 that Albuquerque began using it as part of its municipal supply, with the completion of San Juan-Chama Drinking Water Project (SJCDWP) by the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe SJCDWP uses an adjustable-height diversion dam to skim imported San Juan-Chama water from the Rio Grande, then pumps this water to a treatment plant on Albuquerque's north side. From there it is added to a municipal drinking water distribution system serving Albuquerque's metro area. Diversions are restricted during periods of low river flow in order to protect the riparian ecosystem and mitigate effects on endangered species like the Rio Grande silvery minnow. Treated effluent water is recycled into the Rio Grande south of the city. Surface water from the SJCDWP comprises a significant percentage of Albuquerque's drinking water supply, with groundwater constituting the remainder; annual percentages vary according to runoff and climate conditions. Acquisition of native pre-1907 water rights is not part of the Water Authority's long-term resource management plan, dubbed WATER 2120.\nDams on the Rio Grande include Rio Grande Dam, Cochiti Dam, Elephant Butte Dam, Caballo Dam, Amistad Dam, Falcon Dam, Anzalduas Dam, and Retamal Dam. In southern New Mexico and the upper portion of the Texas border segment, the river's discharge dwindles. Diversions, mainly for agricultural irrigation, have increased the natural decrease in flow such that by the time the river reaches Presidio, little or no water is left. Below Presidio, the Rio Conchos restores the flow of water. Near Presidio, the river's discharge is frequently zero. Its average discharge is , down from at Elephant Butte Dam. Supplemented by other tributaries, the Rio Grande's discharge increases to its maximum annual average of near Rio Grande City. Large diversions for irrigation below Rio Grande City reduce the river's average flow to at Brownsville and Matamoros.\nCrossings.\nThe major international border crossings along the river are at Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez and El Paso; Presidio and Ojinaga; Laredo and Nuevo Laredo; McAllen and Reynosa; and Brownsville and Matamoros. Other notable border towns are the Texas/Coahuila pairings of Del Rio\u2013Ciudad Acu\u00f1a and Eagle Pass\u2013Piedras Negras.\nNames and pronunciation.\n is Spanish for \"Big River\" and means \"Big River of the North\". In English, Rio Grande is pronounced either or .\nIn Mexico, it is known as or , meaning (among other things) \"furious\", \"agitated\" or \"wild\".\nHistorically, the Pueblo and Navajo peoples also have had names for the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo:\nThe four Pueblo names likely antedated the Spanish \"entrada\" by several centuries.\n was most commonly used for the upper Rio Grande (roughly, within the present-day borders of New Mexico) from Spanish colonial times to the end of the Mexican period in the mid-19th century. This use was first documented by the Spanish in 1582. Early American settlers in South Texas began to use the modern 'English' name Rio Grande. By the late 19th century, in the United States, the name Rio Grande had become standard in being applied to the entire river, from Colorado to the sea.\nBy 1602, had become the standard Spanish name for the lower river, below its confluence with the Rio Conchos.\nTributaries.\nThe largest tributary of the Rio Grande by discharge is the Rio Conchos, which contributes almost twice as much water as any other. In terms of drainage basin size, the Pecos River is the largest.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43006", "revid": "48969816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43006", "title": "Britpop", "text": "1990s UK pop culture movement\nBritpop was a British music and cultural movement that emerged in the 1990s. Musically, it produced bright, catchy alternative rock that drew heavily on the traditions of 1960s guitar-based British pop, with lyrics that emphasised national identity and offered commentary on British culture and society. The movement was seen as a reaction against the darker lyrical themes and soundscapes of the American-led grunge and the more introspective shoegaze scene in Britain. It helped bring British alternative rock into the mainstream and became a key part of the broader Cool Britannia phenomenon, which echoed the spirit of the Swinging Sixties.\nBritpop also marked the rise of bands emerging from the independent music scene of the early 1990s. Although often described as a cultural moment rather than a strictly defined musical genre, its leading bands shared influences from 1960s British pop, 1970s glam and punk rock, and 1980s indie pop. Manchester's indie scene \u2014 including groups such as the Smiths, the Stone Roses, and Happy Mondays \u2014 is often cited as an important precursor to Britpop's musical development.\nThe acts most frequently labelled by the UK music press as Britpop's \"big four\" were Oasis, Blur, Suede, and Pulp. The period of Britpop's popularity is generally considered to have lasted from 1993 to 1997, with its peak years between 1995 and 1996. A chart rivalry between Blur and Oasis, dubbed \"The Battle of Britpop\", brought the movement to the forefront of the British press in 1995. Oasis's \"(What's the Story) Morning Glory?\" is among the UK's all-time best-selling albums, illustrating the movement\u2019s mainstream reach. While primarily a music-based phenomenon, Britpop also influenced fashion, art, and politics, with Prime Minister Tony Blair and New Labour aligning themselves with the movement.\nDuring the late 1990s, many Britpop acts began to decline commercially, disband, or shift towards new musical styles. As a commercial force, Britpop was soon eclipsed by the rise of teen pop, while artistically it evolved into the post-Britpop indie movement, associated with bands such as Travis and Coldplay.\nStyle, roots and influences.\nThough Britpop has sometimes been viewed as a marketing tool and more of a cultural moment than a distinct musical genre, there are musical conventions and influences the bands grouped under the Britpop term have in common. Britpop bands show elements from the British pop music of the 1960s, glam rock and punk rock of the 1970s, and indie pop of the 1980s in their music, attitude, and clothing. Specific influences vary: Blur drew from the Kinks and early Pink Floyd, Oasis took inspiration from the Beatles, and Elastica had a fondness for arty punk rock, notably Wire and both incarnations of Adam and the Ants. Regardless, Britpop artists project a sense of reverence for British pop sounds of the past. The Kinks' Ray Davies and XTC's Andy Partridge are sometimes advanced as the \"godfathers\" or \"grandfathers\" of Britpop, though Davies disputes it. Others similarly labelled include Paul Weller and Adam Ant.\nAlternative rock acts from the indie scene of the 1980s and early 1990s were the direct ancestors of the Britpop movement. The influence of the Smiths is common to the majority of Britpop artists. The Madchester scene, fronted by the Stone Roses, Happy Mondays, James and Inspiral Carpets (for whom Oasis's Noel Gallagher had worked as a roadie during the Madchester years), was an immediate root of Britpop since its emphasis on good times and catchy songs provided an alternative to the British-based shoegazing and American based grunge styles of music. In 1991, James's song \"Sit Down\" reached number two in the UK charts, with \"Flavorwire\" writing the song \"predates the Britpop label, but it presaged the quintessentially British sound that would explode in the '90s. Entire festival crowds used to sit down during the chorus of this song\". Pre-dating Britpop by four years, Liverpool-based group the La's hit single \"There She Goes\" was described by \"Rolling Stone\" as a \"founding piece of Britpop's foundation\". Naming it his favourite song from the 1990s (\"There She Goes\" was originally released in 1988), Noel Gallagher once declared that \"Oasis want to finish what The La's started\".\nLocal identity and regional British accents are common to Britpop groups, as well as references to British places and culture in lyrics and image. Stylistically, Britpop bands use catchy hooks and lyrics that were relevant to young British people of their own generation. Britpop bands conversely denounced grunge as irrelevant and having nothing to say about their lives. In contrast to the dourness of grunge, Britpop was defined by \"youthful exuberance and desire for recognition\". Damon Albarn of Blur summed up the attitude in 1993 when after being asked if Blur were an \"anti-grunge band\" he said, \"Well, that's good. If punk was about getting rid of hippies, then I'm getting rid of grunge.\"\nIn spite of the professed disdain for the genres, some elements of both crept into the more enduring facets of Britpop. Noel Gallagher has since championed Ride and once stated that Nirvana's Kurt Cobain was the only songwriter he had respect for in the last ten years, and that he felt their music was similar enough that Cobain could have written \"Wonderwall\". By 1996, Oasis's prominence was such that \"NME\" termed a number of Britpop bands (including The Boo Radleys, Ocean Colour Scene and Cast) \"Noelrock\", citing Gallagher's influence on their music. Journalist John Harris described these bands, and Gallagher, as sharing \"a dewy-eyed love of the 1960s, a spurning of much beyond rock's most basic ingredients, and a belief in the supremacy of 'real music'\".\nThe imagery associated with Britpop was equally British and working class. A rise in unabashed maleness, exemplified by \"Loaded\" magazine, binge drinking and lad culture in general, would be very much part of the Britpop era. The Union Jack became a prominent symbol of the movement (as it had a generation earlier with mod bands such as the Who) and its use as a symbol of pride and nationalism contrasted deeply with the controversy that erupted just a few years before when former Smiths singer Morrissey performed draped in it. The emphasis on British reference points made it difficult for the genre to achieve success in the US.\nOrigins and first years.\nJohn Harris has suggested that Britpop began when Blur's fourth single \"Popscene\" and Suede's \"The Drowners\" were released around the same time in the spring of 1992. He stated, \"[I]f Britpop started anywhere, it was the deluge of acclaim that greeted Suede's first records: all of them audacious, successful and very, very British.\" Suede were the first of the new crop of guitar-orientated bands to be embraced by the UK music media as Britain's answer to Seattle's grunge sound. Their debut album \"Suede\" became the fastest-selling debut album in the history of the UK. In April 1993, \"Select\" magazine featured Suede's lead singer Brett Anderson on the cover with a Union Flag in the background and the headline \"Yanks go home!\" The issue included features on Suede, the Auteurs, Denim, Saint Etienne and Pulp and helped start the idea of an emerging movement.\nBlur were involved in a vibrant social scene in London (dubbed \"The Scene That Celebrates Itself\" by \"Melody Maker\") that focused on a weekly club called Syndrome in Oxford Street; the bands that met up were a mix of music styles, some would be labelled shoegazing, while others would go on to be part of Britpop. The dominant musical force of the period was the grunge invasion from the United States, which filled the void left in the indie scene by the Stone Roses' inactivity. Blur, however, took on an Anglocentric aesthetic with their second album \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" (1993).\nBlur's new approach was inspired by a tour of the United States in the spring of 1992. During the tour, frontman Damon Albarn began to resent American culture and found the need to comment on that culture's influence seeping into Britain. Justine Frischmann, formerly of Suede and leader of Elastica (and at the time in a relationship with Albarn) explained, \"Damon and I felt like we were in the thick of it at that point... it occurred to us that Nirvana were out there, and people were very interested in American music, and there should be some sort of manifesto for the return of Britishness.\" John Harris wrote in an \"NME\" article just before the release of \"Modern Life is Rubbish\": \"[Blur's] timing has been fortuitously perfect. Why? Because, as with baggies and shoegazers, loud, long-haired Americans have just found themselves condemned to the ignominious corner labelled 'yesterday's thing'.\" The music press also fixated on what the \"NME\" had dubbed the new wave of new wave, a term applied to the more punk-derivative acts such as Elastica, S*M*A*S*H and These Animal Men.\nWhile \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" was a moderate success, Blur's third album, \"Parklife\", made them arguably the most popular band in the UK in 1994. \"Parklife\" continued the fiercely British nature of its predecessor, and coupled with the death of Nirvana's Kurt Cobain in April of that year British alternative rock became the dominant rock genre in the country. That same year Oasis released their debut album \"Definitely Maybe\", which broke Suede's record for fastest-selling debut album; it went on to be certified 7\u00d7 Platinum (2.1\u00a0million sales) by the BPI. Blur won four awards at the 1995 Brit Awards, including Best British Album for \"Parklife\" (ahead of \"Definitely Maybe\"). In 1995, Pulp released the album \"Different Class\" which reached number one, and included the single \"Common People\". The album sold over 1.3 million copies in the UK.\nThe term \"Britpop\" arose when the media were drawing on the success of British designers and films, the Young British Artists (sometimes termed \"Britart\") such as Damien Hirst, and on the mood of optimism with the decline of John Major's government, and the rise of the youthful Tony Blair as leader of the Labour Party. After terms such as \"the New Mod\" and \"Lion Pop\" were used in the press around 1992, journalist (and now BBC Radio 6 Music DJ) Stuart Maconie used the term Britpop in 1993 (though recounting the event in a BBC Radio 2 programme from 2020, he believed it may have been used in the 1960s, around the time of the British Invasion). However, journalist and musician John Robb states he had used the term in the late 1980s in \"Sounds\" magazine to refer to bands such as the La's, the Stone Roses and Inspiral Carpets.\nIt was not until 1994 that Britpop started to be used by the UK media in relation to contemporary music and events. Bands emerged aligned with the new movement. At the start of 1995, bands including Sleeper, Supergrass and Menswear scored pop hits. Elastica released their debut album \"Elastica\" that March; its first week sales surpassed the record set by \"Definitely Maybe\" the previous year. The music press viewed the scene around Camden Town as a musical centre; frequented by groups like Blur, Elastica, and Menswear; \"Melody Maker\" declared \"Camden is to 1995 what Seattle was to 1992, what Manchester was to 1989, and what Mr Blobby was to 1993.\"\n\"The Battle of Britpop\".\nA chart battle between Blur and Oasis, dubbed the \"Battle of Britpop\", brought Britpop to the forefront of the British press in 1995. The bands had initially praised each other but over the course of the year antagonisms between the two increased. Spurred on by the media, they became engaged in what the \"NME\" dubbed on the cover of its 12 August issue the \"British Heavyweight Championship\" with the pending release of Blur's single \"Country House\" and Oasis' \"Roll with It\" on the same day. The battle pitted the two bands against each other, with the conflict as much about British class and regional divisions as it was about music. Oasis were taken as representing the North of England, while Blur represented the South. The event caught the public's imagination and gained mass media attention in national newspapers, tabloids and television news. \"NME\" wrote about the phenomenon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yes, in a week where news leaked that Saddam Hussein was preparing nuclear weapons, everyday folks were still getting slaughtered in Bosnia and Mike Tyson was making his comeback, tabloids and broadsheets alike went Britpop crazy.\nBilled as the greatest pop rivalry since the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, it was spurred on by jibes thrown back and forth between the two groups, with Oasis dismissing Blur as \"Chas &amp; Dave chimney sweep music\", while Blur referred to their opponents as the \"Oasis Quo\" in a deriding of their alleged unoriginality and inability to change. In what was the best week for UK singles sales in a decade, on 20 August, Blur's \"Country House\" sold 274,000 copies against \"Roll with It\" by Oasis which sold 216,000, the songs charting at number one and number two, respectively. Blur performed their chart topping single on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\", with the band's bassist Alex James wearing an 'Oasis' t-shirt. However, in the long run Oasis became more commercially successful than Blur, at home and abroad. In a 2019 interview, Oasis bandleader Noel Gallagher reflected on the chart battle between the two songs, both of which he saw as \"shit\", and suggested that a chart race between Oasis' \"Cigarettes &amp; Alcohol\" and Blur's \"Girls &amp; Boys\" would have had greater merit. He also noted that he and Blur frontman Damon Albarn \u2013 with whom Gallagher had enjoyed multiple musical collaborations during the 2010s \u2013 were now friends. Both men have noted that they do not discuss their 1990s rivalry, with Albarn adding, \"I value my friendship with Noel because he is one of the only people who went through what I did in the Nineties.\" Noel Gallagher has also described Blur guitarist Graham Coxon as \"one of the most talented guitarists of his generation.\"\nPeak and decline.\nIn the months following the chart battle, \"NME\" states, \"Britpop became a major cultural phenomenon\". Oasis's second album, \"(What's the Story) Morning Glory?\", sold over four million copies in the UK \u2013 becoming the fifth best-selling album in UK chart history. Blur's third album in their 'Life' trilogy, \"The Great Escape\", sold over one million copies. At the 1996 Brit Awards, both albums were nominated for Best British Album (as was Pulp's \"Different Class\"), with Oasis winning the award. All three bands were also nominated for Best British Group and Best Video, which were won by Oasis. While accepting Best Video (for \"Wonderwall\"), Oasis taunted Blur by singing the chorus of the latter's \"Parklife\" and changing the lyrics to \"shite life\". The Lightning Seeds' single \"Three Lions\", written to mark the England football team's participation in Euro 96 (which England was hosting), reached number one in the UK charts and became an enduring anthem, with the refrain \"It's coming home\" a popular chant at England games. Cast's single \"Walkaway\" memorably featured in the closing footage of the BBC's coverage of England's Euro 96 semi-final.\nOasis' third album \"Be Here Now\" (1997) was highly anticipated. Despite initially attracting positive reviews and selling strongly, the record was soon subjected to strong criticism from music critics, record-buyers and even Noel Gallagher himself for its overproduced and bloated sound. Music critic Jon Savage pinpointed \"Be Here Now\" as the moment where Britpop ended; Savage said that while the album \"isn't the great disaster that everybody says\", he commented that \"[i]t was supposed to be the big, big triumphal record\" of the period. At the same time, Blur sought to distance themselves from Britpop with their self-titled fifth album, assimilating American lo-fi influences such as Pavement. Albarn explained to the \"NME\" in January 1997 that \"We created a movement: as far as the lineage of British bands goes, there'll always be a place for us... We genuinely started to see that world in a slightly different way.\" Cornershop's single \"Brimful of Asha\", boosted by its remixed version by Fatboy Slim, reached number one in the UK charts, eventually becoming the fifth best-selling Britpop song.\nAs Britpop slowed, many acts began to falter and broke up. The sudden popularity of girl group the Spice Girls has been seen as having \"snatched the spirit of the age from those responsible for Britpop\". While established acts struggled, attention began to turn to the likes of Radiohead and the Verve, who had been previously overlooked by the British media. These two bands \u2013 in particular Radiohead \u2013 showed considerably more esoteric influences from the 1960s and 1970s that were uncommon among earlier Britpop acts. In 1997, Radiohead and the Verve released their respective albums \"OK Computer\" and \"Urban Hymns\", both widely acclaimed. Post-Britpop bands such as Travis, Stereophonics and Coldplay, influenced by Britpop acts, particularly Oasis, with more introspective lyrics, were some of the most successful rock acts of the late 1990s and early 2000s.\nAftermath.\nLegacy.\nRetrospective documentaries on the movement include \"The Britpop Story\", a BBC programme presented by John Harris on BBC Four in August 2005 as part of Britpop Night, ten years after Blur and Oasis went head-to-head in the charts, and \"\", a 2003 documentary film written and directed by John Dower. Both documentaries include mention of Tony Blair and New Labour's efforts to align themselves with the distinctly British cultural resurgence that was underway, as well Britpop artists such as Damien Hirst.\nGender and media critiques.\nSeveral scholars and journalists have argued that Britpop's media packaging overlapped with the rise of \"lad culture\", shaping coverage and industry dynamics in ways that often marginalised women's voices. Retrospectives have documented experiences of women musicians during the era and critiqued coverage that prioritised laddish imagery. BBC presenters Jo Whiley and Steve Lamacq have likewise reassessed the scene's relationship with sex and gender in anniversary programming.\nSuccessors and revivals.\nPost-Britpop.\nAfter Britpop the media focused on bands that may have been established acts, but had been overlooked due to focus on the Britpop movement. Bands such as Radiohead and the Verve, and new acts such as Travis, Stereophonics, Feeder and particularly Coldplay, achieved wider international success than most of the Britpop groups that had preceded them, and were some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1990s and early 2000s. These bands avoided the Britpop label while still producing music derived from it. Bands that had enjoyed some success during the mid-1990s, but were not really part of the Britpop scene, included the Verve and Radiohead. The music of most bands was guitar based, often mixing elements of British traditional rock (or British trad rock), particularly the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and Small Faces with American influences. Post-Britpop bands also used elements from 1970s British rock and pop music. Drawn from across the UK, the themes of their music tended to be less parochially centred on British, English and London life, and more introspective than had been the case with Britpop at its height. This, beside a greater willingness to woo the American press and fans, may have helped a number of them in achieving international success. They have been seen as presenting the image of the rock star as an ordinary person, or \"boy-next-door\" and their increasingly melodic music was criticised for being bland or derivative.\nThe cultural and musical scene in Scotland, dubbed \"Cool Caledonia\" by some elements of the press, produced a number of successful alternative acts, including the Supernaturals from Glasgow. Travis, also from Glasgow, were one of the first major rock bands to emerge in the post-Britpop era, and have been credited with a major role in disseminating and even creating the subgenre of post-Britpop. From Edinburgh Idlewild, more influenced by post-grunge, produced three top 20 albums, peaking with \"The Remote Part\" (2002). The first major band to break through from the post-Britpop Welsh rock scene, dubbed \"Cool Cymru\", were Catatonia, whose single \"Mulder and Scully\" (1998) reached the top ten in the UK, and whose album \"International Velvet\" (1998) reached number one, but they were unable to make much impact in the US and, after personal problems, broke up at the end of the century. Other Welsh bands included Stereophonics and Feeder.\nThese acts were followed by a number of bands who shared aspects of their music, including Snow Patrol from Northern Ireland and Elbow, Embrace, Starsailor, Doves, Electric Pyramid and Keane from England. The most commercially successful band in the milieu were Coldplay, whose debut album \"Parachutes\" (2000) went multi-platinum and helped make them one of the most popular acts in the world by the time of their second album \"A Rush of Blood to the Head\" (2002). Keane's debut album \"Hopes and Fears\" (2004), which included the lead single \"Somewhere Only We Know\", became one of the best-selling albums in UK chart history. Snow Patrol's \"Chasing Cars\" (from their 2006 album \"Eyes Open\") is the most widely played song of the 21st century on UK radio.\nPost-punk/garage rock revival.\nBands like Coldplay, Starsailor and Elbow, with introspective lyrics and even tempos, began to be criticised at the beginning of the new millennium as bland and sterile and the wave of garage rock or post-punk revival bands, like the Hives, the Vines, the Strokes, the Black Keys and the White Stripes, that sprang up in that period were welcomed by the musical press as \"the saviours of rock and roll\". British groups in this vein, including the Libertines, Razorlight, Kaiser Chiefs, Arctic Monkeys and Bloc Party, were viewed by some as a \"second wave\" of Britpop\". These bands have been seen as looking less to music of the 1960s and more to 1970s\u20131980s punk, new wave, and post-punk, while still being influenced by Britpop. Despite these developments, artists such as Travis, Stereophonics and Coldplay continued to record and enjoy commercial success into the late 2000s.\n2010s-2020s minor Britpop revival.\nAt the beginning of the 2010s, a wave of new bands emerged that combined indie rock with the Britpop of the 1990s. Viva Brother launched an update on Britpop, dubbed \"gritpop\", with their debut album \"Famous First Words\", although they did not receive significant support from the music press. In 2012, All the Young released their debut album, \"Welcome Home\". Later, bands such as Superfood and the Australian band DMA's joined the revival, with DMA's debut album receiving favorable reviews. Several large Britpop bands also began to reunite during this period, with Blur, Suede and Pulp all reforming in the late 2000s and early 2010s.\nIn 2024, Oasis became the highest-profile Britpop band to reunite, announcing they would embark on a world tour the next year. The ensuing Oasis Live '25 Tour was highly successful and was credited with reviving interest in Britpop culture.\nTerminology.\nArtists of the genre have dismissed the \"Britpop\" term. Oasis bandleader Noel Gallagher denied that the band were associated with the term: \"We're not Britpop, we're universal rock. The media can take the Britpop and stick it as far up the back entry of the country houses as they can take it.\" Blur guitarist Graham Coxon stated in the 2009 documentary \"Blur \u2013 No Distance Left to Run\" that he \"didn't like being called Britpop, or pop, or PopBrit, or however you want to put it.\" Pulp frontman Jarvis Cocker also expressed his dislike for the term in an interview with Stephen Merchant on BBC Radio 4's \"Chain Reaction\" in 2010, describing it as a \"horrible, bitty, sharp sound.\" He would go onto to tell \"NME\" in 2025: \"I've always hated that word. I would never willingly associate myself with it. ... If that kind of attitude is coming back, then I would be very excited about it, just not the 'BP' word \u2013 it's a terrible word.\"\nIn 2020, with attention turning to \"landfill indie\" acts of the 2000s, Mark Beaumont of the \"NME\" argued that the term Britpop had been devalued, ignoring all the cultural aspects that had made the scene so important, with the term becoming a \"catch-all\" for \"any band that played guitars in the 1990s.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43007", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43007", "title": "Blur (band)", "text": "British rock and alternative band\nBlur are an English rock band formed in London in 1988, consisting of singer Damon Albarn, guitarist Graham Coxon, bassist Alex James, and drummer Dave Rowntree. Their debut album, \"Leisure\" (1991), incorporated the sounds of Madchester and shoegaze. Following a stylistic change influenced by British guitar pop groups such as the Kinks, the Beatles, and XTC, Blur released the albums \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" (1993), \"Parklife\" (1994), and \"The Great Escape\" (1995). \"Parklife\" lead single \"Girls &amp; Boys\" (1994) became a hit in the UK and the US, respectively peaking at number 5 on the UK singles chart and number 59 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. As a result, the band helped to popularise the Britpop genre and achieved mass popularity in the UK, aided by a widely publicised chart battle with rival band Oasis in 1995 dubbed \"the Battle of Britpop\". \nBlur's self-titled fifth album (1997) saw another stylistic shift, influenced by the lo-fi styles of American indie rock groups, and became their third UK chart-topping album. It's single \"Song 2\" became popular on alternative radio in the US. Their next album, \"13\" (1999), saw the band experimenting with electronic and art rock styles, and featured more personal lyrics from Albarn and Coxon. Their seventh album, \"Think Tank\" (2003), continued their experimentation with electronic sounds and was shaped by Albarn's growing interest in world music, featuring more minimal guitar work. Coxon left the band early in the sessions for \"Think Tank\", and Blur disbanded for several years after the album's tour in 2003.\nIn 2009, Blur reunited with Coxon and embarked on a European reunion tour. In the following years, they released several singles and compilations and toured internationally. In 2012, they received the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. Their eighth album, \"The Magic Whip\" (2015), was their first in twelve years and the sixth consecutive Blur studio album to top the British charts. After the \"Magic Whip\" tour, Blur went on hiatus until the release of their ninth album, \"The Ballad of Darren\", in 2023.\nHistory.\nFormation and \"Leisure\" (1988\u20131991).\nBlur were formed in December 1988 when bassist Alex James joined Damon Albarn's band, Circus, and they changed the name to Seymour after J. D. Salinger's \"\". Already in the band were drummer Dave Rowntree, who had joined in October, and guitarist Graham Coxon, Albarn's childhood friend from Essex, who was studying at the University of London's Goldsmiths College along with Albarn and James. The group performed live for the first time in summer 1989 in the goods shed of the East Anglian Railway Museum at Chappel &amp; Wakes Colne. In November, Food Records' A&amp;R representative Andy Ross attended a Seymour performance that convinced him to court the group for his label. After this he brought label founder David Balfe to a couple more, including a particularly packed gig at The Falcon, Camden. The only concern held by Ross and Food was that they disliked the band's name. Food drew up a list of alternatives, from which the group decided on Blur. Food Records finally signed the rechristened band in March 1990.\nFrom March to July 1990, Blur toured Britain, opening for the Cramps, and testing out new songs. In October 1990, after their tour was over, Blur released the single \"She's So High\", which reached number 48 in the UK singles chart. The band had trouble creating a follow-up single, but they made progress when paired with producer Stephen Street. The resulting single release, \"There's No Other Way\", became a hit, peaking at number eight. As a result of the single's success, Blur became pop stars and were accepted into a clique of bands who frequented the Syndrome club in London dubbed \"The Scene That Celebrates Itself\". \"NME\" magazine wrote in 1991, \"[Blur] are [the] acceptable pretty face of a whole clump of bands that have emerged since the whole Manchester thing started to run out of steam.\"\nThe band's third single, \"Bang\", performed relatively disappointingly, reaching only number 24. Andy Ross and Food owner David Balfe were convinced Blur's best course of action was to continue drawing influence from the Madchester genre. Blur attempted to expand their musical sound, but the recording of the group's debut album was hindered by Albarn having to write his lyrics in the studio. Although the resulting album \"Leisure\" (1991) peaked at number seven on the UK Albums Chart, it received mixed reviews, and according to journalist John Harris, \"could not shake off the odour of anti-climax\".\nBritpop years (1992\u20131995).\nAfter discovering they were \u00a360,000 in debt, Blur toured the United States in 1992 in an attempt to recoup their financial losses. The group released the single \"Popscene\" to coincide with the start of the tour. Featuring \"a rush of punk guitars, '60s pop hooks, blaring British horns, controlled fury, and postmodern humor\", \"Popscene\" was a turning point for the band musically. However, upon its release it only charted at number 32. \"We felt 'Popscene' was a big departure; a very, very English record\", Albarn told the \"NME\" in 1993, \"But that annoyed a lot of people ... We put ourselves out on a limb to pursue this English ideal and no-one was interested.\" As a result of the single's lacklustre performance, plans to release a single named \"Never Clever\" were scrapped and work on Blur's second album was pushed back.\nDuring the two-month American tour, the band became increasingly unhappy, often venting frustrations on each other, leading to several physical confrontations. The band members were homesick; Albarn said, \"I just started to miss really simple things ... I missed everything about England so I started writing songs which created an English atmosphere.\" Upon the group's return to Britain, Blur (Albarn in particular) were upset by the success rival group Suede had achieved while they were gone. After a poor performance at a 1992 gig that featured a well-received set by Suede on the same bill, Blur were in danger of being dropped by Food. By that time, Blur had undergone an ideological and image shift intended to celebrate their British heritage in contrast to the popularity of American grunge bands such as Nirvana. Although sceptical of Albarn's new manifesto for Blur, Balfe gave assent for the band's choice of Andy Partridge (of XTC) to produce their follow-up to \"Leisure\". The sessions with Partridge proved unsatisfactory, but a chance reunion with Stephen Street resulted in him returning to produce the group.\nBlur completed their second album \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" in December 1992, but Food Records said the album required more potential hit singles and asked them to return to the studio for a second time. The band complied and Albarn wrote \"For Tomorrow\", which became the album's lead single. \"For Tomorrow\" was a minor success, reaching number 28 on the charts. \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" was released in May 1993. The announcement of the album's release included a press photo which featured Blur, dressed in a mix of mod and skinhead attire, posing alongside a mastiff with the words \"British Image 1\" spraypainted behind them. At the time, such imagery was viewed as nationalistic and racially insensitive by the British music press; to quieten concerns, Blur released the \"British Image 2\" photo, which was \"a camp restaging of a pre-war aristocratic tea party\". \"Modern Life Is Rubbish\" peaked at number 15 on the British charts, but failed to break into the US \"Billboard\" 200, selling only 19,000 copies there.\nThe success of \"Parklife\" (1994) revived Blur's commercial fortunes. The album's first single, the disco-influenced \"Girls &amp; Boys\", found favour on BBC Radio 1 and peaked at number 5 on the UK Singles Chart, and number 59 in the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 where it remains the band's highest-charting single. \"Parklife\" entered the British charts at number one and stayed on the album charts for 90 weeks. Enthusiastically greeted by the music press\u2014the \"NME\" called it \"a Great Pop Record ... bigger, bolder, narkier and funnier [than \"Modern Life is Rubbish\"]\"\u2014\"Parklife\" is regarded as one of Britpop's defining records. Blur won four awards at the 1995 Brit Awards, including Best Band and Best Album for \"Parklife\". Coxon later pointed to \"Parklife\" as the moment when \"[Blur] went from being regarded as an alternative, left field arty band to this amazing new pop sensation\".\nBlur began working on their fourth album \"The Great Escape\" at the start of 1995. Building upon the band's previous two albums, Albarn's lyrics for the album consisted of several third-person narratives. James reflected, \"It was all more elaborate, more orchestral, more theatrical, and the lyrics were even more twisted ... It was all dysfunctional, misfit characters fucking up.\" The release of the album's lead single \"Country House\" played a part in Blur's public rivalry with Manchester band Oasis termed the \"Battle of Britpop\". Partly due to increasing antagonisms between the groups, Blur and Oasis released their new singles on the same day, an event the \"NME\" called \"The British Heavyweight Championship\". The debate over which band would top the British singles chart became a media phenomenon, and Albarn appeared on the \"News at Ten\". At the end of the week, \"Country House\" ultimately outsold Oasis' \"Roll With It\" by 274,000 copies to 216,000, becoming Blur's first number one single.\n\"The Great Escape\", which Albarn told the public was the last installment in the band's Life Trilogy, was released in September 1995 to ecstatic reviews. The \"NME\" hailed it as \"spectacularly accomplished, sumptuous, heart-stopping and inspirational\", while \"Mojo\" argued \"Blur are the very best that '95 Britpop has to offer and this is a most gong-worthy sound, complete with head-slicing guitars, catchy tunes and very funny words\". Entering the UK charts at number one, the album sold nearly half a million copies in its first month of sale. However, opinion quickly changed and Blur found themselves largely out of favour with the media once again. Following the worldwide success of Oasis' \"(What's the Story) Morning Glory?\" (which went quadruple platinum in the United States), the media quipped \"[Blur] wound up winning the battle but losing the war.\" Blur became perceived as an \"inauthentic middle class pop band\" in comparison to the \"working class heroes\" Oasis, which Albarn said made him feel \"stupid and confused\". Alex James later summarised, \"After being the People's Hero, Damon was the People's Prick for a short period ... basically, he was a loser \u2013 very publicly.\"\nReinvention after Britpop (1996\u20132000).\nAn early 1996 \"Q\" magazine interview revealed that relations between Blur members had become very strained; journalist Adrian Deevoy wrote that he found them \"on the verge of a nervous breakup\". Coxon, in particular, began to resent his bandmates: James for his playboy lifestyle, and Albarn for his control over Blur's musical direction and public image. The guitarist struggled with drinking problems and, in a rejection of the group's Britpop aesthetic, made a point of listening to noisy American alternative rock bands such as Pavement. In February 1996, when Coxon and James were absent for a lip-synced Blur performance broadcast on Italian television, they were replaced by a cardboard cutout and a roadie, respectively. Blur biographer Stuart Maconie later wrote that, at the time, \"Blur were sewn together very awkwardly\".\nAlthough he had previously dismissed it, Albarn grew to appreciate Coxon's tastes in lo-fi and underground music, and recognised the need to significantly change Blur's musical direction once again. \"I can sit at my piano and write brilliant observational pop songs all day long but you've got to move on\", he said. He subsequently approached Street, and argued for a more stripped-down sound on the band's next record. Coxon, recognising his own personal need to\u2014as Rowntree put it\u2014\"work this band\", wrote a letter to Albarn, describing his desire for their music \"to scare people again\". After initial sessions in London, the band left to record the rest of the album in Iceland, away from the Britpop scene.\nThe result was \"Blur\", the band's fifth studio album, released in February 1997. Although the music press predicted that the lo-fi sonic experimentation would alienate Blur's teenage girl fan-base, they generally applauded the effort. Pointing out lyrics such as \"Look inside America/She's alright\", and noting Albarn's \"obligatory nod to Beck, [and promotion of] the new Pavement album as if paid to do so\", reviewers felt the band had come to accept American values during this time\u2014an about-face of their attitude during the Britpop years. Despite cries of \"commercial suicide\", the album and its first single, \"Beetlebum\", debuted at number one in the UK. Although the album could not match the sales of its predecessors in Britain, internationally \"Blur\" was more successful. In the US, the album received strong reviews, reached number 61 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was certified gold. The album's second single and second track, aptly named \"Song 2\", was also popular on alternative radio, reaching number six on the \"Billboard\" Modern Rock chart and remaining on that chart for 26 weeks. After it was licensed for use in various media\u2014such as soundtracks, advertisements and television shows\u2014\"Song 2\" became the most recognisable Blur song in the US. After the success of \"Blur\", the band embarked on a nine-month world tour.\nIn February 1998, a few months after completing the tour, Blur released \"Bustin' + Dronin\"' for the Japanese market. The album is a collection of Blur songs remixed by artists such as Thurston Moore, William Orbit and Moby. Among the tracks, the band were most impressed by Orbit's effort and enlisted him to replace Street as producer for their next album, citing a need to approach the recording process from a fresh perspective.\nReleased in March 1999, Blur's sixth studio album \"13\" saw them drift still further away from their Britpop-era attitude and sound. Orbit's production style allowed for more jamming, and incorporated a \"variety of emotions, atmospheres, words and sounds\" into the mix. \"13\" was creatively dominated by Coxon, who \"was simply allowed to do whatever he chose, unedited\", by Orbit. Albarn's lyrics\u2014more heart-felt, personal and intimate than on previous occasions\u2014were reflective of his break-up with Elastica frontwoman Justine Frischmann, his partner of eight years. The album received generally favourable reviews from the press. While \"Q\" called it \"a dense, fascinating, idiosyncratic and accomplished art rock album\", the \"NME\" felt it was inconsistent and \"(at least) a quarter-of-an-hour too long\". \"13\" debuted at the top of the UK charts, staying at that position for two weeks. The album's lead single, the gospel-based \"Tender\", opened at the second spot on the charts. After \"Coffee &amp; TV\", the first Blur single to feature Coxon on lead vocals, only reached number 11 in the UK, manager Chris Morrison demanded a chart re-run because of what he deemed was a sales miscalculation.\nIn July 1999, in celebration of their tenth anniversary, Blur released a 22-CD limited edition box-set of their singles. The accompanying tour saw Blur play the A-sides of the 22 singles in their chronological order of release. In October 2000, the group released the compilation \"\", which debuted at number three in the UK and went 4\u00d7 Platinum due to 1,200,000 copies being shipped. Dismissed by the band as \"the first record we have seen as product\", the track listing and release dates of \"Blur: The Best Of\" were determined on the basis of market research and focus groups conducted by Blur's record label, EMI. By this time, the group had largely disowned the upbeat pop singles from the Britpop era, and favoured the more arty, experimental work on \"Blur\" and \"13\". In an otherwise highly enthusiastic review of the best-of for the \"NME\", Steve Sutherland criticised the band's \"sheer disregard\" for their earlier work; \"Just because these songs embarrassed them once they started listening to broadsheet critics and retreated wounded from the big-sales battle with Oasis doesn't mean that we're morons to love them.\"\nCoxon's departure, \"Think Tank\" and hiatus (2001\u20132007).\nAfter \"13\" and the subsequent tours in 1999\u20132000, band members pursued other projects. Graham Coxon recorded a string of solo albums, while Damon Albarn dedicated his time to Gorillaz, the animated band he had created with Jamie Hewlett. Alex James worked with Fat Les and co-wrote several songs with Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Marianne Faithfull.\nRecording for Blur's next album began in London in November 2001, but concerted work started in June 2002, with the sessions moving to Marrakesh, Morocco soon after, and then to Devon back in the UK. Not long after the sessions began, Coxon left the group. Graham had developed a drinking problem once Blur had become more mainstream being more involved in the business side of music than he would have liked to have been, which ended up giving him huge anxiety and depression problems. This caused friendships and relationship problems. Coxon said \"there were no rows\" and \"[the band] just recognized the feeling that we needed some time apart\". Before the album was released, Blur released a new single, \"Don't Bomb When You Are the Bomb\" as a very limited white label release. The song is largely electronic, and was part of the band's protest against war in the Middle East. Albarn, however, attempted to assuage fans' fears that the album would be electronic by providing reassurances that the band's new album would be \"a rockin' record\", and also said that it has \"a lot of finely crafted pop songs\". Early in 2002, Blur recorded a song that would be played by European Space Agency's Beagle 2 lander once it touched down; however, attempts to locate the probe after it landed on Mars were fruitless.\n\"Think Tank\", released in May 2003, was filled with atmospheric, brooding electronic sounds, featuring simpler guitar lines played by Albarn, and largely relying on other instruments to replace Coxon. The guitarist's absence also meant that \"Think Tank\" was almost entirely written by Albarn. Its sound was seen as a testament to Albarn's increasing interest in African and Middle Eastern music, and to his complete control over the group's creative direction. \"Think Tank\" was yet another UK number one and reached number 56 in the United States. It was also nominated for best album at the 2004 Brit Awards. The band did a successful tour in 2003, with former Verve guitarist Simon Tong filling in for Coxon.\nIn 2005, XFM News reported that Blur would record an EP, and denied that they would hire a replacement guitarist for Coxon. There were also some aborted recordings made in 2005. Overall the band kept a low profile and did no studio or touring work as a three-piece. After Coxon significantly thawed on the subject of rejoining Blur, in 2007 band members announced that they would reunite, and that they intended to record together first in August, with the date later being pushed back to September, then October. Though the band members finally met up in October, they posted on their website that they had only \"met up for an enjoyable lunch\" and that there were no \"other music plans for Blur\".\nReunion performances (2008\u20132015).\nIn December 2008, Blur announced they would reunite for a concert at London's Hyde Park on 3 July 2009. Days later, the band added a second date, for 2 July. A series of June preview shows were also announced, ending at Manchester Evening News arena on the 26th. All the shows were well received; \"The Guardian\"'s music critic Alexis Petridis gave their performance at Goldsmiths college a full five stars, and wrote \"Blur's music seems to have potentiated by the passing of years ... they sound both more frenetic and punky and more nuanced and exploratory than they did at the height of their fame\". Blur headlined the Glastonbury Festival on 28 June, where they played for the first time since their headline slot in 1998. Reviews of the Glastonbury performance were enthusiastic; \"The Guardian\" called them \"the best Glastonbury headliners in an age\". The band released their second greatest hits album \"\" on 15 June 2009.\nBlur also headlined at other summer festivals, including Oxegen 2009 in Ireland, and the Scottish outdoor show of T in the Park. Their T in the Park headline slot was put in jeopardy after Graham Coxon was admitted to hospital with food poisoning. Ultimately, the band did play, albeit an hour and a half after they were scheduled to appear. After the completion of the reunion dates, James said the group had not discussed further plans, and Albarn told \"Q\" soon after that Blur had no intention of recording or touring again. He said, \"I just can't do it anymore\", and explained that the main motivation for participating in the reunion was to repair his relationship with Coxon, which he succeeded at. Coxon also said that no further Blur activity was planned, telling NME.com in September, \"We're in touch and we say 'Wotcha' and all that but nothing has been mentioned about any more shows or anything else\".\nIn January 2010, \"No Distance Left to Run\", a documentary about the band, was released in cinemas and a month later on DVD. The same month, their 1994 album \"Parklife\" was one of ten classic album covers from British artists commemorated on a UK postage stamp issued by the Royal Mail; the collection was unveiled by Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page. In April 2010, Blur released their first new recording since 2003, \"Fool's Day\", for the Record Store Day event, as a vinyl record limited to 1000 copies; it was later made available as a free download on their website. \"No Distance Left to Run\" was nominated as Best Long Form Music Video for the 53rd Grammy Awards, Blur's first-ever Grammy nomination.\nIn February 2012, Blur were awarded the Outstanding Contribution to Music award at the 2012 Brit Awards. Later that month, Albarn and Coxon premiered a new track together live, \"Under the Westway\". In April, the band announced that a box-set entitled \"Blur 21\"\u2014containing all seven Blur studio albums, four discs of unreleased rarities and three DVDs\u2014would be released in July. Blur had also entered the studio early that year to record material for a new album, but in May producer William Orbit told the \"NME\" that Albarn had halted recording. Blur's official Twitter and Facebook pages announced that the band would release two singles \"The Puritan\" and \"Under the Westway\" on 2 July. That August, Blur headlined a show at Hyde Park for the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony. In 2013, the band performed at the Rock Werchter in Belgium, the Spanish and Portuguese dates of the Primavera Sound festival, and the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in the United States.\n\"The Magic Whip\" and second hiatus (2015\u20132022).\nIn April 2015, Blur released their first studio album in twelve years, \"The Magic Whip\". Conceived over five days in Hong Kong after a cancelled Japan tour in 2013, the album was inspired by the city as well. \"There's nothing pastoral about it\", Albarn said, \"it's very urban\". \"The Magic Whip\" also marks the return of Coxon, absent on all but one track on \"Think Tank\", and Stephen Street, Blur's producer during the Britpop era.\n\"The Magic Whip\" received positive reviews. Awarding the album a full five stars, \"The Daily Telegraph\" called \"The Magic Whip\" \"a triumphant comeback that retains the band's core identity while allowing ideas they'd fermented separately over the past decade to infuse their sound with mature and peculiar new flavour combinations\". The \"NME\" concurred, saying Blur were \"a reunited band making music to rival their very best\". It was also a commercial success, becoming the sixth consecutive Blur LP since \"Parklife\" (1994) to top the British charts. The \"Guardian\" also noted that at times during its first week of release, \"The Magic Whip\" sold \"more than the rest of the top five combined\". \"The Magic Whip\" also became Blur's highest charting album in the United States when it peaked at number 24 on the \"Billboard\" 200. That December \"New World Towers\", a documentary on the recording process of \"The Magic Whip\", was released in select British theatres.\nBlur went on hiatus following the 2015 \"Magic Whip\" tour. They briefly reunited in March 2019 for a surprise performance at an Albarn-organized Africa Express event in London.\n\"The Ballad of Darren,\" and second reunion (2022\u2013present).\nOn 14 November 2022, Blur announced that they would perform at Wembley Stadium on 8 July 2023 \u2013 their first headline performance since 2015. On 10 February 2023, in line with the reunion, the band collaborated with clothing brand PLEASURES to release a line of items commemorating their 1997 album \"Blur\".\nOn 18 May 2023, Blur released \"The Narcissist\", the first single from their ninth studio album \"The Ballad of Darren\". The next day, the band played their first concert in eight years on 19 May 2023 at the Colchester Arts Centre in Colchester. Following the warmup shows, Blur performed at Primavera Sound in Barcelona and Malahide Castle near Dublin. Blur headlined Wembley Stadium on 8 July and 9 July 2023, with Jockstrap, Sleaford Mods, and Self Esteem as the support acts for the first show, and The Selecter and Paul Weller as support acts for the second show. \"The Ballad of Darren\" was released on 21 July, and was preceded by the second single \"St. Charles Square\". After the album's release, the band performed at the \u00d8yafestivalen in Oslo on 10 August, Way Out West in Gothenburg on 11 August, Flow Festival in Helsinki on 13 August and Summer Sonic Festival in Tokyo and Osaka on 19 and 20 August.\nOn 5 December, Albarn announced that Blur would enter another hiatus, saying, \"[It's] time to wrap up this campaign. It\u2019s too much for me.\" However, the band accepted a late night phone call offer to play 2024's Coachella, with management giving them five minutes to decide, prompting Albarn to postpone the hiatus. Blur performed a warm-up sold out show at Pomona Fox Theater supported by Jockstrap on 10 April, the group's first U.S. show since 2015. The band's first week Coachella performance on 13 April drew significant media attention for the lack of crowd interaction during \"Girls &amp; Boys\" and Albarn's visible frustration. During the band's second week Coachella performance on 20 April, Albarn said it was probably the band's final show. In early May 2024, it was announced that July 2024 would see the release of a new documentary titled \"To the End\".\nMusical style and influences.\nBlur's musical style has been described as Britpop, indie rock, alternative rock, art pop, pop rock, and art rock, with influences from indie rock and lo-fi. The band's seventh studio album \"Think Tank\" moved into more of an electronic sound. The band's influences include David Bowie, Bobby Womack, William Onyeabor, the B-52's, the Kinks, Pink Floyd, the Jam, and Depeche Mode. In their days as Seymour, they were a \"shambolic\" avant-pop band, whose early concerts exhibited their art school background; meanwhile, Albarn \"took cues\" from Syd Barrett and Julian Cope.\nBand members.\nFormer touring musicians\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43008", "revid": "41454490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43008", "title": "Supergrass", "text": "English rock band\nSupergrass are an English rock band formed in 1993. For the majority of the band's tenure, the line-up consisted of brothers Gaz (lead vocals, guitar) and Rob Coombes (keyboards), Mick Quinn (bass, backing vocals), and Danny Goffey (drums, backing vocals). Originally a three-piece, Coombes officially joined in 2002.\nThe band signed to Parlophone Records in 1994 and produced \"I Should Coco\" (1995), the label's best-selling debut album since the Beatles' \"Please Please Me\". Their first album's fourth single, \"Alright\", was an international hit. The band went on to release five more albums: \"In It for the Money\" (1997), \"Supergrass\" (1999), \"Life on Other Planets\" (2002), \"Road to Rouen\" (2005) and \"Diamond Hoo Ha\" (2008), as well as a compilation called \"Supergrass Is 10\" (2004). In August 2009, the band signed to Cooking Vinyl and began work on their seventh studio album, \"Release the Drones\". The album remains unreleased and unfinished. \nIn April 2010, the band announced they were splitting up due to musical and creative differences. The group disbanded after four farewell shows, the final one at La Cigale, Paris, on 11 June 2010. The band reformed in 2019, initially to perform at Pilton Party followed by a \"secret\" show at Oslo in Hackney, London. The band made their final appearance of their first reunion with a performance in honour of Foo Fighters' recently deceased drummer Taylor Hawkins at his tribute concert in 2022, performing some of Hawkins' favourite songs from Supergrass's catalogue. Hawkins had previously expressed his love of the band, and had even made a cameo drum appearance at one of their concerts. The band announced a 2025 UK tour at the end of 2024 playing \"I Should Coco\" (for its 30th anniversary) in its entirety plus hits.\nHistory.\nThe Jennifers and formation (1990\u20131993).\nAt the age of 16 and 18 respectively and whilst attending Wheatley Park School just outside Oxford, Gaz Coombes and Danny Goffey were playing in the Jennifers along with Nick Goffey and Andy Davies. Danny and Nick Goffey are the sons of former BBC Top Gear presenter and motoring journalist Chris Goffey.\nThe Jennifers began building a reputation in the Oxford indie music scene, influenced by Ride, the Charlatans, Inspiral Carpets, the Kinks, the Who, and including traits of the shoegaze era. The band played gigs at various venues around Oxfordshire, often public houses and clubs. One pub the band played at was the Jericho Tavern in Oxford.\nThey sold a demo tape recorded and produced by Nick Langston at Stargoat Studios near Banbury. The demo featured three songs: \"Flying\", which featured a 20-second countdown at the beginning, the recording of a rocket launch and then a fast guitar-based section which appeared to be influenced by the Stone Roses; \"Inside of Me\", mostly similar in style but with a slower, funk-inflected jam at the end; and a guitar-based ballad simply titled \"(Slow Song)\" on the tape. The band enjoyed enough success to release one single in 1992, \"Just Got Back Today\", on Nude Records, which is now a highly sought-after rarity. Second single, \"Tightrope\" was never released due to disagreements with Nude Records (but does appear on the compilation CD \"Days Spent Dreaming\"), the band split up soon after this in the fall of 1992. Andy Davies went off to university and Nic Goffey went on to form a directing partnership with friend Dom Hawley, later directing many videos for Supergrass.\nWhen Coombes began working at the local Harvester, he befriended co-worker Mick Quinn. The two realised they had common music interests and Coombes invited Quinn to come and jam with him and Goffey. In February 1993 they formed a band named Theodore Supergrass \"for about two months,\" according to Quinn, who explained, \"[T]hen we realized that Theodore was a bit rubbish so we took that off.\"\nGoffey claims that the name was his idea and says, \"Although the others will dispute it, it was me. We were Theodore Supergrass and the idea was the band would be a little black character, and we wouldn't ever have to do interviews. We'd get the questions in advance, script the answers and then animate Theodore Supergrass answering them. But it cost too much money.\"\nGaz's brother, Rob Coombes, played flute for the band's d\u00e9but gig at the Co-Op Hall, Oxford in 1993. In January 1995 he first performed as keyboardist with the band for a live Radio 1 John Peel session. His role in the band progressed over the years, post-I Should Coco material is credited to \"Supergrass and Rob Coombes\", however, he wasn't introduced as a band member until almost a decade later.\nBritpop years and stardom (1994\u20131998).\nIn mid-1994, Supergrass issued their debut single \"Caught by the Fuzz\" on the small independent local label Backbeat Records. The song recounts lead singer and guitarist Gaz Coombes's experience of being arrested by the police for possession of cannabis. The limited release of vinyl copies sold out quickly, thanks in part to support from John Peel on his Radio One show. The Parlophone label signed the band and re-released the single in the autumn of the same year. It achieved the rare feat of being both \"NME\" and \"Melody Maker\"'s \"Single Of The Week\" status in the same week.\n\"Mansize Rooster\", released in February 1995, peaked at number 20 in the UK Singles Chart and \"Lenny\" was the band's first top 10 single. \"Lenny\" was followed soon afterwards by the band's debut album, \"I Should Coco\" (May 1995), which entered the UK Albums Chart at number one. It achieved half a million sales in the UK and over a million worldwide. \"NME\" reviewer Steve Sutherland gave the album a nine out of ten rating, writing, \"These freaks shall inherit the earth.\" The album's fourth single, the double A-side release \"Alright\"/\"Time\", stayed in the UK Top Three for a month, peaking at number two.\nSupergrass followed \"I Should Coco\" with 18 months of heavy touring, appearing at festivals such as Scotland's T in the Park and the Glastonbury Festival. After Performing at Rio's \"Hollywood Rock Festival\" in April 1996, Supergrass met the train robber Ronnie Biggs, and he apparently said to them, \"I was frightened for my life when I heard there was a supergrass in the area.\" A photograph of Ronnie Biggs and Gaz together was subsequently included in the music video for their 1996 single \"Going Out\". Recorded at Great Linford Manor the single peaked at number five in the UK chart, but was the last song produced by Sam Williams. Supergrass returned to Sawmills Studio to co-produce follow up album, \"In It for the Money\" (released April 1997), with John Cornfield. The album was a huge success and went platinum in the UK, but confused some fans expecting something similar to \"I Should Coco\". The single, \"Richard III\", reached number two. Subsequent releases, \"Sun Hits the Sky\" and \"Late in the Day\", reached numbers 10 and 18 respectively.\nAround this time Supergrass also appeared on the front cover of \"The Big Issue\", interviewed for the magazine at Heathrow Airport by ex-drug smuggler Howard Marks.\nFurther musical growth (1999\u20132004).\nThe band again took a short break before returning in 1999 with the single \"Pumping on Your Stereo\". The promo video, produced in conjunction with the Jim Henson's Creature Shop, featured the band with comical \"muppet\" bodies. The single generated welcome publicity following their time out of the limelight, as did a small sold-out tour scheduled around the single release, the final night of which was at Shepherd's Bush Empire as part of MTV's \"Five Night Stand\" festival. The single and the tour were followed by their third LP \"Supergrass\" (1999). The following spring the record was released in the US Once more, the album was recorded at Sawmills Studio with longtime associate Cornfield producing. \"Supergrass\" was well received critically and commercially and it has since gone platinum in the UK, but did not reap the same level of success as its predecessors. Critics claimed the album was \"hit and miss\", which showed up particularly as the \"also-rans are surrounded by songs that are as great as anything Supergrass has ever recorded\". Their next single, \"Moving\", proved popular and reached the Top Ten in the UK. And their third single, \"Mary\" entered the Top 40. There followed a long hiatus.\nAfter three years out of the limelight, the band returned with \"Life on Other Planets\" (September 2002), recorded at \"Heliocentric\", \"Rockfield\" and \"Mayfair\" Studios and produced by Beck collaborator Tony Hoffer. The album was released in the UK on Parlophone, but in the US on the Island Def Jam imprint. The record was not as commercially successful as Supergrass's first three albums, failing to make the Top Three in the UK albums chart. However, the critical response to the album was generally very positive, with Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic claiming \"The world is a better place for having Supergrass in it.\" It has since gone gold in the UK. \"Life on Other Planets\" was also notable as it was the first Supergrass album to recognise Rob Coombes as an official member. For the band's first three albums, Supergrass officially consisted of Gaz Coombes, Goffey and Quinn although Rob Coombes contributed to many of the band's songs and videos, and toured with them. Tracks recorded before this were often credited to \"Supergrass and Rob Coombes\". The band followed \"Life on Other Planets\" with another extended three-year hiatus, devoted to touring and personal engagements.\nIn June 2004 the band's record company suggested the band release a singles compilation \"Supergrass Is 10\", spawning two new self-produced tracks: \"Kiss of Life\" and \"Bullet\". The companion DVD contained \"Home Movie\", a humorous documentary charting the band's first 10 years' achievements, made in collaboration with \"Seen the Light\" video director Simon Hilton. The record entered the UK albums chart at number four and has since gone gold in the UK.\nDevelopment (2005\u20132008).\nRecording of their fifth studio album, \"Road to Rouen\", began in France in a studio built by the band in Normandy. Working with French engineer Pierre-Olivier Marger, the sessions represented a significant change in direction and were perceived as a more mature body of work.\n\"St. Petersburg\", the string-laden first single, was released on 8 August 2005. The album followed a week later (released 27 September in North America) and reached No.\u00a09 on the UK chart, going on to achieve silver status in the UK. Opinion at the time was divided, but the album garnered the band many new fans and a measure of creative respect, some even embracing it as \"the sound of a band at last hitting their stride\".\nThe second single, \"Low C\", featured a video by \"Pumping on Your Stereo\" video director Garth Jennings, shot in Weeki Wachee Springs Florida. The third single, \"Fin\", interpreted as a missive to the Coombes brothers' recently deceased mother, received much critical praise, \"The Guardian\" referring to it as \"so gorgeously light and airy that listening to it is like sleepwalking in space\".\nThe band toured the songs in both acoustic and electric formats with percussionist Satin Singh joining the live band throughout. From August 2005 to September 2006 they performed in Japan, South America, the United States, and Europe, finishing with a memorable gig at the Beijing Pop Festival.\nThe follow-up album, \"Diamond Hoo Ha\" was recorded at Hansa Tonstudio, Berlin, with producer\nNick Launay, and mixed at Seedy Underbelly Studios in Los Angeles. The band toured in the summer of 2007, headlining Guilfest, among others, and debuting new material, with the youngest sibling of the Coombes brothers, ex-22-20s keyboardist Charly, on second guitar, percussion and backing vocals.\nOn 27 September 2007, bassist Mick Quinn sustained a broken heel bone and two spinal fractures in a sleepwalking accident whilst on holiday in France (Quinn sleepwalked out of a first floor window of the villa he was staying at in the South of France.). \nDuring his recuperation, Gaz and Danny promoted first single \"Diamond Hoo Ha Man\" as the Diamond Hoo Ha Men, with a run of small club shows in December and January. To celebrate the single release, Mick Quinn appeared as Diamond Hoo Ha Man \"Biff Hymenn\" at the Apple Store, Regent Street, London, marking his return to touring duties on 15 January. Charly directed \"Glange Fever\" (under pseudonym \"Chas Harrison\") a rockumentary which followed their exploits.\nFor a handful of \"full band\" Supergrass dates on the Diamond Hoo Ha tour (as opposed to Gaz &amp; Danny as the Diamond Hoo Ha Men duo), Charly Coombes filled in for Mick Quinn on bass while he recovered from his injuries.\nWhen Mick recovered &amp; returned to the band, Charly remained with them on second guitar &amp; percussion (as per his work on the record) for the rest of the tour.\nIn February 2008, the video of their second single \"Bad Blood\" was released on the band's official web-site, winning Best Rock Video at the UK Music Video Awards, and the single followed on 17 March.\nIn 2008, Parlophone was taken over by venture capitalist group, Terra Firma, and Supergrass ended their contract with the label. \"Rebel In You\", final single from the \"Diamond Hoo Ha\" album, was released, under licence from Parlophone, on the band's own imprint, Supergrass Records.\nIndependent career and split (2009\u20132010).\nThe band headlined Wychwood Festival on 30 May and also Sellindge Music Festival (6 June), Provinssirock Festival (13 June) and a short European trek in July at BBK Live (10 July) at Bilbao, Bikini Festival (11 July) in Toulouse, Festival Les Ardentes (12 July) in Li\u00e8ge (Belgium) and Paredes de Coura Festival (30 July) in Portugal. There was also a co-headlining date at 2009's Truck Festival along with Ash, on 25\u201326 July at Hill Farm in Steventon, Oxfordshire.\nOn 12 April 2010, the band announced they were to split up after a series of four farewell shows, with their final gig in Paris on 11 June 2010.\nAt the time of the split, Supergrass were working on their seventh studio album, tentatively titled \"Release the Drones\". In early 2010, the band revealed that the album had been influenced by krautrock bands such as Can, and drone music, and that the members had swapped instruments on several tracks during its recording. Coombes said of the approach to the album: \"This record's actually been very collaborative. It's been cool to try something different and chaotic.\" Coombes stated that the album was \"nearly finished\", and it was scheduled for release in May. The album remains unfinished and unreleased.\nReformation (2019\u2013present).\nIn July 2019, it was reported in the press that the band were to reform and play at Pilton Party on 6 September 2019. On 22 August 2019, the Twitter account Secretglasto posted \"We're not going to Grass up the special guest at the Pilton Party, but we're pretty sure they'll be Super.\" In an interview with \"The Times\", the band confirmed they are not going to be working on new material, with Goffey stating that \"the positive vibe of playing together would be compromised by going into a studio for ages\" and that \"the idea is to play gigs, not create more music\". Gaz Coombes told \"Q\" that he was prepared to give a year up to perform with Supergrass, but was wary of promising to make new music.\nAfter performing two warm up shows at The Empire in Coventry and the Cheese &amp; Grain in Frome the band embarked on a short European tour visiting France, Belgium and The Netherlands before doing a full UK tour finishing with two sold-out shows at Alexandra Palace, London on 7 March.\nThe band were due to tour across America and Australia in April and May 2020 as well as festival appearances in Norway, Italy, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands and the UK (which would have also included their 5th appearance at Glastonbury) but all were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nDespite the tour's cancellation, Supergrass still managed to perform a live-streamed gig on 21 August at The Bullingdon in their hometown of Oxford. The show was a collaboration with Goose Island Brewery and served as a launch event for the new Supergrass-inspired beer Man Sized Brew Sir, which was named after the band's song \"Mansize Rooster\". Ticket proceeds for the event went to the Nordoff Robbins Music Therapy Charity and the band's charity of choice, the suicide prevention charity CALM. The band also played a socially-distanced show at the Virgin Money Unity Arena in Newcastle the next day.\nOn 27 November, Supergrass released \"Live on Other Planets\", a live album consisting of songs recorded at various dates on their recent reunion tour. The album was released to mark the band's 25th anniversary; to capture the reunion gigs and thank the fans who attended; and to support grassroots music venues, with proceeds from the album's sales going to the #SaveOurVenues campaign in aid of venues struggling due to the pandemic.\nOn 3 September 2022 the band performed a 3-song set at the Taylor Hawkins Tribute Concert at Wembley Stadium. Gaz Coombes also took lead vocal duties on covers of David Bowie's \"Modern Love\" (performed with Nile Rodgers) and the Police's \"Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic\" (performed with Foo Fighters alongside Stewart Copeland on drums). Following the performance, Gaz Coombes confirmed on his social media that it was the band's \"final Supergrass reunion show\". \"I want to thank all you [Supergrass] fans for the love and incredible support you've shown us over the last three years,\" he wrote. \"It's been a blast.\" Shortly thereafter, Coombes announced a return to his solo career \u2013 as did Goffey, who confirmed the band's hiatus to \"NME\". \"Gaz is gonna do something himself, and I've got this thing coming up, so we'll give it a rest for six months and then we'll see,\" he said.\nOn 16 September 2024, the band reunited to announce that they would play a 30th Anniversary tour of \"I Should Coco\", in May 2025.\nSolo projects.\nDuring 1998, Coombes and Quinn were invited to play on Dr John's \"Anutha Zone\" album (they appear on the track \"Voices In My Head\"), whilst Goffey contributed to the debut album by Lodger (which also featured his partner Pearl Lowe and members of the band Delicatessen).\nDanny Goffey has also embarked on a solo project between Supergrass engagements called \"Van Goffey\" which saw tracks being released via MySpace in August 2006, the first three being \"Crack House Blues\", \"I Feel so Gaye\" and \"Natalie Loves the F\". He plays drums on the charity football song \"Born In England\" by a collective of musicians called Twisted X, which charted at number 8 in the UK Charts in 2004. Danny Goffey was also a drummer on the 2004 charity single \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\", along with members of Radiohead and the Darkness under the name Band Aid 20.\nIn July 2008, Coombes joined Foo Fighters on stage during a show that saluted the Who's musical career, VH1 Rock Honors. Coombes performed vocals on the Who's classic song \"Bargain\".\nIn 2007 and 2008, while Mick Quinn was still recuperating from his injury, Danny Goffey and Gaz Coombes were performing as the duo Diamond Hoo Ha Men, the name taken from the band's sixth album and its lead single (see ). They appeared in character as Duke Diamond and Randy Hoo Ha to play gigs at small venues. Gigs included an appearance at the Apple Store on London's Regent Street, which featured Mick Quinn's first appearance in the band since his injury. He appeared on stage introduced by Gaz as Biff Hymen.\nGoffey and Coombes were members of side-project the Hotrats (originally the Hot Rats). They released an album of covers produced by Nigel Godrich called \"Turn Ons\" on 25 January 2010. A cover of \"Drive My Car\" by the Beatles appears in an advert for Orange, a fragrance by Hugo Boss. Since Supergrass announced they were to split, the Hotrats have joined with Air to perform \"The Virgin Suicides\" live for the first time, over several concert dates. A deluxe 3CD / 1DVD box-set of the Hot Rats album was scheduled for release in June 2020.\nIn May 2010, Mick Quinn formed the DB Band with former Shake Appeal bassist Fab Wilson. The band released their first EP \"Stranger in the Alps\" on 17 September 2011. They have toured the Netherlands, France and appeared at Oxford's Truck Festival in Steventon.\nGaz Coombes completed his first solo album, \"Here Come the Bombs\", at his home studio in Oxford. The album was recorded with Sam Williams, who produced 1995's \"I Should Coco\" for Supergrass, and released on 21 May 2012. Coombes' second album, \"Matador\", was released 26 January 2015, charting at No. 18 on the UK Albums Chart and nominated for the 2015 Mercury Music Prize. Coombes released a third studio album, titled \"World's Strongest Man\" on Caroline Records in 2018.\nIn 2015, Mick Quinn began playing as touring bassist for Swervedriver, whose members Adam Franklin and Jimmy Hartridge were childhood friends of his in Oxford. He would eventually join the band as a full member in 2017, appearing on the band's 2019 album \"Future Ruins\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43013", "revid": "22802661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43013", "title": "El Nino", "text": ""}
{"id": "43014", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43014", "title": "Eunice Kennedy Shriver", "text": "American philanthropist (1921\u20132009)\nEunice Mary Kennedy Shriver (n\u00e9e Kennedy; July 10, 1921 \u2013 August 11, 2009) was an American philanthropist. Shriver was a member of the Kennedy family by birth, and a member of the Shriver family through her marriage to Sargent Shriver, who was the United States Ambassador to France and the final Democratic nominee for Vice President of the United States in 1972. She was a sister of U.S. President John F. Kennedy, U.S. Senators Robert F. Kennedy and Edward Kennedy, and U.S. Ambassador to Ireland Jean Kennedy Smith.\nShriver nationalized the Special Olympics, a sports organization conceived for persons with intellectual disabilities. For her efforts on behalf of disabled people, she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1984.\nEarly life, education, and early career.\nEunice Mary Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on July 10, 1921. She was the fifth of nine children of Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., and Rose Fitzgerald. Her siblings included U.S. President and Senator John F. Kennedy, U.S. Attorney General and U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy, U.S. Senator Edward Kennedy, and U.S. Ambassador to Ireland Jean Kennedy Smith.\nEunice was educated at the Convent of the Sacred Heart School in Noroton, Connecticut, and Manhattanville College. She studied at Stanford University where she competed on the swimming and track and field teams. After graduating from Stanford in 1943 with a Bachelor of Science degree in sociology, she moved to Washington, D.C. and worked for the Special War Problems Division of the U.S. State Department. Kennedy eventually moved to the U.S. Justice Department as executive secretary for a project dealing with juvenile delinquency. During her time in Washington, she shared a townhouse in Georgetown with her brother John, then a U.S. Congressman. Kennedy served as a social worker at the Federal Industrial Institution for Women for one year before moving to Chicago in 1951 to work with the House of the Good Shepherd women's shelter and Chicago Juvenile Court.\nCharity work and awards.\nShriver became executive vice president of the Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Foundation in 1957. She shifted the organization's focus from Catholic charities to research on the causes of intellectual disabilities, and humane ways to treat them. This interest eventually culminated in, among other things, the Special Olympics movement.\nA long-time advocate for children's health and disability issues, Shriver championed the creation of the President's Panel on Mental Retardation in 1961. The panel was significant in the movement from institutionalization to community integration in the U.S. and throughout the world. Shriver was a key founder of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), a part of the National Institutes of Health in 1962.\nIn 1962, Shriver founded Camp Shriver, a summer day camp for children and adults with intellectual disabilities at her Maryland farm to explore their capabilities in a variety of sports and physical activities. From that camp came the concept of Special Olympics. Shriver founded the Special Olympics in 1968. That year, the Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Foundation helped to plan and fund the First International Special Olympics Summer Games, held in Chicago's Soldier Field where 1,000 athletes with intellectual disabilities from 26 states and Canada competed. In her speech at the opening ceremony, Shriver said, \"The Chicago Special Olympics prove a very fundamental fact, the fact that exceptional children \u2014 mentally disabled children \u2014 can be exceptional athletes, the fact that through sports they can realize their potential for growth.\" Special Olympics Inc. was established as a nonprofit charity in 1968; since that time, nearly three million athletes have participated.\nIn 1969, Shriver moved to France and pursued her interest in intellectual disability there. She started organizing small activities with Paris organizations, mostly reaching out to families of kids who had special needs to provide activities for them, laying the foundation for a robust international expansion of the Special Olympics in the late 1970s and 1980s.\nIn 1982, Shriver founded the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Center for Community of Caring at University of Utah, Salt Lake City. The Community is a \"grades K-12, whole school, comprehensive character education program with a focus on disabilities... adopted by almost 1,200 schools nationwide and in Canada\".\nShriver was awarded the nation's highest civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, in 1984 by U.S. President Ronald Reagan for her work on behalf of persons with disabilities. In 1988, she received the Laetare Medal, considered the highest award for American Catholics, by the University of Notre Dame. In 1990 Shriver was awarded the Eagle Award from the United States Sports Academy. The Eagle Award is the academy's highest international honor and was awarded to Shriver for her significant contributions to international sport.\nIn 1992, Shriver received the Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, an award given out annually by the Jefferson Awards for Public Service.\nFor her work in nationalizing the Special Olympics, Shriver received the Civitan International World Citizenship Award. Her advocacy on this issue has also earned her other awards and recognitions, including honorary degrees from numerous universities. She is the second American and only woman to appear on a US coin while still living. Her portrait is on the obverse of the 1995 commemorative silver dollar honoring the Special Olympics. On the reverse is the quotation attributed to Shriver, \"As we hope for the best in them, hope is reborn in us.\"\nIn 1998, Shriver was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.\nShriver received the 2002 Theodore Roosevelt Award (the Teddy), an annual award given by the National Collegiate Athletic Association to a graduate from an NCAA member institution who earned a varsity letter in college for participation in intercollegiate athletics, and who ultimately became a distinguished citizen of national reputation based on outstanding life accomplishment. In addition to the Teddy recognition, she was selected in 2006 as part of the NCAA Centennial celebration as one of the 100 most-influential individuals in its first century; she was listed ninth. In 2006, she received a papal knighthood from Pope Benedict XVI, being made a Dame of the Order of St. Gregory the Great (DSG). Her mother had been created a papal countess in 1950 by Pope Pius XII.\nIn 2008, she received the Foremother Award from the National Center for Health Research for her lifetime achievements.\nIn 2008, the U.S. Congress changed the NICHD's name to the \"Eunice Kennedy Shriver\" National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. In December 2008, \"Sports Illustrated\" named Shriver the first recipient of Sportsman of the Year Legacy Award. On May 9, 2009, the Smithsonian Institution's National Portrait Gallery (NPG) in Washington, D.C., unveiled an historic portrait of her, the first portrait the NPG has ever commissioned of an individual who had not served as a U.S. president or First Lady. The portrait depicts her with four Special Olympics athletes (including Loretta Claiborne) and one Best Buddies participant. It was painted by David Lenz, the winner of the Outwin Boochever Portrait Competition in 2006. As part of the Portrait Competition prize, the NPG commissioned a work from the winning artist to depict a living subject for the collection. Lenz, whose son, Sam, has Down syndrome and is an enthusiastic Special Olympics athlete, was inspired by Shriver's dedication to working with people with intellectual disabilities.\nShriver became involved with Dorothy Hamill's special skating program in the Special Olympics after Hamill's Olympic Games ice-skating win. In September 2010, the State University of New York at Brockport, home of the 1979 Special Olympics, renamed its football stadium the Eunice Kennedy Shriver Stadium.\nIn July 2017, Shriver posthumously received the Arthur Ashe Courage Award at the 2017 ESPY Awards.\nPolitical involvement.\nShriver actively campaigned for her elder brother, John, during his successful 1960 U.S. presidential election.\nAlthough Shriver was a Democrat, she was a vocal supporter of the anti-abortion movement. In 1990, Shriver wrote a letter to \"The New York Times\" denouncing an abortion rights group for having used a quotation of President Kennedy's words out of context in support of their position. Shriver was one of several prominent Democrats \u2013 including Governor Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania and Bishop Austin Vaughan of New York \u2013 who took out a full-page \"The New York Times\" advertisement opposing \"abortion on demand\" during the 1992 Democratic Convention (the Party adopted a 1992 platform that emphasized its support for abortion rights). Shriver was a supporter of several anti-abortion organizations: Feminists for Life of America, the Susan B. Anthony List, and Democrats for Life of America.\nDespite being a Democrat, Shriver supported her Republican son-in-law Arnold Schwarzenegger's successful 2003 Governor of California election.\nOn January 28, 2008, aged 86, Shriver was present at American University in Washington, D.C., when her brother, U.S. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, announced his endorsement of Barack Obama's 2008 Democratic U.S. presidential campaign.\nPersonal life.\nOn May 23, 1953, aged 31, Shriver married Sargent Shriver in a Roman Catholic ceremony at Saint Patrick's Cathedral in New York City. Her husband served as the U.S. ambassador to France from 1968 to 1970 and was the 1972 Democratic U.S. vice presidential candidate (with George McGovern as the candidate for U.S. President). They had five children: Robert Sargent Shriver III, Maria Owings Shriver (Schwarzenegger), Timothy Perry Shriver, Mark Kennedy Shriver, and Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver. Shriver had nineteen grandchildren at the time of her death.\nShe had a close relationship with her sister Rosemary Kennedy, who was intellectually disabled and who became incapacitated due to a lobotomy. Shriver suffered a stroke and broken hip in 2005. On November 18, 2007, aged 86, she was admitted to Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where she spent several weeks.\nDeath.\nOn August 7, 2009, Shriver was admitted to Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Massachusetts with an undisclosed ailment. On August 10, her relatives were called to the hospital. She died at the hospital the next day at the age of 88, two weeks before her brother, Senator Ted Kennedy, died on August 25, 2009, at the age of 77.\nShriver's family issued a statement upon her death, reading in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Inspired by her love of God, her devotion to her family, and her relentless belief in the dignity and worth of every human life, she worked without ceasing\u2014searching, pushing, demanding, hoping for change. She was a living prayer, a living advocate, a living center of power. She set out to change the world and to change us, and she did that and more. She founded the movement that became Special Olympics, the largest movement for acceptance and inclusion for people with intellectual disabilities in the history of the world. Her work transformed the lives of hundreds of millions of people across the globe, and they in turn are her living legacy.\nPresident Barack Obama remarked after Shriver's death that she was \"an extraordinary woman who, as much as anyone, taught our nation\u2014and our world\u2014that no physical or mental barrier can restrain the power of the human spirit.\"\nFuneral and burial.\nOn August 14, 2009, an invitation-only Requiem Mass was celebrated for Shriver at St. Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church in Hyannis. Following the Requiem Mass, she was buried at the St. Francis Xavier parish cemetery in nearby Centerville, Massachusetts. Pope Benedict XVI sent a letter of condolence to her family. Because her brother Ted had terminal brain cancer, he was unable to attend the funeral, and their sister Jean Kennedy Smith stayed with him. Ted died two weeks later, leaving Jean as the sole surviving child of Joseph and Rose Kennedy until her death on June 17, 2020, at the age of 92.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43015", "revid": "29738728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43015", "title": "John Lingard", "text": "English Roman Catholic priest and historian (1771\u20131851)\nJohn Lingard (5 February 1771 \u2013 17 July 1851) was an English Catholic priest and historian, the author of \"The History of England, From the First Invasion by the Romans to the Accession of Henry VIII\", an eight-volume work published in 1819. Lingard was a teacher at the English College at Douai, and at the seminary at Crook Hall, and later St. Cuthbert's College. In 1811 he retired to Hornby in Lancashire to continue work on his writing.\nThough Lingard was accorded no recognition by the British intellectual establishment and is no longer popular as an historian, his contribution to historical method came at a critical point in British intellectual history. That he was also a Catholic priest, in a turbulent time for the Church in England, makes that contribution all the more interesting.\nBiography.\nBorn in 1771 in St Thomas Street in central Winchester to recusant parents, John Lingard was the son of John and Elizabeth Rennell Lingard. His mother was from an old Catholic family who had been persecuted for their beliefs; his father was, by trade, a carpenter, who had converted to Catholicism upon his marriage. They each migrated from their native Claxby in Lincolnshire, first to London, where they met once again and married, then, after a short return to their old home, to Winchester, where he was born.\nBishop Challoner recommended the young John Lingard for a \"burse\" at the English College at Douai, France. He entered the college in September 1782, to commence training for the priesthood. At the English College, he excelled in the humanities before beginning the study of theology. At the end of his course in philosophy he was retained as professor of grammar at one of the lower schools. Narrowly escaping attacks by mobs at the time of the French Revolution upon the declaration of war between the Kingdom of Great Britain and France, he returned to England in 1793 in charge of two brothers named Oliveira and of William, afterwards Lord Stourton. For nearly a year, he was tutor to young Stourton at Baron Stourton's residence near York.\nWhen Lingard learned that a number of his students from Douai had made it to Arthur Storey's school in Tudhoe, he asked leave of the Baron to join them, which was granted.\nIn 1792 Thomas Eyre was appointed to the mission of Pontop Hall, near Lanchester, County Durham. In 1794 Bishop William Gibson asked Eyre to take charge of the Northern students who had been expelled from Douai, and who were then temporarily at Tudhoe under John Lingard. Eyre relocated Lingard and his students to Pontop Hall, and then later to Crook Hall, all within a few miles of Durham. Nominally Lingard held the chair of philosophy; practically, besides the duties of vice-president to Eyre, he undertook in addition those of prefect of studies, procurator, and of professor of Church history.\nLingard concluded his theological studies and was ordained at York in April 1795. In 1805, he wrote a series of letters which, after their publication in a periodical, were collected as \"Catholic Loyalty Vindicated\". In 1806 the first edition of \"The Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church\" appeared, a development of his informal lectures. He remained at Crook Hall for fourteen years until, in 1808, the seminary moved to St. Cuthbert's College. Lingard donated a stained glass window to St. Cuthbert's Chapel at Ushaw.\nUpon the death of Eyre in 1810, Lingard, having continued as vice-president, governed the college, at the same time teaching theology. In 1811, he retired to take charge of the secluded mission at Hornby, in Lancashire, spending most of the rest of his life there. Devoting himself to his study and writing, he was well liked as a quiet and gentle man by the residents. He was offered the presidency of St Patrick's College, Maynooth and of Old Hall Green, but declined both.\nIn 1819, the first three volumes of \"The History of England\" was published. Volume I was originally intended as textbook for schools. In 1821, Pope Pius VIII created Lingard a doctor of Divinity. A fourth volume followed in 1823, bringing the history up to the reign of Edward VI. He built St. Mary's Church with the proceeds from volume IV of the \"History of England\". Lingard would refer to it in jest as \"Henry VIII's Chapel\". (The church is a Grade II listed building.) When he traveled to Rome for research in 1825, Pope Leo XII presented him with a gold medal. Subsequent volumes appeared at intervals until he completed the work in 1849.\nLingard died at Hornby on 17 July 1851 at the age of eighty-one. He was buried, at his request, in the cloister of the college cemetery at Ushaw.\nWriting.\n\"The Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church\".\n\"The Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church\" arose from a series of informal talks Lingard gave at Ushaw. They were compiled and edited, and published at Newcastle in 1806. Lingard emphasized that he drew his information wherever possible from original works. He demonstrated that the church in England grew contemporaneously with expanding political structures, and that the institutional structure of the church planted by Augustine of Canterbury developed within the politico-social environment of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. Lingard argued that \"...By preserving the use of the Latin tongue, they imposed on the clergy the necessity of study, kept alive the spirit of improvement, and transmitted to future generations the writings of the classics, and the monuments of profane and ecclesiastical history.\" In his discussion of saints and their holy books, Lingard implies a continuity between the Anglo-Saxon Christians and the English Roman Catholics of his own day, some of whom retained custody of the ancient manuscripts. The section regarding Ecgberht of Ripon, Willibrord, and Boniface suggests that a number of practices and traditions many of his contemporaries would regard as \"Romish\" were actually exported to the continent by Englishmen. By drawing a connection between Anglo-Saxon Christians and nineteenth century Roman Catholics he sought to show that the latter were not only good Christians, but also good and loyal Englishmen.\n\"The History of England\".\nThe principal object of his major work, \"The History of England\", is to emphasise the disastrous effects of the Reformation. A substantial scholarly work which gave full treatment to the history of England, the book was later expanded by the author and the title changed to reflect the period covered. As each additional volume appeared the \"History\"'s reputation increased, while Lingard continued to revise and improve the whole work. Most of the earnings from this project and his other writings were directed towards the educating of students to the priesthood.\nIn his style and presentation of English history, Lingard demonstrates the prevalent manner of Catholic scholarship \u2013 he gives, for example, no indication that he is a priest on the title page, and professes emphatically to be writing an impartial history. But in a curious turnaround, his \"History\" by its very impartiality is a Catholic apologetic, and Lingard's desire for impartiality is a reflection of the Catholic political and intellectual situation in the Emancipation era.\nThe Catholic position in the early nineteenth century, politically speaking, was that of a minority body, allied to the Whig-Radical-Dissenting political grouping, and seeking religious and political freedom. This alliance encouraged Old Catholic intellectuals to present their arguments in 'liberal' and 'reasonable' form \u2013 the argumentative advantage in this being that it presented Catholics as enlightened and tolerant, and their opposition as prejudiced and bigoted.\nLingard himself argued that one of his chief duties as an historian was: \"to weigh with care the value of the authorities on which I rely, and to watch with jealousy the secret workings of my own personal feelings and prepossessions. Such vigilance is a matter of necessity to every writer of history ... Otherwise, he will be continually tempted to make an unfair use of the privilege of the historian; he will sacrifice the interests of truth to the interests of party, national, or religious, or political.\" (J. Lingard, \"History of England\", vol 1, 6th edition, London: Charles Dolman, 1854, p. 6.)\nLingard adopted a non-controversial and sober approach to history with the emphasis on incontrovertible fact and using primary rather than secondary sources.\nIn the History, Lingard faces the task of convincing Protestants of the fundamental truths of the Catholic faith, while maintaining an unbiased presentation of historical truth. He possesses little sense of \"preaching to the converted\" (in a very literal sense), and aims his work more at influencing Protestants than placating his Ultramontane opposition. In a letter of 18 December 1819, Lingard wrote: \"... my only chance of being read by Protestants depends upon my having the reputation of a temperate writer. The good to be done is by writing a book which Protestants will read.\" (Lingard to Kirke, in Haile, Bonney, Life and Letters of John Lingard, 1771\u20131851, London: 1912, pp 166\u201367).\nLingard's History is also an apt demonstration of the advantages a Catholic historian of the time may have had, in terms of impartiality. Lingard's religion had to a large extent isolated him from the mainstream nationalism which surrounded Protestant historians, as well as from the growing \"providentialist\" concept of history. Lingard's strength of argument, however, continued to be popular, and the influence of Protestant animosity for Catholic apologetic also led him to develop a keen critical judgement. He was devoted to absolute accuracy and detail and the History was a groundbreaking work in its use of primary sources. Lingard made extensive use of Vatican archives and French, Italian, Spanish and English dispatches, document collections and state papers \u2013 the first British historian to do so. The peripheral nature of English Catholicism put him in a position of \"outside observer\" to much of English intellectual culture, and this is reflected in his historical works. Despite this distancing effect, however, Lingard maintained an active interest in politics all his life and was a noted pamphleteer.\nThe edition that is usually seen is a 10 volume set, \"to the Accession of William and Mary in 1688.\" There is an enlarged 13 volume set published just before Lingard's death which was his final revision, \"to the Commencement of the Reign of William the Third.\" The History was abridged and revised adding material to bring its treatment up to the then present and used as a text in English Catholic schools during the nineteenth century.\nWilliam Cobbett also used the work as an unbiased reference source for his own \"History of the Protestant Reformation\" in which he puts forward the argument that the reformation had disastrous consequences for the ordinary people of England. His work would in turn be influential in the passage of the Catholic emancipation bill by preparing the way for public acceptance and the minimisation of sectarian violence.\nGospel translation.\nLesser known than Lingard's historical works is his anonymously published translation of the Four Gospels in 1836. The title page reads simply that the work is \"by a Catholic.\" Lingard departed from usual Catholic practice by using early Greek manuscripts rather than the Latin Vulgate as the principal basis for the translation. This resulted in such renderings as \"repent\" rather than \"do penance\" (Matt 3:2). His willingness to depart from Catholic custom contrasts with his contempt for the Protestant concept of \"private interpretation\" of Scripture. In a note to John 1:1, he states, \"Hence it happens that men of every persuasion find confirmation of their peculiar opinions in the sacred volumes: for, in fact, it is not the Scripture that informs them, but that they affix their own meaning to the language of Scripture.\"\nThe work influenced Francis P. Kenrick (1796\u20131863), Roman Catholic Bishop of Philadelphia, and later Archbishop of Baltimore, who published his own translation of the Four Gospels in 1849. By 1851, Lingard felt sufficiently confident to publish a new edition of his Four Gospels in his own name.\nHymn.\nLingard also authored the very popular Catholic hymn to the Virgin Mary titled Hail Queen of Heaven, the Ocean Star, loosely based on the medieval Latin plainchant Ave maris stella. J. Vincent Higginson described it as \"one of the oldest English vernacular hymns commonly found in Catholic hymnals.\"\nHonours.\nIn 1821 Pope Pius VII honoured Lingard with a triple doctorate \u2013 in theology, canon law and civil law \u2013 and a few years later Leo XII conferred upon him a gold medal generally only given to cardinals and princes. There is even strong evidence that he was made a cardinal \"in pectore\" (\"in the breast\") in 1826. This meant that the Pope could have announced the appointment publicly at some future time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43017", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43017", "title": "Gruinard Island", "text": "Island off the coast of Scotland\nGruinard Island ( ;\n) is a small, oval-shaped Scottish island approximately long by wide, located in Gruinard Bay, about halfway between Gairloch and Ullapool. At its closest point to the mainland, it is about offshore. In 1942, the island became a sacrifice zone,&lt;ref name=\"newstatesman/ai-odh\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and was dangerous for all mammals after military experiments with the anthrax bacterium, until it was decontaminated in 1990.\nEarly history.\nThe island was mentioned by Dean Munro who travelled the area in the mid-16th century. He wrote that it was Clan MacKenzie territory, \"full of woods\" (it is treeless today), and that it was \"guid for fostering of thieves and rebellis\".\nHistorically, the counties of Ross-shire and Cromartyshire have both laid claim to Gruinard Island due to the position of the island in between Gairloch and Ullapool. In the late 1780s, the villages became substantial fishing and sheep farming communities leading Gruinard Island to be utilized as an area of land for grazing sheep or as a small dock for fishing. By 1881, the population on the island was six, soon becoming uninhabited with no record detailing any established population.\nIn 1926, Rosalynd Maitland purchased the Eilean Darach estate which included Gruinard Island. Rosalynd Maitland bequeathed the island to her niece Molly Dunphie, who was friends with Winston Churchill.\nBiological warfare testing.\nIn 1942, during World War II, a biological warfare test was carried out on Gruinard by scientists from the Biology Department of Porton Down. The test was conducted as part of Operation Vegetarian, an ultimately unused plan which called for the dispersal of linseed cakes spiked with anthrax across the German countryside. It was recognised that tests would cause long-lasting contamination of the immediate area by anthrax spores, so a remote and uninhabited island was required. Gruinard was surveyed, deemed suitable, and requisitioned from its owners by the British government. Porton Down meteorologist Sir Oliver Graham Sutton was put in charge of a fifty-man team to conduct the trial, with David Willis Wilson Henderson in charge of the germ bomb. Biology Department head Paul Fildes made frequent visits.\nThe anthrax strain chosen was a highly virulent type called \"Vollum 14578\", named after Roy Lars Vollum (1899\u20131970), a professor of bacteriology at the University of Oxford, who supplied it. Eighty sheep were taken to the island and bombs filled with anthrax spores were detonated close to where selected groups were tethered. The sheep became infected with anthrax and began to die within days of exposure.\nSome of the experiments were recorded on 16 mm colour movie film, which was declassified in 1997. One sequence shows the detonation of an anthrax bomb fixed at the end of a tall pole supported with guy ropes. After the bomb explodes, a brownish aerosol cloud drifts away towards the target animals. A later sequence shows anthrax-infected sheep carcasses being burned in incinerators at the end of the experiment. After the tests were completed, scientists concluded that a large release of anthrax spores would thoroughly pollute German cities, rendering them uninhabitable for decades afterwards. Those conclusions were supported by the inability to decontaminate the island after the experiment\u2014the spores were sufficiently durable to resist any efforts at decontamination.\nIn 1945, when the island's owner sought its return, the Ministry of Supply recognised that the island was contaminated, and so could not be de-requisitioned until it was deemed safe. In 1946, the government agreed to acquire the island and to take responsibility for it. The owner or their heirs would be able to repurchase the island for \u00a3500 when it was declared \"fit for habitation by man and beast\". For many years, it was judged too hazardous and expensive to decontaminate the island sufficiently to allow public access, and Gruinard Island was quarantined indefinitely. Visits to the island were prohibited, except for periodic checks by Porton Down personnel to determine the level of contamination.\nOperation Dark Harvest.\nIn 1981 newspapers began receiving messages with the heading \"Operation Dark Harvest\" which demanded that the government decontaminate the island, and reported that a \"team of microbiologists from two universities\" had landed on the island with the aid of local people and collected of soil.\nThe group threatened to leave samples of the soil \"at appropriate points that will ensure the rapid loss of indifference of the government and the equally rapid education of the general public\". The same day a sealed package of soil was left outside the military research facility at Porton Down; tests revealed that it contained anthrax bacilli. A few days later another sealed package of soil was left in Blackpool, where the governing Conservative Party was holding its annual conference. The soil did not contain anthrax, but officials said that the soil was similar to that found on the island.\nDecontamination.\nStarting in 1986 a determined effort was made to decontaminate Gruinard Island, 280 tonnes of formaldehyde solution diluted in sea water was sprayed over all 485 acres (196 hectares) of the island and the worst-contaminated topsoil around the dispersal site was removed. Run-off from the formaldehyde seeped into the ocean and slowly led to the destruction of intertidal organisms such as barnacles, crustaceans, and seaweed. By 2000, research into intertidal organisms recovery was launched, with researchers from that survey project in 2007 saying that \u201crecolonization is ongoing, rather than complete.\u201d\nA flock of sheep was placed on the island not long after the cleanup in 1987 and remained healthy.\nOn 24 April 1990, after 48 years of quarantine and four years after the solution was applied, junior defence minister Michael Neubert visited the island and announced its safety by removing the warning signs.&lt;ref name=\"bbc/604838492\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; On 1 May 1990, the island was repurchased by the heirs of the original owner for the original sale price of \u00a3500. There was some confusion in which members of the public did not know it was being resold solely to its original owners and people from around the world sent letters to the British government asking to purchase the island for \u00a3500.\nWildfire.\nOn 26 March 2022, the island was burned \"from one end to the other\" by a wildfire. Eyewitnesses described the scene as \"apocalyptic\". The cause of the wildfire has not been confirmed but around 200 hectares have been destroyed by the fire. A spokeswoman on behalf of the Gruinard estate did not explicitly state the cause of the fire, only that \"It hasn't caused any damage. It has done good.\"\nPopular culture references.\nGruinard Island is mentioned in the novels \"The Anthrax Mutation\" by Alan Scott (1971), \"The Enemy\" by Desmond Bagley (1977), \"1982, Janine\" by Alasdair Gray (1984), \"Isvik\" by Hammond Innes (1991), \"Sea of Death\" by Richard P. Henrick (1992), \"The Fist of God\" by Frederick Forsyth (1994), \"Quantico\" by Greg Bear (2005), \"The Big Over Easy\" by Jasper Fforde (2005), \"Forbidden Island\" by Malcolm Rose (2009), \"And then you die\" by Iris Johansen (1998), \"The Island\" by R. J. Price (better-known as the poet Richard Price) (2010), \"And the Land Lay Still\" by James Robertson, \"The Impossible Dead\" by Ian Rankin (2011), \"White Pines\" by Gemma Amor (2020), and \"Paying the Piper\" by Sharon McCrumb. It also features as the principal setting for the novel \"El a\u00f1o de gracia\" by Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez Cubas, in which the protagonist spends a winter shipwrecked on the island. The island is the principal location in the novel \"Anthrax Island\" by D. L. Marshall (2021).\nIn issues 187\u2013188 of the comic book \"Hellblazer\", in a story titled \"Bred in the Bone\", the protagonist's niece finds herself on Gruinard surrounded by flesh-eating children. The issues were released in 2003 and were written by Mike Carey and illustrated by Doug Alexander Gregory.\nAn episode of the British wartime TV series \"Foyle's War\" entitled \"Bad Blood\" involved biological testing \u2013 a reference to the Gruinard testing.\nThe 1970 \"Hawaii Five-O\" episode \"Three Dead Cows at Makapu, Part 2\" featured a scientist played by Ed Flanders who threatened to unleash a deadly virus on the island of Oahu. When being interrogated, the scientist briefly mentions Gruinard Island and how it will be uninhabitable for a century due to anthrax experiments.\n\"Outlying Islands\", a Fringe First-winning play by Scottish dramatist David Greig, is a fictionalised account of two British scientists' visit to an island in Scotland where the government plans to test anthrax inspired by the story of Gruinard.\n\"Smallpox Island\", off the north-west coast of Scotland, appears in the \"2000 AD\" comic strip \"Caballistics, Inc.\", although the warnings of contamination from biological weapons are a cover for a top secret, high-security prison.\nThe 2006 \"Doctor Who\" audio drama \"Night Thoughts\" is set on the fictional Gravonax Island, the name and history of which are inspired by those of Gruinard.\nThe 2013 UK TV series \"Utopia\" describes the fictional outbreak of a new form of flu. During Episode 3, Dugdale visits the proposed origin of the virus at the, now quarantined, Island of Fetlar. On arrival, personnel at the island, wearing orange overalls, carry one of numerous covered bodies past on a stretcher in a scene that is nearly identical to that seen in the original test footage from Gruinard Island. In the dramatisation however, the personnel at Fetlar are seen wearing dust masks as opposed to the gas masks seen in the Gruinard footage; likely due to budget constraints (much of Utopia was not filmed where it claims to be).\nThe experiments are referred to in the storyline of \"Trust\", the third and fourth episodes of Series 16 of the BBC series \"Silent Witness\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43018", "revid": "45192756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43018", "title": "South West Africa", "text": "South African territory from 1915 to 1990\nSouth West Africa was a territory under South African administration from 1915 to 1990. Renamed \"Namibia\" by the United Nations in 1968, it became independent under this name on 21 March 1990. \nSouth West Africa bordered Angola (a Portuguese colony before 1975), Botswana (Bechuanaland before 1966), South Africa, and Zambia (Northern Rhodesia before 1964). During its administration, South Africa applied its own apartheid system in the territory of South West Africa.\nA German colony known as German South West Africa from 1884 to 1915, it was made a League of Nations mandate of the Union of South Africa following Germany's defeat in the First World War. Although the mandate was repealed by the United Nations on 27 October 1966, South African control over the territory continued. The territory was administered directly by the South African government from 1915 to 1978, when the Turnhalle Constitutional Conference laid the groundwork for semi-autonomous rule. During an interim period between 1978 and 1985, South Africa gradually granted South West Africa a limited form of home rule, culminating in the formation of a Transitional Government of National Unity.\nGerman colony.\nAs a German colony from 1884, it was known as German South West Africa (\"Deutsch-S\u00fcdwestafrika\"). Germany had a difficult time administering the territory, which experienced many insurrections against the harsh German rule, especially those led by guerrilla leader Jacob Morenga. The main port, Walvis Bay, and the Penguin Islands were annexed by the UK in 1878, becoming part of the Cape Colony in 1884. Following the creation of the Union of South Africa in 1910, Walvis Bay became part of the Cape Province.\nAs part of the Heligoland\u2013Zanzibar Treaty in 1890, a corridor of land taken from the northern border of Bechuanaland, extending as far as the Zambezi River, was added to the colony. It was named the Caprivi Strip (\"Caprivizipfel\") after the German Chancellor Leo von Caprivi.\nSouth African rule.\nIn 1915, during the South West Africa campaign of World War I, South Africa captured the German colony. After the war, it was declared a League of Nations Class C Mandate territory under the Treaty of Versailles, with the Union of South Africa responsible for the administration of South West Africa. From 1922, this included Walvis Bay, which, under the South West Africa Affairs Act, was governed as if it were part of the mandated territory. South West Africa remained a League of Nations Mandate until World War II and the collapse of the League of Nations.\nThe Mandate was supposed to become a United Nations Trust Territory when League of Nations Mandates were transferred to the United Nations following World War II. The Prime Minister, Jan Smuts, objected to South West Africa coming under UN control and refused to allow the territory's transition to independence, instead seeking to make it South Africa's fifth province in 1946.\nAlthough this never occurred, in 1949, the South West Africa Affairs Act was amended to give representation in the Parliament of South Africa to whites in South West Africa, which gave them six seats in the House of Assembly and four in the Senate.\nThis was to the advantage of the National Party, which enjoyed strong support from the predominantly Afrikaner and ethnic German white population in the territory. Between 1950 and 1977, all of South West Africa's parliamentary seats were held by the National Party.\nAn additional consequence of this was the extension of apartheid legislation to the territory. This gave rise to several rulings at the International Court of Justice, which in 1950 ruled that South Africa was not obliged to convert South West Africa into a UN trust territory, but was still bound by the League of Nations Mandate, with the United Nations General Assembly assuming the supervisory role. The ICJ also clarified that the General Assembly was empowered to receive petitions from the inhabitants of South West Africa and to call for reports from the mandatory nation, South Africa. The General Assembly constituted the Committee on South West Africa to perform the supervisory functions.\nIn another Advisory Opinion issued in 1955, the Court further ruled that the General Assembly was not required to follow League of Nations voting procedures in determining questions concerning South West Africa. In 1956, the Court further ruled that the committee had the power to grant hearings to petitioners from the mandated territory. In 1960, Ethiopia and Liberia filed a case in the International Court of Justice against South Africa alleging that South Africa had not fulfilled its mandatory duties. This case did not succeed, with the Court ruling in 1966 that they were not the proper parties to bring the case.\nMandate terminated.\nThere was a protracted struggle between South Africa and forces fighting for independence, particularly after the formation of the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO) in 1960.\nOn 27 October 1966, the General Assembly passed resolution 2145 (XXI) which declared the Mandate terminated and that the Republic of South Africa had no further right to administer South West Africa. South African control over the territory nevertheless continued despite its illegality under international law. In 1971, acting on a request for an Advisory Opinion from the United Nations Security Council, the ICJ ruled that the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia was illegal and that South Africa was under an obligation to withdraw from Namibia immediately. It also ruled that all member states of the United Nations were under an obligation not to recognise as valid any act performed by South Africa on behalf of Namibia.\nSouth West Africa became known as Namibia by the UN when the General Assembly changed the territory's name by Resolution 2372 (XXII) of 12 June 1968. SWAPO was recognised as representative of the Namibian people, and gained UN observer status when the territory of South West Africa was already removed from the list of non-self-governing territories.\nIn 1977, South Africa transferred control of Walvis Bay back to the Cape Province, thereby making it an exclave.\nBantustans (1968\u20131980).\nThe South African authorities established 10 bantustans in South West Africa in the late 1960s and early 1970s in accordance with the Odendaal Commission, three of which were granted self-rule. These bantustans were replaced with separate ethnicity based second-tier representative authorities in 1980.\nThree-tier system of governance (1980\u20131989).\nThe South African government convened the Turnhalle Constitutional Conference between 1976 and 1978 with a view to achieving an \"internal\" solution to the status of South West Africa. The conference was attended by representatives of 11 ethnic groups: Herero, Baster, Tswana, Damara, Ovambo, Lozi, Nama, Kavango, San, the Coloureds, and the Whites. However, the largest freedom movement, SWAPO, was not invited. The conference produced a 29-page document entitled \"Petition for the establishment of an interim government\". The petition contained a request to set up an interim government for the territory, as well as a draft constitution for \"a republican, democratic state\" to be known as \"South West Africa/Namibia\" with its own flag and national anthem.\nUnder the proposals, there was to be a three-tiered system of governance. The first tier, the Central Government, would consist of a National Assembly which would appoint a Council of Ministers. The second tier would consist of ethnically based Representative Authorities and the third tier would be made up of Local Authorities.\nTier one: Central Government.\nThe upper tier of governance consisted of an elected fifty member National Assembly with legislative powers. The assembly would appoint a Council of Ministers with executive powers. Multi-racial elections for the National Assembly were held in December 1978. The Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) won 41 of the 50 seats and its leader, Dirk Mudge would become Chairman of the Council of Ministers on 1 July 1980. Johannes Skrywer, also of the DTA, became Speaker of the National Assembly.\nThe interim government collapsed on 18 January 1983 following the resignation of the Council of Ministers citing interference from the South African government and proposals to create a State Council.\nFollowing the collapse of the Interim Government, its legislative and executive powers returned to South African Administrator-General Willie van Niekerk, who was assisted by and Jan F Greebe as chief executive officer. The Representative Authorities and Local Authorities continued to function as intended during this period.\nA Multi-Party Conference was established in September 1983 to suggest arrangements for the formation of a new Central Government. Nineteen parties participated in the conference, but again SWAPO was excluded.\nThe Multi-Party Conference issued the \"Windhoek Declaration of Basic Principles\" in 1984 and a \"Bill of Fundamental Rights and Objectives\" the following year, resulting in the establishment of a Transitional Government of National Unity (TGNU) on 17 June 1985.\nUnlike the previous Interim Government, the TGNU was not directly elected but instead consisted of an appointed 62 member National Assembly and an 8-member Council of Ministers which would be led by each member on a three-month rotational basis. The DTA was awarded 22 seats in the National Assembly with five other parties being awarded 8 seats each. Johannes Skrywer would again become Speaker of the National Assembly and Dawid Bezuidenhout would be the first Chairman of the Council of Ministers.\nTier two: Representative Authorities.\nThe second-tier of governance in South West Africa consisted of ethnic-based Representative Authorities which replaced the previous system of Bantustans that were established in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Each authority would have executive and legislative competencies, being made up of elected Legislative Assemblies who would appoint Executive Committees led by chairmen. Representative Authorities had responsibility for land tenure, agriculture, education up to primary level, teachers' training, health services, and social welfare and pensions and their Legislative Assemblies had the ability to pass legislation known as Ordinances. Unlike the former Bantustans, Representative Authorities functioned on the basis of ethnicity only and were no longer based on geographically defined areas. \nRepresentative Authorities were created for Whites, Coloureds, Ovambos, Kavangos, Lozi, Damaras, Namas, Tswanas, and Herero. A similar body had been established for Rehoboth Basters by the Rehoboth Self-Determination Act, 1976. An advisory council was established for San Bushmen in 1986. No representative body was established for Himbas.\nTier three: Local authorities.\nLocal authorities formed the lowest tier of governance in South West Africa. Previously established local government bodies would continue to exist and new ones could be formed. In urban areas, the local authority would be an elected local council. In rural areas where local governance structures was based on traditional customary law, the relevant Representative Authority could support their further development.\nTransition to independence (1989\u20131990).\nThe Three-tier system of governance was suspended on 28 February 1989 following the signing of a peace agreement the previous year. As stipulated by United Nations Security Council Resolution 435, a United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) was deployed on 1 April 1989. Elections to a Constituent Assembly were held in November 1989 and the territory became independent as the Republic of Namibia on 21 March 1990. Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands remained under South African control until 1994.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43019", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43019", "title": "The Hollywood Review of 1929", "text": ""}
{"id": "43021", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43021", "title": "Fata Morgana", "text": "Fata Morgana often refers to:\nFata Morgana may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43022", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43022", "title": "Fata-Morgana", "text": ""}
{"id": "43023", "revid": "48439861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43023", "title": "Gulliver's Travels", "text": "1726 novel by Jonathan Swift\nGulliver's Travels, originally titled Travels into Several Remote Nations of the World. In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain of Several Ships, is a 1726 satirical prose novel by the Anglo-Irish writer and clergyman Jonathan Swift. The novel satirises human nature and the imaginary \"travellers' tales\" literary subgenre. \"Gulliver's Travels\" is one of the most famous classics of both English and world literature, and popularised the fictional island of Lilliput. The poet John Gay remarked of the work, \"It is universally read, from the cabinet council to the nursery.\" Although the novel is popularly classified under children's literature, Swift had originally written it as a political satire. The book has been adapted for theatrical performances, films, television, and radio over the centuries.\nThe story is about Lemuel Gulliver, an adventurous Englishman who travels to a series of strange and distant lands, each inhabited by unusual beings that reflect different aspects of human nature and society. In Lilliput, he encounters tiny people engaged in petty political disputes; in Brobdingnag, he is a small man among giants who criticise European customs; in Laputa, he meets impractical intellectuals disconnected from reality; and in the land of the Houyhnhnms, he finds rational horses living peacefully alongside savage human-like creatures called Yahoos. Through these journeys, the novel satirises the flaws of various civilisations.\nIt is uncertain when Swift began writing the novel, but it is considered to have been an attempt at satirising popular literary genres. By mid 1725, the book was finished and as the work was a political satire, it is very likely that Swift had the manuscript copied by another writer so that his writing could not be used as evidence if a legal case should arise. The novel also has numerous made-up words, referred to as Liliputian language, which critics say might have been inspired by Hebrew. On its publication, the book was an immediate success, and Swift claimed that he wrote \"Gulliver's Travels\" \"to vex the world rather than divert it\". Initial public opinions were overwhelming positive, with most readers lauding the clever satire, realistic depictions of travel to distant lands, and the political dangers that travelers often face as visitors. However, some critics accused Swift of excessive misanthropy. The English novelist William Thackeray, in particular, described the work as being \"blasphemous\", saying it was overly harsh in its depiction of human societies.\n\"Gulliver's Travels\" remains popular in modern times due to its insightful social commentary and themes. The novel's satire, particularly its elaborate critique of human nature, societal flaws and norms, and personal relations, continues to be studied in literary circles. Since his death, Swift has emerged as the most widely read and translated Irish author, and \"Gulliver's Travels\" has retained its position as the most printed book by an Irish writer in libraries and bookstores worldwide.\nPlot.\nPart I: A Voyage to Lilliput.\nThe travel begins with a short preamble in which Lemuel Gulliver gives an outline of his life and history before his voyages.\nDuring his first voyage, Gulliver is washed ashore after a shipwreck and finds himself a prisoner of a race of tiny people less than tall, much like the little people in mythology, who are inhabitants of the island country of Lilliput. After giving assurances of his good behaviour, he is given a residence in Lilliput and becomes a favourite of the Lilliput Royal Court. He is also given permission by the King of Lilliput to go around the city on the condition that he must not hurt their subjects.\nAt first, the Lilliputians are hospitable to Gulliver, but they are also wary of the threat that his size poses to them. The Lilliputians reveal themselves to be a people who put great emphasis on trivial matters. For example, which end of an egg a person cracks becomes the basis of a deep political rift within that nation. They are a people who revel in displays of authority and performances of power. Gulliver aids the Lilliputians against the rival island nation of Blefuscu by stealing its naval fleet. He refuses to reduce Blefuscu to a province of Lilliput, displeasing the King and the royal court.\nGulliver is charged with treason for, among other crimes, urinating in the capital, though he was putting out a fire. He is convicted and sentenced to be blinded. With the assistance of a kind friend, \"a considerable person at court\", he escapes to Blefuscu. Here, he spots and retrieves an abandoned boat and sails out to be rescued by a passing ship, which safely takes him back home with some Lilliputian animals he carries with him.\nPart II: A Voyage to Brobdingnag.\nGulliver soon sets out again. When the sailing ship \"Adventure\" is blown off course by storms and forced to sail for land in search of fresh water, Gulliver is abandoned by his companions and left on a peninsula on the western coast of the North American continent. The grass of this new land, Brobdingnag, is as tall as a tree. \nGulliver is found by a farmer who is about 72 ft (22 m) tall, judging from Gulliver estimating the man's step being . The giant farmer brings Gulliver home, and his daughter Glumdalclitch cares for Gulliver. The farmer treats him as a curiosity and exhibits him for money.\nAfter a while, the constant display makes Gulliver sick, and the farmer sells him to the queen of the realm. Glumdalclitch (who accompanied her father while exhibiting Gulliver) is taken into the queen's service to take care of the tiny man. Since Gulliver is too small to use their huge chairs, beds, knives and forks, the queen commissions a small house to be built so he can be carried around in it; this is referred to as Gulliver's \"travelling box\".\nBetween small adventures (such as fighting giant wasps and being carried to the roof by a monkey), Gulliver discusses the state of Europe with the King of Brobdingnag. The king is not happy with Gulliver's accounts of Europe, especially upon learning of the use of guns and cannon. On a trip to the seaside, Gulliver's traveling box is seized by a giant eagle which drops Gulliver and his box into the sea. He is rescued by sailors who return him to England.\nPart III: A Voyage to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Luggnagg, Glubbdubdrib and Japan.\nSetting out again, Gulliver's ship is attacked by pirates, and he is marooned close to a desolate rocky island near India. He is rescued by the flying island of Laputa, a kingdom devoted to the arts of music, mathematics, and astronomy but unable to use them for practical ends. Rather than using armies, Laputa has a custom of throwing rocks down at rebellious cities on the ground.\nGulliver tours Balnibarbi, the kingdom ruled from Laputa, as the guest of a low-ranking courtier and sees the ruin brought about by the blind pursuit of science without practical results, in a satire on bureaucracy and on the Royal Society and its experiments. At the Grand Academy of Lagado in Balnibarbi, great resources and manpower are employed on researching preposterous schemes such as extracting sunbeams from cucumbers, softening marble for use in pillows, learning how to mix paint by smell, and uncovering political conspiracies by examining the excrement of suspicious persons. Gulliver refers in passing to his visit to Tribnia (that is, Britain), called by some Langden (that is, England), where the main occupations are plotting and informing. Gulliver is then taken to Maldonada, the main port of Balnibarbi, to await a trader who can take him on to Japan.\nWhile waiting for a passage, Gulliver takes a short side-trip to the island of Glubbdubdrib which is southwest of Balnibarbi. On Glubbdubdrib, he visits a magician's dwelling and discusses history with the ghosts of historical figures, the most obvious restatement of the \"ancients versus moderns\" theme in the book. The ghosts include Julius Caesar, Brutus, Homer, Aristotle, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and Pierre Gassendi.\nOn the island of Luggnagg, he encounters the \"struldbrugs\", people who are immortal. They do not have the gift of eternal youth, but suffer the infirmities of old age and are considered legally dead at the age of eighty.\nAfter reaching Japan, Gulliver asks the Emperor \"to excuse my performing the ceremony imposed upon my countrymen of trampling upon the crucifix\", which the Emperor does. Gulliver returns home, determined to stay there for the rest of his days.\nPart IV: A Voyage to the Land of the Houyhnhnms.\nDespite his earlier intention of remaining at home, Gulliver returns to sea as the captain of a merchantman, as he is bored with his employment as a surgeon. On this voyage, he is forced to find new additions to his crew who, he believes, have turned against him. His crew then commits mutiny. After keeping him contained for some time, they resolve to leave him on the first piece of land they come across, and continue as pirates. He is abandoned in a landing boat and comes upon a race of deformed savage humanoid creatures to which he conceives a violent antipathy. Shortly afterwards, he meets the Houyhnhnms, a race of talking horses. They are the rulers while the deformed creatures that resemble human beings are called Yahoos.\nSome scholars have identified the relationship between the Houyhnhnms and Yahoos as a master/slave dynamic.\nGulliver becomes a member of a horse's household and comes to both admire and emulate the Houyhnhnms and their way of life, rejecting his fellow humans as merely Yahoos endowed with some semblance of reason which they only use to exacerbate and add to the vices Nature gave them. However, an Assembly of the Houyhnhnms rules that Gulliver, a Yahoo with some semblance of reason, is a danger to their civilization and commands him to swim back to the land that he came from. Gulliver's \"Master\", the Houyhnhnm who took him into his household, buys him time to create a canoe to make his departure easier. After another disastrous voyage, he is rescued against his will by a Portuguese ship. He is disgusted to see that Captain Pedro de Mendez, whom he considers a Yahoo, is a wise, courteous, and generous person.\nHe returns to his home in England, but is unable to reconcile himself to living among \"Yahoos\" and becomes a recluse, remaining in his house, avoiding his family and his wife, and spending several hours a day speaking with the horses in his stables.\nComposition and history.\nIt is uncertain when Swift started writing \"Gulliver's Travels\". (Much of the writing was done at Loughry Manor in Cookstown, County Tyrone.) Some sources suggest as early as 1713 when Swift, Gay, Pope, Arbuthnot and others formed the Scriblerus Club with the aim of satirising popular literary genres. According to these accounts, Swift was charged with writing the memoirs of the club's imaginary author, Martinus Scriblerus, and also with satirising the \"travellers' tales\" literary subgenre. It is known from Swift's correspondence that the composition proper began in 1720 with the mirror-themed Parts I and II written first, Part IV next in 1723 and Part III written in 1724; amendments were made even while Swift was writing \"Drapier's Letters\". By August 1725 the book was complete; and as \"Gulliver's Travels\" was a transparently anti-Whig satire, it is likely that Swift had the manuscript copied so that his writing could not be used as evidence if a prosecution should arise, as had happened in the case of some of his Irish pamphlets (the \"Drapier's Letters\"). In March 1726 Swift travelled to London to have his work published; the manuscript was secretly delivered to the publisher Benjamin Motte, who used five printing houses to speed production and avoid piracy. Motte, recognising a best-seller but fearing prosecution, cut or altered the worst offending passages (such as the descriptions of the court contests in Lilliput and the rebellion of Lindalino), added some material in defence of Queen Anne to Part II, and published it. The first edition was released in two volumes on 28 October 1726, priced at 8\"s\". 6\"d\".\nMotte published \"Gulliver's Travels\" anonymously, and as was often the way with fashionable works, several follow-ups (\"Memoirs of the Court of Lilliput\"), parodies (\"Two Lilliputian Odes, The first on the Famous Engine With Which Captain Gulliver extinguish'd the Palace Fire...\") and \"keys\" (\"Gulliver Decipher'd\" and \"Lemuel Gulliver's Travels into Several Remote Regions of the World Compendiously Methodiz'd\", the second by Edmund Curll who had similarly written a \"key\" to Swift's \"Tale of a Tub\" in 1705) were swiftly produced. These were mostly printed anonymously (or occasionally pseudonymously) and were quickly forgotten. Swift had nothing to do with them and disavowed them in Faulkner's edition of 1735. Swift's friend Alexander Pope wrote a set of five \"Verses on Gulliver's Travels\", which Swift liked so much that he added them to the second edition of the book, though they are rarely included in modern editions.\nFaulkner's 1735 edition.\nIn 1735 an Irish publisher, George Faulkner, printed a set of Swift's works, Volume III of which was \"Gulliver's Travels\". As revealed in Faulkner's \"Advertisement to the Reader\", Faulkner had access to an annotated copy of Motte's work by \"a friend of the author\" (generally believed to be Swift's friend Charles Ford) which reproduced most of the manuscript without Motte's amendments, the original manuscript having been destroyed. It is also believed that Swift at least reviewed proofs of Faulkner's edition before printing, but this cannot be proved. Generally, this is regarded as the \"editio princeps\" of \"Gulliver's Travels\" with one small exception. This edition had an added piece by Swift, \"A letter from Capt. Gulliver to his Cousin Sympson\", which complained of Motte's alterations to the original text, saying he had so much altered it that \"I do hardly know mine own work\" and repudiating all of Motte's changes as well as all the keys, libels, parodies, second parts and continuations that had appeared in the intervening years. This letter now forms part of many standard texts.\nLindalino.\nThe five-paragraph episode in Part III, telling of the rebellion of the surface city of Lindalino against the flying island of Laputa, was an allegory of the affair of \"Drapier's Letters\" of which Swift was proud. Lindalino represented Dublin and the impositions of Laputa represented the British imposition of William Wood's poor-quality copper currency. Faulkner had omitted this passage, either because of political sensitivities raised by an Irish publisher printing an anti-British satire, or possibly because the text he worked from did not include the passage. In 1899 the passage was included in a new edition of the \"Collected Works\". Modern editions derive from the Faulkner edition with the inclusion of this 1899 addendum.\nThemes.\n\"Gulliver's Travels\" has been described as a Menippean satire, a children's story, proto-science fiction and a forerunner of the modern novel. Published seven years after Daniel Defoe's successful \"Robinson Crusoe\", \"Gulliver's Travels\" may be read as a systematic rebuttal of Defoe's optimistic account of human capability. In \"The Unthinkable Swift: The Spontaneous Philosophy of a Church of England Man\", Warren Montag argues that Swift was concerned to refute the notion that the individual precedes society as Defoe's work seems to suggest. Swift regarded such thought as a dangerous endorsement of Thomas Hobbes' radical political philosophy and for this reason Gulliver repeatedly encounters established societies rather than desolate islands. The captain who invites Gulliver to serve as a surgeon aboard his ship on the disastrous third voyage is named Robinson.\nAllan Bloom asserts that Swift's lampooning of the experiments of Laputa is the first questioning by a modern liberal democrat of the effects and cost on a society which embraces and celebrates policies pursuing scientific progress. Swift wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first man I saw was of a meagre aspect, with sooty hands and face, his hair and beard long, ragged, and singed in several places. His clothes, shirt, and skin, were all of the same colour. He has been eight years upon a project for extracting sunbeams out of cucumbers, which were to be put in phials hermetically sealed, and let out to warm the air in raw inclement summers. He told me, he did not doubt, that, in eight years more, he should be able to supply the governor's gardens with sunshine, at a reasonable rate: but he complained that his stock was low, and entreated me \"to give him something as an encouragement to ingenuity, especially since this had been a very dear season for cucumbers\". I made him a small present, for my lord had furnished me with money on purpose, because he knew their practice of begging from all who go to see them.\nA possible reason for the book's classic status is that it can be seen as many things to many people. Broadly, the book has three themes:\nIn storytelling and construction the parts follow a pattern:\nMisogyny.\nAlthough Swift is often accused of misogyny in this work, many scholars believe Gulliver's blatant misogyny to be intentional, and that Swift uses satire to mock misogyny throughout the book. One of the most cited examples of this comes from Gulliver's description of a Brobdingnagian woman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I must confess no Object ever disgusted me so much as the Sight of her monstrous Breast, which I cannot tell what to compare with, so as to give the curious Reader an Idea of its Bulk, Shape, and Colour... This made me reflect upon the fair Skins of our \"English\" Ladies, who appear so beautiful to us, only because they are of our own Size, and their Defects not to be seen but through a magnifying glass...\nThis critique of aspects of the female body is something that Swift often brings up in other works of his, particularly in poems such as \"The Lady's Dressing Room\" and \"A Beautiful Young Nymph Going To Bed\".\nA criticism of Swift's use of misogyny by Felicity A. Nussbaum proposes the idea that \"Gulliver himself is a gendered object of satire, and his antifeminist sentiments may be among those mocked\". Gulliver's own masculinity is often mocked, seen in how he is made to be a coward among the Brobdingnag people, repressed by the people of Lilliput, and viewed as an inferior Yahoo among the Houyhnhnms. Nussbaum goes on to say that in the adventures, particularly in the first story, the satire is not singularly focused on satirizing women, but to satirize Gulliver as a politically naive and inept giant whose masculine authority comically seems to be in jeopardy.\nAnother criticism of Swift's use of misogyny delves into Gulliver's repeated use of the word 'nauseous', and the way that Gulliver is fighting his emasculation by commenting on how he thinks the women of Brobdingnag are disgusting,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Swift has Gulliver frequently invoke the sensory (as opposed to reflective) word \"nauseous\" to describe this and other magnified images in Brobdingnag not only to reveal the neurotic depths of Gulliver's misogyny, but also to show how male nausea can be used as a pathetic countermeasure against the perceived threat of female consumption. Swift has Gulliver associate these magnified acts of female consumption with the act of \"throwing-up\"\u2014the opposite of and antidote to the act of gastronomic consumption.\nThis commentary of Deborah Needleman Armintor relies on the giant women doing with Gulliver as they please, in much the same way as one might play with a toy, and get it to do everything one can think of. Armintor's comparison focuses on the pocket microscopes that were popular in Swift's time. She talks about how this instrument of science evolved into something toy-like and accessible, so it shifted into something that women favored, and thus men lost interest. This is similar to the progression of Gulliver's time in Brobdingnag, from man of science to women's plaything.\nComic misanthropy.\nMisanthropy is a theme that scholars have identified in \"Gulliver's Travels\". Arthur Case, R.S. Crane, and Edward Stone discuss Gulliver's development of misanthropy and come to the consensus that this theme ought to be viewed as comical rather than cynical.\nIn terms of Gulliver's development of misanthropy, these three scholars point to the fourth voyage. According to Case, Gulliver is at first averse to identifying with the Yahoos, but, after he deems the Houyhnhnms superior, he comes to believe that humans (including his fellow Europeans) are Yahoos due to their shortcomings. Perceiving the Houyhnhnms as perfect, Gulliver thus begins to perceive himself and the rest of humanity as imperfect. According to Crane, when Gulliver develops his misanthropic mindset, he becomes ashamed of humans and views them more in line with animals. This new perception of Gulliver's, Stone claims, comes about because the Houyhnhnms' judgement pushes Gulliver to identify with the Yahoos. Along similar lines, Crane holds that Gulliver's misanthropy is developed in part when he talks to the Houyhnhnms about mankind because the discussions lead him to reflect on his previously held notion of humanity. Specifically, Gulliver's master, who is a Houyhnhnm, provides questions and commentary that contribute to Gulliver's reflectiveness and subsequent development of misanthropy. However, Case points out that Gulliver's dwindling opinion of humans may be blown out of proportion due to the fact that he is no longer able to see the good qualities that humans are capable of possessing. Gulliver's new view of humanity, then, creates his repulsive attitude towards his fellow humans after leaving Houyhnhnmland. But in Stone's view, Gulliver's actions and attitude upon his return can be interpreted as misanthropy that is exaggerated for comic effect rather than for a cynical effect. Stone further suggests that Gulliver goes mentally mad and believes that this is what leads Gulliver to exaggerate the shortcomings of humankind.\nAnother aspect that Crane attributes to Gulliver's development of misanthropy is that when in Houyhnhnmland, it is the animal-like beings (the Houyhnhnms) who exhibit reason and the human-like beings (the Yahoos) who seem devoid of reason; Crane argues that it is this switch from Gulliver's perceived norm that leads the way for him to question his view of humanity. As a result, Gulliver begins to identify humans as a type of Yahoo. To this point, Crane brings up the fact that a traditional definition of man\u2014\"Homo est animal rationale\" (Humans are rational animals)\u2014was prominent in academia around Swift's time. Furthermore, Crane argues that Swift had to study this type of logic (see Porphyrian Tree) in college, so it is highly likely that he intentionally inverted this logic by placing the typically given example of irrational beings\u2014horses\u2014in the place of humans and vice versa.\nStone points out that \"Gulliver's Travels\" takes a cue from the genre of the travel book, which was popular during Swift's time period. From reading travel books, Swift's contemporaries were accustomed to beast-like figures of foreign places; thus, Stone holds that the creation of the Yahoos was not out of the ordinary for the time period. From this playing off of familiar genre expectations, Stone deduces that the parallels that Swift draws between the Yahoos and humans is meant to be humorous rather than cynical. Even though Gulliver sees Yahoos and humans as if they are one and the same, Stone argues that Swift did not intend for readers to take on Gulliver's view; Stone states that the Yahoos' behaviors and characteristics that set them apart from humans further supports the notion that Gulliver's identification with Yahoos is not meant to be taken to heart. Thus, Stone sees Gulliver's perceived superiority of the Houyhnhnms and subsequent misanthropy as features that Swift used to employ the satirical and humorous elements characteristic of the Beast Fables of travel books that were popular with his contemporaries; as Swift did, these Beast Fables placed animals above humans in terms of morals and reason, but they were not meant to be taken literally.\nCharacter analysis.\nPedro de Mendez is the name of the Portuguese captain who rescues Gulliver in Book IV. When Gulliver is forced to leave the Island of the Houyhnhnms, his plan is \"to discover some small Island uninhabited\" where he can live in solitude. Instead, he is picked up by Don Pedro's crew. Despite Gulliver's appearance\u2014he is dressed in skins and speaks like a horse\u2014Don Pedro treats him compassionately and returns him to Lisbon.\nThough Don Pedro appears only briefly, he has become an important figure in the debate between so-called soft school and hard school readers of \"Gulliver's Travels\". Some critics contend that Gulliver is a target of Swift's satire and that Don Pedro represents an ideal of human kindness and generosity. Gulliver believes humans are similar to Yahoos in the sense that they make \"no other use of reason, than to improve and multiply ... vices\". Captain Pedro provides a contrast to Gulliver's reasoning, proving humans are able to reason, be kind, and most of all: civilized. Gulliver sees the bleak fallenness at the center of human nature, and Don Pedro is merely a minor character who, in Gulliver's words, is \"an Animal which had some little Portion of Reason\".\nPolitical allusions.\nPart I is probably responsible for the greatest number of political allusions. One of the most commonly noted parallels is that the wars between Lilliput and Blefuscu resemble those between England and France. The enmity between the low heels and the high heels is often interpreted as a parody of the Whigs and Tories, and the character referred to as Flimnap is often interpreted as an allusion to Sir Robert Walpole, a British statesman and Whig politician with whom Swift had a personally turbulent relationship.\nIn Part III, the grand Academy of Lagado in Balnibarbi resembles and satirizes the Royal Society, which Swift was openly critical of. Furthermore, \"A. E. Case, acting on a tipoff offered by the word 'projectors,' found [the Academy] to be the hiding place of many of those speculators implicated in the South Sea Bubble.\" According to Treadwell, however, these implications extend beyond the speculators of the South Sea Bubble to include the many projectors of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century England, including Swift himself. Not only is Swift satirizing the role of the projector in contemporary English politics, which he dabbled in during his younger years, but the role of the satirist, whose goals align with that of a projector: \"The less obvious corollary of that word [projector] is that it must include the poor deluded satirist himself, since satire is, in its very essence, the wildest of all projects - a scheme to reform the world.\"\nAnn Kelly describes Part IV of \"The Travels\" and the Yahoo-Houyhnhnm relationship as an allusion to that of the Irish and the British: \"The term that Swift uses to describe the oppression in both Ireland and Houyhnhnmland is 'slavery'; this is not an accidental word choice, for Swift was well aware of the complicated moral and philosophical questions raised by the emotional designation 'slavery.' The misery of the Irish in the early eighteenth century shocked Swift and all others who witnessed it; the hopeless passivity of the people in this desolate land made it seem as if both the minds and bodies of the Irish were enslaved.\" Kelly goes on to write: \"Throughout the Irish tracts and poems, Swift continually vacillates as to whether the Irish are servile because of some defect within their character or whether their sordid condition is the result of a calculated policy from without to reduce them to brutishness. Although no one has done so, similar questions could be asked about the Yahoos, who are slaves to the Houyhnhnms.\" However, Kelly does not suggest a wholesale equivalence between Irish and Yahoos, which would be reductive and omit the various other layers of satire at work in this section.\nLanguage.\nPart I includes examples of the Lilliputian language, including a paragraph for which Gulliver provides a translation. In his annotated edition of the book published in 1978, Isaac Asimov claims that \"making sense out of the words and phrases introduced by Swift...is a waste of time\", and these words were invented nonsense. However, Irving Rothman points out that the language may have been derived from Hebrew, which Swift had studied at Trinity College Dublin.\nReception.\nThe book was very popular upon release and was commonly discussed within social circles. Public reception widely varied, with the book receiving an initially enthusiastic reaction with readers praising its satire, and some reporting that the satire's cleverness sounded like a realistic account of a man's travels. James Beattie commended Swift's work for its \"truth\" regarding the narration and claims that \"the statesman, the philosopher, and the critick, will admire his keenness of satire, energy of description, and vivacity of language\", noting that even children can enjoy the novel. As popularity increased, critics came to appreciate the deeper aspects of \"Gulliver's Travels.\" It became known for its insightful take on morality, expanding its reputation beyond just humorous satire. It also became the most printed book by an Irish writer in libraries and bookstores worldwide.\nDespite its initial positive reception, the book faced backlash. Viscount Bolingbroke, a friend of Swift and one of the first critics of the book, criticised the author for his overt use of misanthropy. Other negative responses to the book also looked towards its portrayal of humanity, which was considered inaccurate. Swift's peers rejected the book on claims that its themes of misanthropy were harmful and offensive. They criticized its satire for exceeding what was deemed acceptable and appropriate, including the Houyhnhnms and Yahoos's similarities to humans. There was also controversy surrounding the political allegories. Readers enjoyed the political references, finding them humorous. However, members of the Whig party were offended, believing that Swift mocked their politics.\nBritish novelist and journalist William Makepeace Thackeray described Swift's work as \"blasphemous\", saying its critical view of mankind was ludicrous and overly harsh. He concluded that he could not understand the origins of Swift's critiques on humanity.\nCultural influences.\nThe term \"Lilliputian\" has entered many languages as an adjective meaning \"small and delicate\". There is a brand of small cigar called Lilliput, and a series of collectable model houses known as \"Lilliput Lane\". The smallest light bulb fitting (5\u00a0mm diameter) in the Edison screw series is called the \"Lilliput Edison screw\". In Dutch and Czech, the words \"Lilliputter\" and \"liliput\u00e1n\", respectively, are used for adults shorter than 1.30 meters, although in Dutch this term is controversial. Conversely, \"Brobdingnagian\" appears in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as a synonym for \"very large\" or \"gigantic\".\nIn like vein, the term \"yahoo\" is often encountered as a synonym for \"ruffian\" or \"thug\". In the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" it is defined as \"a rude, noisy, or violent person\" and its origins attributed to Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\".\nIn the discipline of computer architecture, the terms \"big-endian\" and \"little-endian\" are used to describe two possible ways of laying out bytes of data in computer memory. The terms derive from one of the satirical conflicts in the book, in which two religious sects of Lilliputians are divided between those who crack open their soft-boiled eggs from the little end, the \"Little-endians\", and those who use the big end, the \"Big-endians\". The nomenclature was chosen as an irony, since the choice of which byte-order method to use is technically trivial (both are equally good), but actually still important: systems which do it one way are thus incompatible with those that do it the other way, and so it \"shouldn't\" be left to each individual designer's choice, resulting in a \"holy war\" over a triviality.\nIn other works.\nMany sequels followed the initial publishing of the \"Travels\". The earliest of these was the anonymously authored \"Memoirs of the Court of Lilliput\", published 1727, which expands the account of Gulliver's stays in Lilliput and Blefuscu by adding several gossipy anecdotes about scandalous episodes at the Lilliputian court. Abb\u00e9 Pierre Desfontaines, the first French translator of Swift's story, wrote a sequel, \"Le Nouveau Gulliver ou Voyages de Jean Gulliver, fils du capitaine Lemuel Gulliver\" (The New Gulliver, or the travels of John Gulliver, son of Captain Lemuel Gulliver), published in 1730. Gulliver's son has various fantastic, satirical adventures.\nTraces of Swift's work can be found in the work of some modern science fiction writers. Isaac Asimov's \"Shah Guido G\" describes a flying island which dominates the lands underneath, and a large portion of Robert Heinlein's \"Starman Jones\" takes place on a planet where intelligent \"horses\" dominate wild Yahoo-like humanoids.\nThe Hungarian writer Frigyes Karinthy wrote two satirical novels with Gulliver as the protagonist. The first, \"Voyage to Faremido\" (1916), is about artificial intelligence, and the second, \"Capillaria\" (1921), describes an underwater world inhabited by women and the result of the first sexual encounter between men and women.\nIn the short story \"El informe de Brodie\" (\"Brodie's Report\") by Jorge Luis Borges, published in 1970 and inspired, according to its author, by the last journey of Swift's character, the protagonist is a Scottish shepherd who narrates his experience in a place inhabited by primitive men whom he calls Yahoos.\nIn 2014, Argentine writer Edgar Brau published a novel titled \"El oficio de Gulliver\" (\"Gulliver's Craft\"), which describes a fifth voyage (in 1722) of Jonathan Swift's character, in which he discovers an island located off the coast of Patagonia. Every so many years, the island shrinks until it reaches the size of a tortoise, without affecting daily life; after a while, it expands again. There, Gulliver lives a series of adventures accompanied by Tito, an anteater he has rescued and taught to speak. The novel is a satire on present-day issues.\nIn music.\nGeorg Philipp Telemann wrote a Gulliver Suite for 2 violins without bass between 1728 and 1729. It includes a \"Lilliputian\" chaconne, a \"Brobigdinian\" gigue as well as a Loure of the \"well-mannered houyhnhnms\" combined with a Fury of the \"naughty yahoos\".\nBibliography.\nEditions.\nThe standard edition of Jonathan Swift's prose works as of 2005[ [update]] is the \"Prose Writings\" in 16 volumes, edited by Herbert Davis et al.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43024", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43024", "title": "Levee", "text": "Ridge or wall to hold back water\nA levee ( or ), dike (American English), dyke (Commonwealth English), embankment, floodbank, or stop bank is an elevated ridge, natural or artificial, alongside the banks of a river, often intended to protect against flooding of the area adjoining the river. It is usually earthen and often runs parallel to the course of a river in its floodplain or along low-lying coastlines.\nNaturally occurring levees form on river floodplains following flooding. Sediment and alluvium are deposited on the banks and settle, forming a ridge that increases the river channel's capacity. Alternatively, levees can be artificially constructed from fill, designed to regulate water levels. In some circumstances, artificial levees can be environmentally damaging.\nAncient civilizations in the Indus Valley, ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia and China all built levees. Today, levees can be found around the world, and failures of levees due to erosion or other causes can be major disasters, such as the catastrophic 2005 levee failures in Greater New Orleans that occurred as a result of Hurricane Katrina.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"levee\", favoured by speakers of American English, comes from the French word (from the feminine past participle of the French verb , 'to raise'). It is attested in New Orleans a few years after the city's founding in 1718 and was later adopted by English speakers. The Latin (feminine past participle of ) is first used in the sense of levee in a document of 954 referring to a millpond near Bagnolo di Po created by a levee which had a road running over it. The verb was used in the sense of diverting water for a mill as early as 778, when Duke Hildeprand of Spoleto granted a canal to Bishop Guicpert of Rieti for the construction of a mill. The name derives from the trait of the levee's ridges being raised higher than both the channel and the surrounding floodplains.\nThe modern word \"dike\" or \"dyke\" most likely derives from the Dutch word , with the construction of dikes well attested as early as the 11th century. The Westfriese Omringdijk, completed by 1250, was formed by connecting existing older dikes. The Roman chronicler Tacitus mentions that the rebellious Batavi pierced dikes to flood their land and to protect their retreat (70\u00a0CE). The word originally indicated both the trench and the bank. It closely parallels the English verb \"to dig\".\nIn Anglo-Saxon, the word already existed and was pronounced as \"dick\" in northern England and as \"ditch\" in the south. Similar to Dutch, the English origins of the word lie in digging a trench and forming the upcast soil into a bank alongside it. This practice has meant that the name may be given to either the excavation or to the bank. Thus Offa's Dyke is a combined structure and Car Dyke is a trench \u2013 though it once had raised banks as well. In the English Midlands and East Anglia, and in the United States, a dike is what a ditch is in the south of England, a property-boundary marker or drainage channel. Where it carries a stream, it may be called a running dike as in \"Rippingale Running Dike\", which leads water from the catchwater drain, Car Dyke, to the South Forty Foot Drain in Lincolnshire (TF1427). The Weir Dike is a soak dike in Bourne North Fen, near Twenty and alongside the River Glen, Lincolnshire. In the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads, a dyke may be a drainage ditch or a narrow artificial channel off a river or broad for access or mooring, some longer dykes being named, e.g., Candle Dyke.\nIn parts of Britain, particularly Scotland and Northern England, a dyke may be a field wall, generally made with dry stone.\nUses.\nThe main purpose of artificial levees is to prevent flooding of the adjoining countryside and to slow natural course changes in a waterway to provide reliable shipping lanes for maritime commerce over time; they also confine the flow of the river, resulting in higher and faster water flow. Levees can be mainly found along the sea, where dunes are not strong enough, along rivers for protection against high floods, along lakes or along polders. Furthermore, levees have been built for the purpose of impoldering, or as a boundary for an inundation area. The latter can be a controlled inundation by the military or a measure to prevent inundation of a larger area surrounded by levees. Levees have also been built as field boundaries and as military defences. More on this type of levee can be found in the article on dry-stone walls.\nLevees can be permanent earthworks or emergency constructions (often of sandbags) built hastily in a flood emergency.\nSome of the earliest levees were constructed by the Indus Valley civilization (in Pakistan and North India from c.\u20092600 BCE) on which the agrarian life of the Harappan peoples depended. Levees were also constructed over 3,000 years ago in ancient Egypt, where a system of levees was built along the left bank of the River Nile for more than , stretching from modern Aswan to the Nile Delta on the shores of the Mediterranean. The Mesopotamian civilizations and ancient China also built large levee systems. Because a levee is only as strong as its weakest point, the height and standards of construction have to be consistent along its length. Some authorities have argued that this requires a strong governing authority to guide the work and may have been a catalyst for the development of systems of governance in early civilizations. However, others point to evidence of large-scale water-control earthen works such as canals and/or levees dating from before King Scorpion in Predynastic Egypt, during which governance was far less centralized.\nAnother example of a historical levee that protected the growing city-state of M\u0113xihco-Ten\u014dchtitlan and the neighboring city of Tlatel\u014dlco, was constructed during the early 1400s, under the supervision of the tlahtoani of the altepetl Texcoco, Nezahualcoyotl. Its function was to separate the brackish waters of Lake Texcoco (ideal for the agricultural technique \"Chin\u0101mitls\") from the fresh potable water supplied to the settlements. However, after the Europeans destroyed Tenochtitlan, the levee was also destroyed and flooding became a major problem, which resulted in the majority of The Lake being drained in the 17th century.\nLevees are usually built by piling earth on a cleared, level surface. Broad at the base, they taper to a level top, where temporary embankments or sandbags can be placed. Because flood discharge intensity increases in levees on both river banks, and because silt deposits raise the level of riverbeds, planning and auxiliary measures are vital. Sections are often set back from the river to form a wider channel, and flood valley basins are divided by multiple levees to prevent a single breach from flooding a large area. A levee made from stones laid in horizontal rows with a bed of thin turf between each of them is known as a \"spetchel\".\nArtificial levees require substantial engineering. Their surface must be protected from erosion, so they are planted with vegetation such as Bermuda grass in order to bind the earth together. On the land side of high levees, a low terrace of earth known as a \"banquette\" is usually added as another anti-erosion measure. On the river side, erosion from strong waves or currents presents an even greater threat to the integrity of the levee. The effects of erosion are countered by planting suitable vegetation or installing stones, boulders, weighted matting, or concrete revetments. Separate ditches or drainage tiles are constructed to ensure that the foundation does not become waterlogged.\nRiver flood prevention.\nProminent levee systems have been built along the Mississippi River and Sacramento River in the United States, and the Po, Rhine, Meuse River, Rh\u00f4ne, Loire, Vistula, the delta formed by the Rhine, Maas/Meuse and Scheldt in the Netherlands and the Danube in Europe. During the Chinese Warring States period, the Dujiangyan irrigation system was built by the Qin as a water conservation and flood control project. The system's infrastructure is located on the Min River, which is the longest tributary of the Yangtze River, in Sichuan, China.\nThe Mississippi levee system represents one of the largest such systems found anywhere in the world. It comprises over of levees extending some along the Mississippi, stretching from Cape Girardeau, Missouri, to the Mississippi delta. They were begun by French settlers in Louisiana in the 18th century to protect the city of New Orleans. The first Louisiana levees were about high and covered a distance of about along the riverside. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, in conjunction with the Mississippi River Commission, extended the levee system beginning in 1882 to cover the riverbanks from Cairo, Illinois to the mouth of the Mississippi delta in Louisiana. By the mid-1980s, they had reached their present extent and averaged in height; some Mississippi levees are as high as . The Mississippi levees also include some of the longest continuous individual levees in the world. One such levee extends southwards from Pine Bluff, Arkansas, for a distance of some . The scope and scale of the Mississippi levees has often been compared to the Great Wall of China.\nThe United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) recommends and supports cellular confinement technology (geocells) as a best management practice. Particular attention is given to the matter of surface erosion, overtopping prevention and protection of levee crest and downstream slope. Reinforcement with geocells provides tensile force to the soil to better resist instability.\nArtificial levees can lead to an elevation of the natural riverbed over time; whether this happens or not and how fast, depends on different factors, one of them being the amount and type of the bed load of a river. Alluvial rivers with intense accumulations of sediment tend to this behavior. Examples of rivers where artificial levees led to an elevation of the riverbed, even up to a point where the riverbed is higher than the adjacent ground surface behind the levees, are found for the Yellow River in China and the Mississippi in the United States.\nCoastal flood prevention.\nLevees are very common on the marshlands bordering the Bay of Fundy in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, Canada. The Acadians who settled the area can be credited with the original construction of many of the levees in the area, created for the purpose of farming the fertile tidal marshlands. These levees are referred to as dykes. They are constructed with hinged sluice gates that open on the falling tide to drain freshwater from the agricultural marshlands and close on the rising tide to prevent seawater from entering behind the dyke. These sluice gates are called \"aboiteaux\". In the Lower Mainland around the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, there are levees (known locally as dikes, and also referred to as \"the sea wall\") to protect low-lying land in the Fraser River delta, particularly the city of Richmond on Lulu Island. There are also dikes to protect other locations which have flooded in the past, such as the Pitt Polder, land adjacent to the Pitt River, and other tributary rivers.\nCoastal flood prevention levees are also common along the inland coastline behind the Wadden Sea, an area devastated by many historic floods. Thus the peoples and governments have erected increasingly large and complex flood protection levee systems to stop the sea even during storm floods. The biggest of these are the huge levees in the Netherlands, which have gone beyond just defending against floods, as they have aggressively taken back land that is below mean sea level. \nSpur dykes or groynes.\nThese typically man-made hydraulic structures are situated to protect against erosion. They are typically placed in alluvial rivers perpendicular, or at an angle, to the bank of the channel or the revetment, and are used widely along coastlines. There are two common types of spur dyke, permeable and impermeable, depending on the materials used to construct them.\nNatural examples.\nNatural levees commonly form around lowland rivers and creeks without human intervention. They are elongated ridges of mud and/or silt that form on the river floodplains immediately adjacent to the cut banks. Like artificial levees, they act to reduce the likelihood of floodplain inundation.\nDeposition of levees is a natural consequence of the flooding of meandering rivers which carry high proportions of suspended sediment in the form of fine sands, silts, and muds. Because the carrying capacity of a river depends in part on its depth, the sediment in the water which is over the flooded banks of the channel is no longer capable of keeping the same number of fine sediments in suspension as the main thalweg. The extra fine sediments thus settle out quickly on the parts of the floodplain nearest to the channel. Over a significant number of floods, this will eventually result in the building up of ridges in these positions and reducing the likelihood of further floods and episodes of levee building.\nIf aggradation continues to occur in the main channel, this will make levee overtopping more likely again, and the levees can continue to build up. In some cases, this can result in the channel bed eventually rising above the surrounding floodplains, penned in only by the levees around it; an example is the Yellow River in China near the sea, where oceangoing ships appear to sail high above the plain on the elevated river.\nLevees are common in any river with a high suspended sediment fraction and thus are intimately associated with meandering channels, which also are more likely to occur where a river carries large fractions of suspended sediment. For similar reasons, they are also common in tidal creeks, where tides bring in large amounts of coastal silts and muds. High will cause flooding, and result in the building up of levees.\nFailures and breaches.\nBoth natural and man-made levees can fail in a number of ways. Factors that cause levee failure include overtopping, erosion, structural failures, and levee saturation. The most frequent (and dangerous) is a levee breach. Here, a part of the levee actually breaks or is eroded away, leaving a large opening for water to flood land otherwise protected by the levee. A breach can be a sudden or gradual failure, caused either by surface erosion or by subsurface weakness in the levee. A breach can leave a fan-shaped deposit of sediment radiating away from the breach, described as a crevasse splay. In natural levees, once a breach has occurred, the gap in the levee will remain until it is again filled in by levee building processes. This increases the chances of future breaches occurring in the same location. Breaches can be the location of meander cutoffs if the river flow direction is permanently diverted through the gap.\nSometimes levees are said to fail when water overtops the crest of the levee. This will cause flooding on the floodplains, but because it does not damage the levee, it has fewer consequences for future flooding.\nAmong various failure mechanisms that cause levee breaches, soil erosion is found to be one of the most important factors. Predicting soil erosion and scour generation when overtopping happens is important in order to design stable levee and floodwalls. There have been numerous studies to investigate the erodibility of soils. Briaud et al. (2008) used Erosion Function Apparatus (EFA) test to measure the erodibility of the soils and afterwards by using Chen 3D software, numerical simulations were performed on the levee to find out the velocity vectors in the overtopping water and the generated scour when the overtopping water impinges the levee. By analyzing the results from EFA test, an erosion chart to categorize erodibility of the soils was developed. Hughes and Nadal in 2009 studied the effect of combination of wave overtopping and storm surge overflow on the erosion and scour generation in levees. The study included hydraulic parameters and flow characteristics such as flow thickness, wave intervals, surge level above levee crown in analyzing scour development. According to the laboratory tests, empirical correlations related to average overtopping discharge were derived to analyze the resistance of levee against erosion. These equations could only fit to the situation, similar to the experimental tests, while they can give a reasonable estimation if applied to other conditions.\nOsouli et al. (2014) and Karimpour et al. (2015) conducted lab scale physical modeling of levees to evaluate score characterization of different levees due to floodwall overtopping.\nAnother approach applied to prevent levee failures is electrical resistivity tomography (ERT). This non-destructive geophysical method can detect in advance critical saturation areas in embankments. ERT can thus be used in monitoring of seepage phenomena in earth structures and act as an early warning system, e.g., in critical parts of levees or embankments.\nNegative impacts.\nLarge scale structures designed to modify natural processes inevitably have some drawbacks or negative impacts.\n Levees interrupt floodplain ecosystems that developed under conditions of seasonal flooding. In many cases, the impact is two-fold, as reduced recurrence of flooding also facilitates land-use change from forested floodplain to farms.\n In a natural watershed, floodwaters spread over a landscape and slowly return to the river. Downstream, the delivery of water from the area of flooding is spread out in time. If levees keep the floodwaters inside a narrow channel, the water is delivered downstream over a shorter time period. The same volume of water over a shorter time interval means higher river stage (height). As more levees are built upstream, the recurrence interval for high-water events in the river increases, often requiring increases in levee height.\n During natural flooding, water spilling over banks rises slowly. When a levee fails, a wall of water held back by the levee suddenly pours out over the landscape, much like a dam break. Impacted areas far from a breach may experience flooding similar to a natural event, while damage near a breach can be catastrophic, including carving out deep holes and channels in the nearby landscape. \n Under natural conditions, floodwaters return quickly to the river channel as water-levels drop. During a levee breach, water pours out into the floodplain and moves down-slope where it is blocked from return to the river. Flooding is prolonged over such areas, waiting for floodwater to slowly infiltrate and evaporate. \n Natural flooding adds a layer of sediment to the floodplain. The added weight of such layers over many centuries makes the crust sink deeper into the mantle, much like a floating block of wood is pushed deeper into the water if another board is added on top. The momentum of downward movement does not immediately stop when new sediment layers stop being added, resulting in subsidence (sinking of land surface). In coastal areas, this results in land dipping below sea level, the ocean migrating inland, and salt-water intruding into freshwater aquifers.\n Where a large river spills out into the ocean, the velocity of the water suddenly slows and its ability to transport sand and silt decreases. Sediments begin to settle out, eventually forming a delta and extending to the coastline seaward. During subsequent flood events, water spilling out of the channel will find a shorter route to the ocean and begin building a new delta. Wave action and ocean currents redistribute some of the sediment to build beaches along the coast. When levees are constructed all the way to the ocean, sediments from flooding events are cut off, the river never migrates, and elevated river velocity delivers sediment to deep water where wave action and ocean currents cannot redistribute. Instead of a natural wedge shaped delta forming, a \"birds-foot delta\" extends far out into the ocean. The results for surrounding land include beach depletion, subsidence, salt-water intrusion, and land loss.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
