{"id": "39894", "revid": "48965259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39894", "title": "History of Bahrain", "text": "Bahrain, an archipelago in the Persian Gulf, has been a pivotal center of trade, culture, and power for millennia, most notably as the heart of the ancient Dilmun civilization, a thriving hub of commerce and diplomacy in the Bronze Age. Its strategic location attracted a succession of influential powers, including the Persians, Sumerians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Portuguese, the Arabs, and the British, each leaving a distinct mark on its cultural and political landscape. In 1932, Bahrain became the first location in the Persian Gulf outside Iran to discover oil, ushering in a transformative era of economic growth and global significance.\nDilmun Civilization.\nBahrain was a central site of the ancient Dilmun civilization. Dilmun appears first in Sumerian cuneiform clay tablets dated to the end of fourth millennium BC, found in the temple of goddess Inanna, in the city of Uruk. The adjective Dilmun is used to describe a type of axe and one specific official; in addition, there are lists of rations of wool issued to people connected with Dilmun.\nDilmun was mentioned in two letters dated to the reign of Burna-Buriash II (c. 1370 BC) recovered from Nippur, during the Kassite dynasty of Babylon. These letters were from a provincial official, Il\u012b-ippa\u0161ra, in Dilmun to his friend Enlil-kidinni in Mesopotamia. The names referred to are Akkadian. These letters and other documents, hint at an administrative relationship between Dilmun and Babylon at that time. Following the collapse of the Kassite dynasty, Mesopotamian documents make no mention of Dilmun with the exception of Assyrian inscriptions dated to 1250 BC which proclaimed the Assyrian king to be king of Dilmun and Meluhha. Assyrian inscriptions recorded tribute from Dilmun. There are other Assyrian inscriptions during the first millennium BC indicating Assyrian sovereignty over Dilmun. Dilmun was also later on controlled by the Kassite dynasty in Mesopotamia.\nOne of the early sites discovered in Bahrain indicate that Sennacherib, king of Assyria (707\u2013681 BC), attacked northeast Persian Gulf and captured Bahrain. The most recent reference to Dilmun came during the Neo-Babylonian dynasty. Neo-Babylonian administrative records, dated 567 BC, stated that Dilmun was controlled by the king of Babylon. The name of Dilmun fell from use after the collapse of Neo-Babylon in 538 BC.\nThere is both literary and archaeological evidence of extensive trade between Ancient Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley civilization (probably correctly identified with the land called \"Meluhha\" in Akkadian). Impressions of clay seals from the Indus Valley city of Harappa were evidently used to seal bundles of merchandise, as clay seal impressions with cord or sack marks on the reverse side testify. A number of these Indus Valley seals have turned up at Ur and other Mesopotamian sites.\nThe \"Persian Gulf\" types of circular, stamped (rather than rolled) seals known from Dilmun, that appear at Lothal in Gujarat, India, and Failaka, as well as in Mesopotamia, are convincing corroboration of the long-distance sea trade. What the commerce consisted of is less known: timber and precious woods, ivory, lapis lazuli, gold, and luxury goods such as carnelian and glazed stone beads, pearls from the Persian Gulf, shell and bone inlays, were among the goods sent to Mesopotamia in exchange for silver, tin, woolen textiles, olive oil and grains. Copper ingots from Oman and bitumen which occurred naturally in Mesopotamia may have been exchanged for cotton textiles and domestic fowl, major products of the Indus region that are not native to Mesopotamia. Instances of all of these trade goods have been found. The importance of this trade is shown by the fact that the weights and measures used at Dilmun were in fact identical to those used by the Indus, and were not those used in Southern Mesopotamia.\n\"the ships of Dilmun, from the foreign land, brought him wood as a tribute\".\nMesopotamian trade documents, lists of goods, and official inscriptions mentioning Meluhha supplement Harappan seals and archaeological finds. Literary references to Meluhhan trade date from the Akkadian, the Third Dynasty of Ur, and Isin-Larsa Periods (c. 2350\u20131800 BC), but the trade probably started in the Early Dynastic Period (c. 2600 BC). Some Meluhhan vessels may have sailed directly to Mesopotamian ports, but by the Isin-Larsa Period, Dilmun monopolized the trade. The Bahrain National Museum assesses that its \"Golden Age\" lasted ca. 2200\u20131600 BC. Discoveries of ruins under the Persian Gulf maybe of Dilmun.]\nIn the Mesopotamian epic poem \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", Gilgamesh had to pass through Mount Mashu to reach Dilmun, Mount Mashu is usually identified with the whole of the parallel Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon ranges, with the narrow gap between these mountains constituting the tunnel.\nDilmun, sometimes described as \"the place where the sun rises\" and \"the Land of the Living\", is the scene of some versions of the Eridu Genesis, and the place where the deified Sumerian hero of the flood, Utnapishtim (Ziusudra), was taken by the gods to live forever. Thorkild Jacobsen's translation of the Eridu Genesis calls it \"Mount Dilmun\" which he locates as a \"faraway, half-mythical place\".\nDilmun is also described in the epic story of Enki and Ninhursag as the site at which the Creation occurred. The promise of Enki to Ninhursag, the Earth Mother: &lt;poem&gt;For Dilmun, the land of my lady's heart, I will create long waterways, rivers and canals,\nwhereby water will flow to quench the thirst of all beings and bring abundance to all that lives.&lt;/poem&gt;\nNinlil, the Sumerian goddess of air and south wind had her home in Dilmun. It is also featured in the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\".\nHowever, in the early epic \"Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta\", the main events, which center on Enmerkar's construction of the ziggurats in Uruk and Eridu, are described as taking place in a world \"before Dilmun had yet been settled\".\nIranian Empires.\nFrom the 6th century BC to the 3rd century BC Bahrain was a pivotal part of the Persian Empire of the Achaemenids, an Iranian dynasty. The Achaemenid navy set up bases along the Karun River as well as in Bahrain, Oman, and Yemen. Beyond maintaining peace along the Karun, the Persian fleet facilitated trade with India through the Persian Gulf.\nFrom the 3rd century BC to the arrival of Islam in the 7th century AD, Bahrain was controlled by two other Iranian dynasties, the Parthians and the Sassanids. By about 130 BC, the Parthian dynasty brought the Persian Gulf under their control and extended their influence as far as Oman; since they needed to control the Persian Gulf trade route, the Parthians established garrisons along the southern coast of the Persian Gulf. Objects related to the Parthian period have been uncovered in Shahkhoura.\nIn the 3rd century AD, the Sassanids succeeded the Parthians and held the area until the arrival of Islam four centuries later. Ardashir, the first ruler of the Iranian Sassanid dynasty marched to Oman and Bahrain and defeated Sanatruq (or Satiran), probably the Parthian governor of Bahrain. He appointed his son Shapur I as governor of Bahrain. Shapur constructed a new city there and named it Batan Ardashir after his father. At this time, Bahrain incorporated the southern Sassanid province covering the Persian Gulf's southern shore plus the archipelago of Bahrain. The southern province of the Sassanids was subdivided into three districts; Haggar (now al-Hafuf province, Saudi Arabia), Batan Ardashir (now al-Qatif province, Saudi Arabia), and Mishmahig (now Bahrain Island).\nTylos.\nBahrain was referred to by the ancient Greeks as Tylos, the centre of pearl trading, when the Greek admiral, Nearchus, first visited there. Nearchus was serving under Alexander the Great, who overthrew the ruling tribe of Al Hamar.\nNearchus is believed to have been the first of Alexander's commanders to visit Bahrain, and he found a verdant land that was part of a wide trading network. He recorded: \"That in the island of Tylos, situated in the Persian Gulf, are large plantations of cotton tree, from which are manufactured clothes called \"sindones\", with very different degrees of value, some being costly, others less expensive. The use of these is not confined to India, but extends to Arabia.\" The Greek historian, Theophrastus, states that many of the islands were covered in these cotton trees and that Tylos was famous for exporting walking canes engraved with emblems that were customarily carried in Babylon.\nIt is not known whether Bahrain was part of the Seleucid Empire, although the archaeological site at Qalat Al Bahrain has been proposed as a Seleucid base in the Persian Gulf. Alexander had planned to settle the eastern shores of the Persian Gulf with Greek colonists, and although it is not clear that this happened on the scale he envisaged, Tylos was very much part of the Hellenised world: the language of the upper classes was Greek (although Aramaic was in everyday use). Local coinage shows a seated Zeus, who may have been worshiped there as a syncretised form of the Arabian sun-god Shams. Tylos was also the site of Greek athletics contests.\nStrabo, the Greek historian, geographer and philosopher mentioned that the Phoenicians came from Eastern Arabia where they have similar gods, cemeteries and temples. This theory was accepted by the 19th-century German classicist Arnold Heeren who said that: \"In the Greek geographers, for instance, we read of two islands, named Tyrus or Tylos, and Arad, Bahrain, which boasted that they were the mother country of the Phoenicians, and exhibited relics of Phoenician temples\". The people of Tyre, Lebanon in particular have long maintained Persian Gulf origins, and the similarity in the words \"Tylos\" and \"Tyre\" has been commented upon. Later classicist theories were proposed prior to modern archaeological excavations which revealed no disruption of Phoenician societies between 3200 B.C. and 1200 B.C.\nHerodotus's account (written c. 440\u00a0BC) refers to the Phoenicians originating from Eastern Arabia. (\"History,\" I:1). &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;According to the Persians best informed in history, the Phoenicians began the quarrel. These people, who had formerly dwelt on the shores of the Erythraean Sea (the eastern part of the Arabia peninsula), having migrated to the Mediterranean and settled in the parts which they now inhabit, began at once, they say, to adventure on long voyages, freighting their vessels with the wares of Egypt and Assyria...\u2014\u200a\nThe name Tylos is thought to be a Hellenisation of the Semitic, Tilmun (from Dilmun). The term Tylos was commonly used for the islands until Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" when the inhabitants are referred to as 'Thilouanoi'. Some place names in Bahrain go back to the Tylos era, for instance, the residential suburb of Arad in Muharraq, is believed to originate from \"Arados\", the ancient Greek name for Muharraq island.\nWith the waning of Seleucid Greek power, Tylos was incorporated into Characene or Mesenian, the state founded in what today is Southern Iraq by Hyspaosines in 127BC. A building inscriptions found in Bahrain indicate that Hyspoasines occupied the islands, (and it also mentions his wife, Thalassia).\nNestorian Christianity.\nFrom the 4th (Sasanian Empire) to the 8th century (Islamic Caliphate) the Bahraini population followed Nestorian Christianity also known as the \"Eastern Church\", temple ruins related to that period was found in Samahij (originally referred to as \"Meshmahij\").\nIslamic Caliphate.\nPrior to Islam, researchers claim that Bahrain was inhabited by partially-Christianized Arabs, Aramaic-speaking agriculturalists, Persian Zoroastrians, and a small amount of Jews. According to archeological finds, Bahrain was indeed a centre of Nestorian Christianity. The Bahraini population is said to have spoken Syriac and Persian (likely Middle \"Pahlavi\" Persian) at the time.\nIslamic narrations claim that Bahrain was majorly a Zoroastrian population, before the Arab conquest, and that Mohammed took the Jizya from them.\nFrom the time when Islam emerged in the 7th century until the early 16th century, the name \"Bahrain\" referred to the wider historical region of Bahrain stretching from Basrah to the Strait of Hormuz along the Persian Gulf coast. This was \"Iql\u012bm al-Ba\u1e25rayn\", i.e. the province of Bahrain, and the Arab inhabitants of the province were descendants of the Arab tribe Bani Abd al-Qais.\nBahrain embraced Islam in 629 (the seventh year of hijra); Mohammed ruled Bahrain through one of his representatives, Al-Ala'a Al-Hadhrami. During the time of Umar I the famous companion of the Prophet, Abu Hurayrah, was the governor of Bahrain. Umar I also appointed Uthman bin Abi Al Aas as governor of the area. Al Khamis Mosque, founded in 692, was one of the earliest mosques built in Bahrain, in the era of Umayyad caliph Umar II.\nThe expansion of Islam did not affect Bahrain's reliance on trade, and its prosperity continued to be dependent on markets in Mesopotamia. After Baghdad emerged as the seat of the caliph in 750 and the main centre of Islamic civilization, Bahrain greatly benefited from the city's increased demand for foreign goods especially from China and South Asia. Bahrain became a hub for intellectuals for hundreds of years stretching from the early days of Islam in the 6th century to the 18th century. Philosophers of Bahrain were highly esteemed, such as the 13th century mystic, Sheikh Maitham Al Bahrani (died in 1299).\nThe Qarmatian Republic.\nAround the year 900, Abu Sa'id al-Hasan al-Jannabi led the Qarmatian revolution, a rebellion by a messianic Ismaili sect originating in Kufa in present-day Iraq. Al-Jannabi took over the city of Hajr, Bahrain's capital at that time, and al-Hasa, which he made the capital of his republic. Once in control of the state he sought to create a utopian society.\nThe Qarmatians' goal was to build a society based on reason and equality. The state was governed by a council of six with a chief who was a first among equals. All property within the community was distributed evenly among all initiates. The Qarmatians were organized as an esoteric society but not as a secret one; their activities were public and openly propagated, but new members had to undergo an initiation ceremony involving seven stages. The Qarmatian world view was one where every phenomenon repeated itself in cycles, where every incident was replayed over and over again.\nEven before taking over Bahrain, the Qarmatians had instigated what some scholars have termed a 'century of terrorism' in Kufa. From Bahrain they launched raids along the pilgrim routes crossing Arabia: in 906 they ambushed the pilgrim caravan returning from Mecca and massacred 20,000 pilgrims. Under Abu Tahir al-Jannabi they came close to capturing Baghdad in 923, and sacked Mecca in 930. In the assault on Islam's holiest sites, the Qarmatians desecrated the Well of Zamzam with corpses of Hajj pilgrims, and took the Black Stone from Mecca to al-Hasa. According to historian al-Juwayni, the stone was returned 22 years later in 951 under mysterious circumstances. Wrapped in a sack, it was thrown into the Great Mosque of Kufa in Iraq, accompanied by a note saying \"By command we took it, and by command we have brought it back.\" The theft and removal of the Black Stone caused it to break into seven pieces.\nThe sack of Mecca followed millenarian excitement among the Qarmatians (and in Persia) over the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 928. Bahrain became the seat of the Qarmatian Mahdi-Caliph from Isfahan who abolished Shar\u012ba law. The new Mahdi also changed the qibla of prayer from Mecca to that of fire, a specifically Zoroastrian practice. Some scholars take the view that \"they may not have been Isamailis at all at the outset, and their conduct and customs gave plausibility to the belief that they were not merely heretics but bitter enemies of Islam.\"\nFor much of the 10th century the Qarmatians were the most powerful force in the Persian Gulf and Middle East, controlling the coast of Oman, and collecting tribute from the Abbasid caliph in Baghdad and from the rival Ismaili Fatimid caliph in Cairo, whom they did not recognize. The land they ruled over was extremely wealthy with a huge slave-based economy according to academic Yitzhak Nakash:\nThe Qarmatian state had vast fruit and grain estates both on the islands and in Hasa and Qatif. Nasiri Khusru, who visited Hasa in 1051, recounted that these estates were cultivated by some thirty thousand Ethiopian slaves. He mentions that the people of Hasa were exempt from taxes. Those impoverished or in debt could obtain a loan until they put their affairs in order. No interest was taken on loans, and token lead money was used for all local transactions. The Qarmatian state had a powerful and long-lasting legacy. This is evidenced by a coin known as Tawila, minted around 920 by one of the Qarmatian rulers, and which was still in circulation in Hasa early in the 20th century\nThe Qarmatians were defeated in battle in 976 by the Abbasids, which encouraged them to look inward to build their utilitarian society. Around 1058, a revolt on the island of Bahrain led by two Shi'a members of the Abd al-Qays tribe, Abul-Bahlul al-'Awwam and Abu'l-Walid Muslim, precipitated the waning of Qarmatian power and eventually the ascendancy to power of the Uyunids, an Arab dynasty belonging to the Abdul Qays tribe.\nUyunid dynasty.\nIn 1076\u20131077, Sheikh Abdullah bin Ali Al Uyuni seized the country from the Qarmatians in Bahrain and Al-Hasa with the military assistance of Great Seljuq Empire and founded the Uyunid dynasty and established the Uyunid Emirate. The Uyunid dynasty, ruled Bahrain for 163 years, from the 11th to the 13th centuries. Their sect is disputed; some sources mention they were Shia, others Sunni. They were the remnants of Bani Abdul Qays tribe. The state of Al-Hasa was the first capital of the Uyunid Emirate. Then Al-Fadhl, son of Abdullah, transfers his capital to Qatif, then to Awal (today's state of Bahrain). In his reign, the state extended to Kuwait. Then in 513 H. the Capital went back to Qatif. Then in 531 H. Mohammed son of Al Fadhl 1 is assassinated there for the state was divided into two, one in Al-Hasa and the other in Al-Qatif.\nUnder Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Abu'l-Hussin b. Abu Sinan, the Uyunid's territory stretched from Najd to the Syrian desert. Due to the influence of the Uyunid kingdom, Caliph al-Nasir li-Din Allah gave Muhammad b. Ahmad authority to protect the pilgrimage route to Mecca. Muhammad was later murdered by a family member, instigated by his cousin, Gharir b. Shukr b. Ali. In the years 587 \u2013 605 H. Mohammed bin Abi Al-hussain unites Qatif and Al-Hasa. The country was ruled by the Uyunid dynasty for 163 years. In 1253 C. Conflicts inside the Uyunid family gave the chance to the Bedouin Usfurids of Banu Uqayl to establish their state and destroy the Uyunid State. Thereby gaining control over eastern Arabia, including the islands of Bahrain. The famous poet Ali bin al Mugrab Al Uyuni is a descendant of the Uyunids.\nUsfurid, and Jabrid dynasties.\nIn 1253, the Bahrani dynasty of the Usfurids of Banu Uqayl \u2013 named after its founder, Usfur ibn Rashid \u2013 gained control over eastern Arabia, including the islands of Bahrain. The late Middle Ages were a time of chronic instability with local disputes allowing various Persian-based Arab Kingdoms based in Qais, Qishm and Hormuz to involve themselves in Bahrain's affairs. In 1330, the islands became tributary to the rulers of Hormuz.\nAccording to historian Juan Cole it was under Shia rule that Twelver Shiaism became established in Bahrain, as Shia Bahrainis gradually moved away from the radical, egalitarian Ismaili Qarmatian sect to the more quietist Twelver or Imami branch, a process which the Sunni rulers encouraged. But even in the 14th century, the North African traveller Ibn Battuta visiting Qatif around 1331, found it inhabited by Arabs whom he described as \"extremist Shi'is\" (rafidiyya ghulat), which Cole presumes is how a 14th-century Sunni would describe Ismailis. Ibn Battuta also noted the great wealth of the area thanks to the pearling industry.\nUntil the late Middle Ages, \"Bahrain\" referred to the larger historical region of Bahrain. Ibn Battuta's 14th-century account contains an early use of the term \"Bahrain\" to refer solely to the Awal islands. However, the exact date at which the term \"Bahrain\" began to refer solely to the Awal archipelago is unknown.\nIn the mid-15th century, another branch of the Banu Uqayl, led by Zamil ibn Jabir, wrested control of Bahrain, founding the dynasty of the Bedouin Jabrids. Based in al-Ahsa, the Jabrids ruled most of eastern Arabia and followed the Shia Twelver rite, which they actively promoted within their domain.\nPortuguese rule.\nThe Arab navigator, Ahmad Bin Majid, visited Bahrain in 1489 prior to the Portuguese' arrival in the region and gave an account of the country: \"In Awal (Bahrain) there are 360 villages and fresh water can be found in a number of places. A most wonderful al-Qasasir, where a man can dive into the salt sea with a skin and can fill it with fresh water while he is submerged in the salt water. Around Bahrain are pearl fisheries and a number of islands all of which have pearl fisheries and connected with this trade are 1,000 ships\" (Majid, Arab Navigation in the Indian Ocean before the Coming of the Portuguese. Trans. G.R. Tibbetts. The Royal Asisatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 1981.)\nPortuguese expansion into the Indian Ocean in the early 16th century followed Vasco da Gama's voyages of exploration in which the Portuguese battled the Ottomans up the coast of the Persian Gulf. The Portuguese, drawn in by the lucrative trade routes of the Gulf, sought control of the strategic Ormus region before setting its sights on Bahrain. Portuguese ships first entered the Gulf in 1485, the first reputed Portuguese traveller to visit Bahrain was Duarte Barbosa. After the Kingdom of Hormuz fell in 1507, Hormuz' political control of Bahrain was lost after the island fell to the princes of Al-Hasa. A combined Portuguese-Hormuz force led by Ant\u00f3nio Correia conquered Bahrain in 1521 only to briefly lose it to the princes of Al-Hasa the same year. In response, the Portuguese sent another expedition to Bahrain and the Arabian coast and subdued the Al-Hasa attempts to regain power.\nThe Portuguese later consolidated their position of the island by reconstructing the Qal'at al Bahrain fortress, which was to serve as the base for the Portuguese garrison. It is believed that the Portuguese ruled the islands via indirect rule, with some force, against the inhabitants for eighty years, despite incurring several revolts and protests (one of which resulted in temporary independence in 1534). Such a revolt was the rebellion of 1529 saw the deployment of a 400-man Portuguese force sent to subdue the island.\nExcept for a brief period in 1559 when the governor of the Ottoman province of Al-Hasa tried to occupy the islands but were repelled, the Portuguese remained in control until they were driven out of the island in 1602, when a popular uprising led by Rukn ed-Din took control of the Bahrain Fort. The uprising was sparked by the governor's order of the execution of the island's richest traders. Portuguese attempts to retake Bahrain were thwarted due to aid from the prince of Shiraz. The uprising coincided with regional disputes between the Portuguese and rival European powers. The power vacuum that resulted was almost immediately filled by the Persian ruler, Shah Abbas I, who deployed a Persian garrison to the Bahrain Fort and subsumed it within the Safavid Empire.\nPersian Safavid hegemony and Omani invasion.\nUnder Persian Safavid rule (1602\u20131717), Bahrain fell under the administrative jurisdiction of the Beglarbegi of Kuhgilu centered at Behbahan in southern Iran. In fact, the Safavids ruled Bahrain from a distance, seeking to control the islands not by force, but through ideology and the manipulation of local rivalries. Safavid rule was a period of intellectual flowering among the Shia theological elite, with Bahrain's seminaries producing such theorists as Sheikh Yusuf Al Bahrani. The Safavid's used the clergy to buttress their rule, hoping that by firmly implanting Imami Shiaism they could secure the islands of Bahrain, with their centrality to trade routes and pearl wealth.\nHowever, the Safavids' strategy was in many ways too successful: the power and influence of the religious class meant that they had a great deal of autonomy, and it was the subsequent tension between Safavid state and the clergy that drove Bahrain's theological vitality. Part of this flourishing was borne of the Bahraini clerics' adherence to conservative Akhbari Shiaism, while the Safavids encouraged the more state-centric, Usulism. Attempts by the Persians to reign in the Bahraini ulema were often counterproductive, and ended up strengthening the clerics against their local land-owning Bahraini rivals who challenged the clerics' control over the lucrative pearl trade. Cleric-landowner conflict was usually contained within very limited parameters given that the senior ulema were usually the sons of the land-owning class.\nOmani invasion and subsequent instability.\nAn Afghan invasion of Iran at the beginning of the 18th century resulted in the near collapse of the Safavid state. In the resultant power vacuum, Oman invaded Bahrain in 1717, ending over a hundred years of Persian hegemony. The Omani invasion began a period of political instability and a quick succession of outside rulers took power with consequent destruction. According to a contemporary account by theologian, Sheikh Yusuf Al Bahrani, in an unsuccessful attempt by the Persians and their Bedouin allies to take back Bahrain from the Kharijite Omanis, much of the country was burnt to the ground. Bahrain was eventually sold back to the Persians by the Omanis, but the weakness of the Safavid empire saw Huwala tribes seize control.\nIn 1730, the new Shah of Persia, Nader Shah, sought to re-assert Persian sovereignty in Bahrain. He ordered Latif Khan, the admiral of the Persian navy in the Persian Gulf, to prepare an invasion fleet in Bushehr. The Persians invaded in March or early April 1736 when the ruler of Bahrain, Shaikh Jubayr, was away on hajj. The invasion brought the island back under central rule and to challenge Oman in the Persian Gulf. He sought help from the British and Dutch, and he eventually recaptured Bahrain in 1736. In 1753, Bahrain was occupied by the Arabs of Abu Shahr of the Bushire-based Al Madhkur family, who ruled Bahrain in the name of Persia and paid allegiance to Karim Khan Zand. During the Qajar era, Persian control over Bahrain waned.\nThe years of almost constant warfare and instability in the period led to a demographic collapse \u2013 German geographer Carsten Niebuhr found in 1763 that Bahrain's 360 towns and villages had, through warfare and economic distress, been reduced to only 60. The influence of Iran was further undermined at the end of the 18th century when the ideological power struggle between the Akhbari-Usuli strands culminated in victory for the Usulis in Bahrain.\nInvasion and British Protectorate (1783\u20131971).\nThe Bahrain invasions.\nIn 1782, war broke out between the army of Sheikh Nasr Al-Madhkur, the ruler of Bahrain and Bushehr and the Zubarah-based Bani Utbah clan, though hostilities arose since 1777 after the Persians saw the Zubarah base as a threat. The prosperity of Zubarah, which is in modern Qatar, had brought it to the attention of the two main powers at the time, Persia and Oman, which were presumably sympathetic to Sheikh Nasr's ambitions. At the same time, Bahrain offered great potential wealth because of the extensive pearls found in its waters.\nNasr enlisted the aid of the rulers of Bandar Rig, Bandar Ganaveh and Dashtestan and amassed an army of 2,000 soldiers to be commanded by his nephew, Mohammed. The Persians launched an assault of Zubarah's fort but were forced to break the siege after suffering stiff resistance from the Al Khalifa defenders and facing imminent naval reinforcements from Bani Utbah men in Kuwait. In retaliation to the assault, the Bani Utbah clan launched an invasion of Bahrain Island in 1783. Historians disagree on who attacked first; some historians believe that the incoming naval reinforcements from Kuwait intercepted a message from Nasr Al-Madhkur to his representative in Bahrain stating that the Persians had lost the battle. Upon learning this, the fleet switched course and invaded Bahrain, capturing the Bahrain fort and surrounding the Persian garrison. With a large coalition of tribesmen from the Bani Utbah and interior Arabia, the invasion of Bahrain was completed on 28 July 1783 Other historians believe that the Kuwaitis invaded Bahrain because they were closer to it than to Zubarah and as such, would deliver a tactical defeat to the Persians and would later handover possession to the Bani Utbah clan. The most probable version, as put forward by Historian J. G. Lorimer, was that the invasion was led by Ahmed Al Fateh in 1783 and that he defeated Nasr Al-Madhkur in battle on the outskirts of Manama and plundered the town.Historians dispute the date of the invasion, some stating it occurred in 1782 while others say it was 1783. Ahmed al-Fateh ruled Bahrain and Zubarah, visiting the former in the summer and the latter in the winter, until his death in 1796.\nIn 1797, fourteen years later after gaining the power of the Bani Utbah, the Al Khalifa family moved to Bahrain and settled in Jaww, later moving to Riffa. They were originally from Kuwait having left in 1766. Al-Sabah family traditions relates that the ancestors of their family and those of the Al-Khalifa family came to Kuwait after their expulsion from the Iraqi Umm Qasr town upon Khor Zubair by the Turks, an earlier base from which they preyed on the caravans of Basra and pirated ships in the Shatt al-Arab waterway. The first ruler of the Al Khalifa was Shaikh Ahmed Al-Fateh.\nPersian attempts to reconquer the island in 1783 and in 1785 failed; the 1783 expedition was a joint Persian-Qawasim invasion force that never left Bushehr. The 1785 invasion fleet, composed of forces from Bushehr, Rig and Shiraz was called off after the death of the ruler of Shiraz, Ali Murad Khan. Due to internal difficulties, the Persians could not attempt another invasion. In 1799, Bahrain came under threat from the expansionist policies of Sayyid Sultan, the Sultan of Oman, when he invaded the island under the pretext that Bahrain did not pay taxes owed. The Bani Utbah solicited the aid of Bushire to expel the Omanis on the condition that Bahrain would become a tributary state of Persia. In 1800, Sayyid Sultan invaded Bahrain again in retaliation and deployed a garrison at Arad Fort, in Muharraq island and had appointed his twelve-year-old son Salim, as Governor of the island. The Bani Utbah laid siege to Arad Fort later that year, ejecting Salim from power. In 1802, Sayyid Sultan once again sailed with a fleet to Bahrain however, the Al Khalifa enlisted the aid of Wahhabis from the mainland which forced the Omanis to abort their invasion.\nTreaties with Britain.\nIn 1820, the Al Khalifa tribe regained power in Bahrain and entered a treaty relationship with Great Britain, by then the dominant military power in the Persian Gulf. This treaty recognised the Al Khalifa as the rulers (\"Al-Hakim\" in Arabic) of Bahrain. It was the first of several treaties including the 1861 Perpetual Truce of Peace and Friendship, which was further revised in 1892 and 1951.\nThis treaty was similar to those entered into by the British Government with the other Persian Gulf principalities. It specified that the ruler could not dispose of any of his territory except to the United Kingdom and could not enter into relationships with any foreign government without British consent. In return the British promised to protect Bahrain from all aggression by sea and to lend support in case of land attack. More importantly, the British promised to support the rule of the Al Khalifa in Bahrain, securing its unstable position as rulers of the country. According to School of Oriental and African Studies academic, Nelida Fuccaro, this treaty relationship with Britain was one aspect of an evolving polity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From this perspective state building under the Al Khalifa shayks should not be considered exclusively as the result of Britain's informal empire in the Persian Gulf. In fact, it was a long process of strategic negotiation with different sections of the local population in order to establish a pre-eminence of their particularly artistic Sunni/Bedouin tradition of family rule.\nAfter the Egyptian ruler, Mohammad Ali Pasha took the Arabian Peninsula from the Wahhabis on behalf of the Ottoman Empire in 1830, the Egyptian army demanded yearly tributes from Sheikh Abdul Al Khalifa. He had earlier sought Persian and British protection from the Egyptians. The Sheikh agreed to the terms of the Egyptians.\nIn April 1843 Muhammad bin Khalifa Al Khalifa defeated Abdullah bin Ahmad Al Khalifa becoming the ruler. Among his first steps taken as ruler was to appoint his brother, Ali bin Khalifa, as chief of Al Bidda, Qatar that year, thereby delegating all mainland affairs and solidifying Qatar's status as a Bahraini suzerainty.\nDuring his reign Muhammad paid an annual tribute to Faisal bin Turki, successor of Abdullah bin Thunayan as the Emir of Najd. After eliminating his rival Abdullah bin Thunayan, Faisal bin Turki consolidated his power by subduing opposition tribes in Najd and taking control of key economic centres such as Al-Ahsa and Saihat. However, Faisal's ambitions extended beyond these territories. In 1847, he attempted to intervene in Bahrain, exploiting internal conflicts within the ruling family. Although unsuccessful in capturing Bahrain, he settled for a peace agreement that included a tribute payment. Faisal's inability to seize Bahrain was, in part, due to the firm stance of the British government against Saudi expansion in the Persian Gulf. The British, who had substantial interests in the region, closely monitored Faisal's movements. Their support for Muhammad bin Khalifa and their strategic positions in the Gulf influenced the broader regional dynamics.\nHowever, in 1850, Muhammad began not to pay the tribute, and next year he attempted to get support from the Ottomans, but his attempt was not fruitful. In May 1851, Faisal launched his third attempt to capture Bahrain, ordering his forces to proceed towards Al Bidda, Qatar, which was intended to be used as a staging area for an invasion of Bahrain, preparing for a confrontation with Muhammad bin Khalifa. In response, Ali bin Khalifa, the Bahraini representative in Qatar, called on all men of fighting age to defend Al Bidda, as well as sending for help from Saeed bin Tahnun Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi. This culminated in the Battle of Mesaimeer, taking place from 2\u20134 June 1851. Although the resistance was initially successful in repelling the invasion, Ali bin Khalifa's forces later retreated to their ships. Shortly after the fighting had taken place, Mohammed bin Thani, an influential tribal leader in Al Bidda, pursued a separate peace agreement with Faisal and agreed to his governance, a move seen as a betrayal by the Bahrainis. Upon receiving news of this, Muhammad bin Khalifa ordered a naval blockade of Al Bidda in June 1851. He also sent Hamad bin Mohammed Al Khalifa to inform British political resident Samuel Hennell of his concerns of a joint Wahhabi-Qatari invasion of Bahrain and requested protection, stating that he was willing to be a British subject in exchange for such protection. The British originally rejected this proposition.\nUpon further analysis of the situation, Justin Sheil, a high-ranking British diplomat in Persia, concluded that Faisal bin Turki's control of the Qatari Peninsula would be detrimental to British interests as it would provide the Ottoman Empire with an opportunity to incorporate Bahrain under its aegis in the event of a joint Qatari-Wahhabi invasion of the island. Thus, on 1 July, Hennel directed multiple British warships to be sent to protect Manama Harbor in Bahrain. He then separately wrote letters to Faisal bin Turki and Mohammed bin Thani, warning them against launching a naval invasion of the Bahraini coast. The conflict pacified when, facing pressure from multiple sides and fearing further erosion of Bahraini influence, Muhammad bin Khalifa agreed to a peace settlement. This agreement, brokered by Saeed bin Tahnun of Abu Dhabi on 25 July 1851, required Bahrain to pay an annual sum of 4,000 German krones to Faisal bin Turki as zakat. In return, Faisal agreed to restore the fort of Al Bidda to Bahraini control and to cease interference in Qatar.\nThe Al Khalifa administration functioned through a hierarchical system of patronage, where tribal allies received preferential treatment. In exchange for their loyalty and defense when needed, these tribes were granted autonomy and tax-free access to Bahrain's valuable pearl banks. By 1860, the Al Khalifa sought protection from the British, the dominant power in the Persian Gulf, establishing a protector-prot\u00e9g\u00e9 relationship with them.\nThe Government of Al Khalifa once again sought the protection of a larger power when the British tried to overpower Bahrain. Sheikh Mohammad bin Khalifa Al Khalifa wrote letters to both the Persian Prince-Governor of Fars and to the Ottoman Wali of Baghdad, to place Bahrain in the protection of each respective state. Both sides sent \"wakils\" (a person who is an authorised representative), who offered the Sheikh their conditions, of which the Ottoman terms were more beneficial and was accepted in March 1860. In another letter to the Iranian Foreign Minister, Sheikh Mohammad demanded that the Government of Iran provide direct guidance and protection from British pressure.\nLike other Gulf Arab sheikhdoms, Bahrain developed as a center for pearl diving and commerce, ruled by a Sunni Arab sheikhly family of Bedouin origin. Despite waves of migration that brought a diverse mix of merchants, financiers, craftsmen, and laborers from across the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean, the Shi'i Baharna remained the majority population. Since the mid-19th century, a small Shi'i community known as the 'Ajam (non-Arabs) from Iran has also been present in Bahrain. Although the Baharna and 'Ajam share the same religious faith, they have historically spoken different languages, worshiped at separate sites, lived in distinct neighborhoods, and intermarried infrequently.\nBahrain's Sunni population historically consisted of three main groups. The first was the Al Khalifa family and their tribal allies. The second group, known as Najdis, were merchants who left the Arabian interior to pursue business opportunities on the coast. Their Sunni faith and Arab ancestry helped them form close ties with the ruling family. The third group, the Hawala \u2013 likely referring to the Sunni Achomi/laristani people of Bahrain which are often conflated with the actual Huwala Arabs, as they are claimed to have been merchant families who claimed Arab heritage and depicted their migration to the Gulf as a return to their ancestral lands after living in southern Iran, and have been Initially referred to as 'Ajam' due to their strong cultural and linguistic ties to Iran, many Hawala emphasized their Sunni faith and Arab identity over time to integrate with the dominant Sunni community. Unlike the tribesmen, who saw commerce as an unsuitable occupation, the Hawala were deeply involved in long-distance trade, multilingual, better educated, and more open to external ideas. This group played a key role in introducing anti-colonial nationalism to Bahrain during the rise of Gamal Abdel Nasser.\nLater on, under pressure from Colonel Sir Lewis Pelly, Sheikh Mohammad requested military assistance from Iran, but the Government of Iran at that time provided no aid to protect Bahrain from British aggression. As a result, the Government of British India eventually overpowered Bahrain. Colonel Pelly signed an agreement with Sheikh Mohammad in May 1861 and later with his brother Sheikh Ali that placed Bahrain under British rule and protection.\nIn 1868, following the Qatari\u2013Bahraini War, British representatives signed another agreement with the Al Khalifa rulers, making Bahrain part of the British protectorate territories in the Persian Gulf. It specified that the ruler could not dispose of any of his territory except to the United Kingdom and could not enter into relationships with any foreign government without British consent. In return the British promised to protect Bahrain from all aggression by sea and to lend support in case of land attack. More importantly the British promised to support the rule of the Al Khalifa in Bahrain, securing its unstable position as rulers of the country. Other agreements in 1880 and 1892 sealed the protectorate status of Bahrain to the British.\nEconomic prosperity.\nPeace and trade brought a new prosperity. Bahrain was no longer dependent upon pearling, and by the mid-19th century, it became the pre-eminent trading centre in the Persian Gulf, overtaking rivals Basra, Kuwait, and finally in the 1870s, Muscat. At the same time, Bahrain's socio-economic development began to diverge from the rest of the Persian Gulf: it transformed itself from a tribal trading centre into a modern state. This process was spurred by the attraction of large numbers of Persian, Huwala, and Indian merchant families who set up businesses on the island, making it the nexus of a vast web of trade routes across the Persian Gulf, Persia and the Indian sub-continent. A contemporary account of Manama in 1862 found:\nMixed with the indigenous population [of Manamah] are numerous strangers and settlers, some of whom have been established here for many generations back, attracted from other lands by the profits of either commerce or the pearl fishery, and still retaining more or less the physiognomy and garb of their native countries. Thus the gay-coloured dress of the southern Persian, the saffron-stained vest of Oman, the white robe of Nejed, and the striped gown of Bagdad, are often to be seen mingling with the light garments of Bahreyn, its blue and red turban, its white silk-fringed cloth worn Banian fashion round the waist, and its frock-like overall; while a small but unmistakable colony of Indians, merchants by profession, and mainly from Guzerat, Cutch, and their vicinity, keep up here all their peculiarities of costume and manner, and live among the motley crowd, 'among them, but not of them'.\nPalgrave's description of Manama's coffee houses in the mid-19th century portrays them as cosmopolitan venues in contrast to what he describes as the 'closely knit and bigoted universe of central Arabia'. Palgrave describes a people with an open \u2013 even urbane \u2013 outlook: \"Of religious controversy I have never heard one word. In short, instead of Zelators and fanatics, camel-drivers and Bedouins, we have at Bahrain [Manama] something like 'men of the world, who know the world like men' a great relief to the mind; certainly it was so to mine.\"\nThe great trading families that emerged during this period have been compared to the Borgias and Medicis and their great wealth \u2013 long before the oil wealth for which the region would later be renowned \u2013 gave them extensive power, and among the most prominent were the Persian Al Safar family, who held the position of Native Agents of Britain in the 19th century. The Al Safar enjoyed an 'exceptionally close' relationship with the Al Khalifa clan from 1869, although the al-Khalifa never intermarried with them \u2013 it has been speculated that this could be related to political reasons (to limit the Safars' influence with the ruling family) and possibly for religious reasons (because the Safars were Shia).\nAs a result of Bahrain's trade with India, the cultural influence of the subcontinent grew dramatically, with styles of dress, cuisine, and education showing a marked Indian influence. According to Exeter University's James Onley \"In these and countless other ways, eastern Arabia's ports and people were as much a part of the Indian Ocean world as they were a part of the Arab world.\"\nEarly 20th century reforms.\nUnrest amongst the people of Bahrain began when Britain officially established complete dominance over the territory in 1892. The first revolt and widespread uprising took place in March 1895 against Sheikh Issa bin Ali, then ruler of Bahrain. Sheikh Issa was the first of the Al Khalifa to rule without Iranian relations. Sir Arnold Wilson, Britain's representative in the Persian Gulf and author of \"The Persian Gulf\", arrived in Bahrain from Mascat at this time. The uprising developed further with some protesters killed by British forces.\nBahrain underwent a period of major social reform between 1926 and 1957, under the \"de facto\" rule of Charles Belgrave, the British advisor to Shaikh Hamad ibn Isa Al-Khalifa (1872-1942). The country's first modern school was established in 1919, with the opening of the Al-Hiddaya Boys School, while the Persian Gulf's first girls school opened in 1928. The American Mission Hospital, established by the Dutch Reform Church, began work in 1903. Other reforms include the abolition of slavery, while the pearl diving industry developed at a rapid pace.\nThese reforms were often vigorously opposed by powerful groups within Bahrain including sections within the ruling family and merchants. In order to counter conservatives, the British removed the Ruler, Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa in 1923 and replaced him with his son. Some Sunni families left Bahrain to mainland Arabia, whilst clerical opponents of social reforms were exiled to Saudi Arabia and Iran. The heads of some merchant and notable families were likewise exiled. Britain's interest in Bahrain's development was motivated by concerns over the ambitions of the Saudi-Wahabi and the Iranians.\nDiscovery of oil.\nThe discovery of oil in 1932 by the Bahrain Petroleum Company brought rapid modernisation to Bahrain. Relations with the United Kingdom became closer, as evidenced by the British Royal Navy moving its entire Middle Eastern command from Bushehr in Iran to Bahrain in 1935. British influence continued to grow as the country developed, culminating with the appointment of Charles Belgrave as advisor. He went on to establish a modern education system in Bahrain. The oil company was however 100% American capital, no British firm was willing to take the risk of exploration at the time.\nBahrain participated in the Second World War as part of the British Empire, specifically the British Indian Empire as a Gulf Residency on the Allied side, joining on 10 September 1939. On 19 October 1940, four Italian SM.82s bombers bombed Bahrain alongside Dhahran oilfields in Saudi Arabia, targeting Allied-operated oil refineries. Although minimal damage was caused in both locations, the attack forced the Allies to upgrade Bahrain's defences which further stretched Allied military resources. After World War II, increasing anti-British sentiment spread throughout the Arab World and led to riots in Bahrain. The riots focused on the Jewish community, which included distinguished writers, singers, accountants, engineers and middle managers working for the oil company, textile merchants with business all over the peninsula, and free professionals.\nThe leftist movement.\nThe National Union Committee (NUC), a leftist nationalist movement associated with the labour unions, was formed in 1954 calling for the end of British interference and political reforms. Work sites were plagued with frequent strikes and occasional riots (including several fatalities) during this period. Following riots in support of Egypt defending itself against the tripartite invasion during 1956 Suez Crisis, the British decided to put an end to the NUC challenge to their presence in Bahrain. The NUC and its offshoots were declared illegal. Its leaders were arrested, tried and imprisoned. Some fled the country while others were forcibly deported.\nStrikes and riots continued during the 1960s, now under the leadership of underground cells of the NUC, namely the communist National Liberation Front and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, the Bahraini section of the Arab Nationalist Movement.\nIn March 1965, an uprising broke out, called the March Intifada, against the British presence in Bahrain. The spark of the riots was the laying off of hundreds of Bahraini workers at the Bahrain Petroleum Company. Several people died in the sometimes violent clashes between protesters and police.\nIndependent Bahrain.\nAfter World War II, Bahrain became the centre for British administration of the lower Persian Gulf.\nIn 1968, when the British Government announced its decision to end the treaty relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms, Bahrain joined with Qatar and the seven Trucial States (which now form the United Arab Emirates) under British protection in an effort to form a union of Arab emirates. By mid-1971, however, the nine sheikhdoms still had not agreed on the terms of union. Accordingly, Bahrain sought independence as a separate entity.\nIn 1969, both the British and Iranian governments agreed to approach the United Nations Secretariat to resolve the dispute of Bahrain's sovereignty. In early 1970, the Iranian government asked the UN secretary-general to assess the will of the Bahraini people with regards to their sovereignty. The survey (sometimes referred to as a \"referendum\") took the form of a United Nations poll on whether islanders preferred independence or Iranian control.\nThe report of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General on the consultation stated that \"the overwhelming majority of the people of Bahrain wish to gain recognition of their identity in a full independent and sovereign State free to decide for itself its relations with other States.\"\nAt 12:50\u00a0p.m. on 26 March 1970, London Radio announced that both Britain and Iran had submitted a request to the Secretary-General of the United Nations to send a representative from the international organization to survey the opinion of the people of Bahrain as to whether they wish to remain under British Protectorate or to have Independence or be part of Iran. Musa Al-Ansari (one of the Ajam of Bahrain) recounts that he voted on the promise for the country to be an independent democratic country that respects minorities, \"I went to vote as a Bahraini, but I do not want to lose my identity as a Persian.\"\nAs a result, the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 278 on 11 May 1970, while in the same month Iran renounced its claim to the island. The country subsequently became independent from the United Kingdom, declaring independence on 15 August 1971, and becoming formally independent as the State of Bahrain on 16 December 1971.\nAt independence, the permanent Royal Navy presence in Bahrain ended and the United States Navy moved onto the 10 acres (40,000 m2) previously occupied by British operations. The installation later grew into Naval Support Activity Bahrain, headquarters for the United States Fifth Fleet.\nThe emirate emerged just as the price of oil skyrocketed after the 1973 Yom Kippur War; while Bahrain's own reserves were being depleted the high oil price meant there was massive capitalisation in the Kingdom's neighbours. The Kingdom was able to exploit the situation thanks to another war in the Levant in 1975: the Lebanese Civil War. Beirut had long been the financial centre of the Arab world, but the outbreak of hostilities in the country had an immediate impact on the banking industry. Bahrain offered a new location at the centre of the booming Persian Gulf with a large educated indigenous workforce and sound fiscal regulations. Realizing the opportunity to become a financial centre resulted in growth in other industries in the country.\nThis bolstered the development of the middle class and gave Bahrain a very different class structure from its tribal dominated neighbours. Although there had long been a large Indian presence in Bahrain, it was at this time that mass migration to the Kingdom began to take off with subsequent consequences for the Kingdom's demographics. Large numbers of immigrants from Third World countries such as the Philippines, Pakistan, Egypt, and Iran were attracted by better salaries than at home.\nThe constitutional experiment.\nBased on its new 1973 constitution, Bahraini men elected its first National Assembly in 1973 (although Article 43 of the 1973 Constitution states that the Assembly is to be elected by \"universal suffrage\", the conditional clause \"in accordance with the provisions of the electoral law\" allowed the regime to prevent women from participating). Although the Assembly and then-Emir Isa ibn Salman al-Khalifa quarrelled over a number of issues (foreign policy; the U.S. naval presence, and the budget), the biggest clash came over the State Security Law (SSL). The Assembly refused to ratify the government-sponsored law, which allowed, among other things, the arrest and detention of people for up to three years, (renewable) without a trial.\nThe legislative stalemate over this act created a public crisis, and on 25 August 1975, the emir dissolved the Assembly. The emir then ratified the State Security Law by decree, and suspended those articles in the constitution dealing with the legislative powers of the Assembly. In that same year, the emir established the State Security Court, whose judgments were not subject to appeal.\nIranian Revolution and social and political change.\nThe tide of political Islam that swept the Middle East in the 1970s, culminating in the Iranian revolution in 1979 was to have profound implications for Bahrain's social and political development.96, 99, 100\nThere were a number of factors that had caused Bahrain to be more liberal than its neighbours, but these were challenged by the rise of Islamic religious fundamentalism. Bahrain's pluralist traditions were to a large extent a result of the complex confessional and demographic makeup of the country, which required Shi'a Moslems Arabs, Sunni Moslem Arabs, ethnic Iranians (Huwala), and (Ajams), and a plethora of minority faiths, to live and work together. This tolerance had been buttressed by the prominence of Arab nationalism and Marxism as the main modes of dissent, both of which were socially progressive and downplayed religious affiliations. The country's traditional dependence on trade further encouraged openness. It was the political earthquake represented by the Shah's fall that changed the dynamics of Bahrain's politics.\nSectarian conflicts increased following the Islamic revolution of Iran, Dr. Ali Akbar Bushehri recounts that the \"Khomeini Revolution\" created a rift between the Ajams of Bahrain. Majority of Bahraini Iranians were opposed to the Revolution, but they started supporting it over time.\nIn 1981, the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain (an alleged Iranian front organisation), attempted a coup d'\u00e9tat. Their goal was the assassination of Bahrain's leadership and installing an Islamist theocracy with a cleric as supreme leader. The attempted coup and the outbreak of the Iran\u2013Iraq War led to the formation of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which Bahrain joined with Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. The sense of regional uncertainty was further heightened when Saddam Hussein's Iraq invaded Kuwait, triggering the 1991 Persian Gulf War.\n1990s.\nThe 1990s saw growing criticism of the lack of democratic reforms. The unrest resulted in approximately forty deaths and ended after Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa became the Emir in 1999. The emir appointed a 30-member Consultative Council for a four-year term in December 1992. Demonstrations followed the arrest of Shia cleric, Sheikh Ali Salman, on 5 December 1994 after he called for the restoration of the National Assembly and criticised the ruling family. A group of youths clashed with police after throwing stones at female runners during an international marathon for running bare-legged. In January 1995, Sheikh Ali Salman was deported and sought asylum in Britain. A cabinet reshuffle in June 1995, brought five Shia ministers into the government. Shia cleric, Sheikh Abdul Amir al-Jamri, arrested in April 1995, was released five months later. After bomb explosions in Manama's business quarter, Al-Jamri was arrested again on 18 January 1996. A Sunni lawyer and poet, Ahmad al-Shamlan, was also detained on 8 February, but released in April. In June 1996, the government claimed it had uncovered another Iranian-backed coup plot by a group called \"Hezbollah-Bahrain\". Bahrain recalled its ambassador to Iran and downgraded its representation to charg\u00e9 d'affaires level. In September 1996 the Consultative Council was increased from 30 to 40 members.\nThe political impasse continued over the next few years during which time the regime dealt with its opponents using severe repression. Bomb attacks and police brutality marked this period in which over forty people were killed in violence between the two sides. Although the violence was never entirely stopped by the security measures, it was contained and continued as low-level intermittent disturbances.\nIn December 1998 Bahrain provided military facilities for \"Operation Desert Fox\", the US and UK bombing campaign against Iraq.\nThe emir, Sheikh Isa, died in March 1999, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa. Sheikh al-Jamri was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in July 1999, but then pardoned by the new Emir. For the first time, non-Muslims (a Christian and a Jewish businessman) and four women were appointed to the Consultative Council in September 2000.\n2000s.\nIn 2001 Bahrainis strongly backed proposals put by the emir \u2013 now the king \u2013 to turn the country into a constitutional monarchy with an elected parliament and an independent judiciary. A referendum on 14\u201315 February 2001 massively supported the National Action Charter. The emir gave women the right to vote, and released all political prisoners.\nAs part of the adoption of the National Action Charter on 14 February 2002, Bahrain changed its formal name from the State (\"dawla\") of Bahrain to the Kingdom of Bahrain.\nLocal elections were held in May 2002. For the first time women could vote and stand as candidates, but failed to win a seat. Parliamentary elections \u2013 the first such in nearly 30 years \u2013 were held in October 2002 for a 40-member parliament, the Council of Deputies, which included a dozen Shia MPs. Authorities said the turnout was more than 50% despite a call by critics for a boycott.\nIn May 2003 thousands of victims of alleged torture petitioned the king to cancel a law which prevents them from suing suspected torturers. Nada Haffadh was made health minister in April 2004 \u2013 the first woman to head a government ministry. The following month, protests in Manama against fighting in the Iraqi holy cities of Najaf and Karbala saw the king sack his interior minister after police tried to prevent the protest. In March\u2013June 2005, thousands of protest marchers demanded a fully elected parliament. In the general election of November 2006, the Shia opposition won 40% of the seats. A Shia Muslim, Jawad Al-Arrayedh, was named as a deputy prime minister.\nA Jewish woman, Houda Nonoo, was appointed Bahrain's ambassador to the US in 2008 May. She is believed to be the Arab world's first Jewish ambassador.\nAuthorities arrested several people who allegedly planned to detonate homemade bombs during Bahrain's national celebrations in December 2008. In April 2009, the King pardoned more than 170 prisoners charged with endangering national security, including 35 Shias being tried on charges of trying to overthrow the state. However, in September 2010, in the run up to the elections, 20 Shia opposition leaders were arrested and accused of plotting to overthrow monarchy by promoting violent protests and sabotage. In the October parliamentary elections, the main Shia opposition group, Al Wefaq, could make only slender gains.\nThe country participated in military action against the Taliban in October 2001 by deploying a frigate in the Arabian Sea for rescue and humanitarian operations. As a result, in November of that year, US president George W. Bush's administration designated Bahrain as a \"major non-NATO ally\". Bahrain opposed the invasion of Iraq and had offered Saddam Hussein asylum in the days prior to the invasion. Relations improved with neighbouring Qatar after the border dispute over the Hawar Islands was resolved by the International Court of Justice in The Hague in 2001. Bahrain negotiated a free trade agreement with the United States in 2004, although Saudi Arabia criticized the move, saying it hindered regional economic integration.\nQatar and Bahrain have made plans to build the Qatar-Bahrain Friendship Bridge to link the countries across the Persian Gulf, which would be the longest fixed-link bridge in the world if completed.\nBahraini uprising (2011\u2013present).\nThe protests in Bahrain started on 14 February, and were initially aimed at achieving greater political freedom and respect for human rights; they were not intended to directly threaten the monarchy. Lingering frustration among the Shiite majority with being ruled by the Sunni government was a major root cause, but the protests in Tunisia and Egypt are cited as the inspiration for the demonstrations.65 The protests were largely peaceful until a pre-dawn raid by police on 17 February to clear protestors from Pearl Roundabout in Manama, in which police killed four protesters. Following the raid, some protesters began to expand their aims to a call for the end of the monarchy. On 18 February army forces opened fire on protesters when they tried to reenter the roundabout, fatally wounding one. The following day protesters reoccupied Pearl Roundabout after the government ordered troops and police to withdraw.81 Subsequent days saw large demonstrations; on 21 February a pro-government Gathering of National Unity drew tens of thousands,86 whilst on 22 February the number of protestors at the Pearl Roundabout peaked at over 150,000 after more than 100,000 protesters marched there.88 On 14 March, Saudi-led GCC forces were requested by the government and entered the country,132 which the opposition called an \"occupation\".\nKing Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa declared a three-month state of emergency on 15 March and asked the military to reassert its control as clashes spread across the country.139 On 16 March, armed soldiers and riot police cleared the protesters' camp in the Pearl Roundabout, in which 3 policemen and 3 protesters were reportedly killed. Later, on 18 March, the government tore down Pearl Roundabout monument. After the lifting of emergency law on 1 June, several large rallies were staged by the opposition parties. Smaller-scale protests and clashes outside of the capital have continued to occur almost daily. On 9 March 2012 over 100,000 protested in what the opposition called \"the biggest march in our history\".\nThe police response has been described as a \"brutal\" crackdown on \"peaceful and unarmed\" protestors, including doctors and bloggers. The police carried out midnight house raids in Shia neighbourhoods, beatings at checkpoints, and denial of medical care in a \"campaign of intimidation\". More than 2,929 people have been arrested, and at least five people died from torture while in police custody.287,288 On 23 November 2011 the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry released its report on its investigation of the events, finding that the government had systematically tortured prisoners and committed other human rights violations. It also rejected the government's claims that the protests were instigated by Iran. Although the report found that systematic torture had stopped, the Bahraini government has refused entry to several international human rights groups and news organizations, and delayed a visit by a UN inspector. More than 120 people had died since the start of the uprising.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39895", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39895", "title": "1411", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1411 (MCDXI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39896", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39896", "title": "1412", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1412 (MCDXII) was a leap year starting on Friday on the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39897", "revid": "1301710940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39897", "title": "1413", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1413 (MCDXIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39898", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39898", "title": "1414", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1414 (MCDXIV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39899", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39899", "title": "1416", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1416 (MCDXVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39900", "revid": "15130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39900", "title": "1417", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1417 (MCDXVII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39901", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39901", "title": "1418", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1418 (MCDXVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39902", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39902", "title": "1419", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1419 (MCDXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39904", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39904", "title": "1420", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1420 (MCDXX) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39905", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39905", "title": "1422", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1422 (MCDXXII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39906", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39906", "title": "1423", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1423 (MCDXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39907", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39907", "title": "1424", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1424 (MCDXXIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39908", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39908", "title": "1425", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1425 (MCDXXV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39909", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39909", "title": "1426", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1426 (MCDXXVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39910", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39910", "title": "1427", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1427 (MCDXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39912", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39912", "title": "1428", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1428 (MCDXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39913", "revid": "3599078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39913", "title": "1429", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1429 (MCDXXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39914", "revid": "15130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39914", "title": "1430", "text": "Calendar year\n1430 (MCDXXX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39915", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39915", "title": "Measurement instrument", "text": ""}
{"id": "39916", "revid": "4328878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39916", "title": "1432", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1432 (MCDXXXII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39917", "revid": "3599078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39917", "title": "1433", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1433 (MCDXXXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39918", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39918", "title": "1434", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1434 (MCDXXXIV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39920", "revid": "4328878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39920", "title": "1435", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1435 (MCDXXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar, the 1435th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 435th year of the 2nd millennium, the 35th year of the 15th century, and the 6th year of the 1430s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39921", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39921", "title": "1438", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1438 (MCDXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39922", "revid": "40513025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39922", "title": "1439", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1439 (MCDXXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39923", "revid": "519737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39923", "title": "1440", "text": "Calendar year\n1440 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39924", "revid": "8776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39924", "title": "Dion &amp; the Belmonts", "text": ""}
{"id": "39925", "revid": "3599078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39925", "title": "1441", "text": "Calendar year\n1441 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39926", "revid": "4328878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39926", "title": "1442", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1442 (MCDXLII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39927", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39927", "title": "1443", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1443 (MCDXLIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39928", "revid": "23316696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39928", "title": "1444", "text": "Calendar year\n1444 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39929", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39929", "title": "1445", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1445 (MCDXLV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39930", "revid": "40043980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39930", "title": "1446", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1446 (MCDXLVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39931", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39931", "title": "1447", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1447 (MCDXLVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39932", "revid": "45451156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39932", "title": "1448", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1448 (MCDXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39934", "revid": "244888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39934", "title": "1449", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1449 (MCDXLIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39935", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39935", "title": "History of Baker Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "39936", "revid": "49836614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39936", "title": "Necrosis", "text": "Unprogrammed cell death caused by external cell injury\nNecrosis (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'death') is a form of cell injury which results in the premature death of cells in living tissue by autolysis. The term \"necrosis\" came about in the mid-19th century and is commonly attributed to German pathologist Rudolf Virchow, who is often regarded as one of the founders of modern pathology. Necrosis is caused by factors external to the cell or tissue, such as infection, or trauma which result in the unregulated digestion of cell components. In contrast, \"apoptosis\" is a naturally occurring programmed and targeted cause of cellular death. While apoptosis often provides beneficial effects to the organism, necrosis is almost always detrimental and can be fatal.\nCellular death due to necrosis does not follow the apoptotic signal transduction pathway, but rather various receptors are activated and result in the loss of cell membrane integrity and an uncontrolled release of products of cell death into the extracellular space. This initiates an inflammatory response in the surrounding tissue, which attracts leukocytes and nearby phagocytes which eliminate the dead cells by phagocytosis. However, microbial damaging substances released by leukocytes would create collateral damage to surrounding tissues. This excess collateral damage inhibits the healing process. Thus, untreated necrosis results in a build-up of decomposing dead tissue and cell debris at or near the site of the cell death. A classic example is gangrene. For this reason, it is often necessary to remove necrotic tissue surgically, a procedure known as \"debridement\".\nClassification.\nStructural signs that indicate irreversible cell injury and the progression of necrosis include dense clumping and progressive disruption of genetic material, and disruption to membranes of cells and organelles.\nMorphological patterns.\nThere are six distinctive morphological patterns of necrosis:\nCauses.\nNecrosis may occur due to external or internal factors.\nExternal factors.\nExternal factors may involve mechanical trauma (physical damage to the body which causes cellular breakdown), electric shock, damage to blood vessels (which may disrupt blood supply to associated tissue), and ischemia. Thermal effects (extremely high or low temperature) can often result in necrosis due to the disruption of cells, especially in bone cells. \nNecrosis can also result from chemical trauma, with alkaline and acidic compounds causing liquefactive and coagulative necrosis, respectively, in affected tissues. The severity of such cases varies significantly based on multiple factors, including the compound concentration, type of tissue affected, and the extent of chemical exposure.\nIn frostbite, crystals form, increasing the pressure of remaining tissue and fluid causing the cells to burst. Under extreme conditions tissues and cells may die through an unregulated process of membrane and cytosol destruction.\nInternal factors.\nInternal factors causing necrosis include: trophoneurotic disorders (diseases that occur due to defective nerve action in a part of an organ which results in failure of nutrition); injury and paralysis of nerve cells. Pancreatic enzymes (lipases) are the major cause of fat necrosis.\nNecrosis can be activated by components of the immune system, such as the complement system; bacterial toxins; activated natural killer cells; and peritoneal macrophages. Pathogen-induced necrosis programs in cells with immunological barriers (intestinal mucosa) may alleviate invasion of pathogens through surfaces affected by inflammation. Toxins and pathogens may cause necrosis; toxins such as snake venoms may inhibit enzymes and cause cell death. Necrotic wounds have also resulted from the stings of \"Vespa mandarinia.\"\nPathological conditions are characterized by inadequate secretion of cytokines. Nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are also accompanied by intense necrotic death of cells. A classic example of a necrotic condition is ischemia which leads to a drastic depletion of oxygen, glucose, and other trophic factors and induces massive necrotic death of endothelial cells and non-proliferating cells of surrounding tissues (neurons, cardiomyocytes, renal cells, etc.). Recent cytological data indicates that necrotic death occurs not only during pathological events but it is also a component of some physiological process.\nActivation-induced death of primary T lymphocytes and other important constituents of the immune response are caspase-independent and necrotic by morphology; hence, current researchers have demonstrated that necrotic cell death can occur not only during pathological processes, but also during normal processes such as tissue renewal, embryogenesis, and immune response.\nPathogenesis.\nPathways.\nUntil recently, necrosis was thought to be an unregulated process. However, there are two broad pathways in which necrosis may occur in an organism.\nThe first of these two pathways initially involves oncosis, where swelling of the cells occurs. Affected cells then proceed to blebbing, and this is followed by pyknosis, in which nuclear shrinkage transpires. In the final step of this pathway cell nuclei are dissolved into the cytoplasm, which is referred to as karyolysis.\nThe second pathway is a secondary form of necrosis that is shown to occur after apoptosis and budding. In these cellular changes of necrosis, the nucleus breaks into fragments (known as karyorrhexis).\nHistopathological changes.\nThe nucleus changes in necrosis and characteristics of this change are determined by the manner in which its DNA breaks down:\nOther typical cellular changes in necrosis include:\nOn a larger histologic scale, pseudopalisades (false palisades) are hypercellular zones that typically surround necrotic tissue. Pseudopalisading necrosis indicates an aggressive tumor.\nTreatment.\nThere are many causes of necrosis, and as such treatment is based upon how the necrosis came about. Treatment of necrosis typically involves two distinct processes: Usually, the underlying cause of the necrosis must be treated before the dead tissue itself can be dealt with.\nEven after the initial cause of the necrosis has been halted, the necrotic tissue will remain in the body. The body's immune response to apoptosis, which involves the automatic breaking down and recycling of cellular material, is not triggered by necrotic cell death due to the apoptotic pathway being disabled.\nIn plants.\nIf calcium is deficient, pectin cannot be synthesized, and therefore the cell walls cannot be bonded and thus an impediment of the meristems. This will lead to necrosis of stem and root tips and leaf edges. For example, necrosis of tissue can occur in \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" due to plant pathogens.\nCacti such as the Saguaro and Cardon in the Sonoran Desert experience necrotic patch formation regularly; a species of Dipterans called Drosophila \"mettleri\" has developed a P450 detoxification system to enable it to use the exudates released in these patches to both nest and feed larvae.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39938", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39938", "title": "History of New Zealand", "text": "The human history of New Zealand can be dated back to between 1320 and 1350 CE, when the main settlement period started, after it was discovered and settled by Polynesians, who developed a distinct M\u0101ori culture. Like other Pacific cultures, M\u0101ori society was centred on kinship links and connection with the land but, unlike them, it was adapted to a cool, temperate environment rather than a warm, tropical one. The first European explorer known to have visited New Zealand was the Dutch navigator Abel Tasman, on 13 December 1642. In 1643 he charted the west coast of the North Island, his expedition then sailed back to Batavia without setting foot on New Zealand soil. British explorer James Cook, who reached New Zealand in October 1769 on the first of his three voyages, was the first European to circumnavigate and map New Zealand. From the late 18th century, the country was regularly visited by explorers and other sailors, missionaries, traders and adventurers. The period from Polynesian settlement to Cook's arrival is New Zealand's prehistoric period, a time before written records began. Acknowledgement of indigenous oral history as recorded history is a matter of academic debate. Depending on definitions, the period from 1642 to 1769 can be called New Zealand's protohistory rather than prehistory: Tasman's recording of M\u0101ori was isolated and scant.\nOn 6 February 1840, the Treaty of Waitangi was signed between representatives of the United Kingdom and various M\u0101ori chiefs, initially at Waitangi and over the following weeks at other locations across the country. On 21 May 1840, New Zealand entered the British Empire when Lieutenant-Governor William Hobson proclaimed British sovereignty at Koror\u0101reka (Russell). Disputes over the differing versions of the Treaty and settler desire to acquire land from M\u0101ori led to the New Zealand Wars from 1843. There was extensive British settlement throughout the rest of the 19th century and into the early part of the next century. The effects of European infectious diseases, the New Zealand Wars, and the imposition of a European economic and legal system led to most of New Zealand's land passing from M\u0101ori to P\u0101keh\u0101 (European) ownership, and M\u0101ori became impoverished.\nThe colony gained responsible government in the 1850s. From the 1890s the New Zealand Parliament enacted a number of progressive initiatives, including women's suffrage and old age pensions. After becoming a self-governing Dominion with the British Empire in 1907, the country remained an enthusiastic member of the empire, and over 100,000 New Zealanders fought in World War I as part of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force. After the war, New Zealand signed the Treaty of Versailles (1919), joined the League of Nations, and pursued an independent foreign policy, while its defence was still controlled by Britain. When World War II broke out in 1939, New Zealand contributed to the defence of Britain and the Pacific War; the country contributed some 120,000 troops. From the 1930s the economy was highly regulated and an extensive welfare state was developed. From the 1950s M\u0101ori began moving to the cities in large numbers, and M\u0101ori culture underwent a renaissance. This led to the development of a M\u0101ori protest movement, which in turn led to greater recognition of the Treaty of Waitangi in the late 20th century.\nThe country's economy suffered in the aftermath of the 1973 global energy crisis, the loss of New Zealand's biggest export market upon Britain's entry to the European Economic Community, and rampant inflation. In 1984, the Fourth Labour Government was elected amid a constitutional and economic crisis. The interventionist policies of the Third National Government were replaced by Rogernomics, a commitment to a free-market economy. Foreign policy after 1984 became more independent, especially in pushing for a nuclear-free zone. Subsequent governments have generally maintained these policies, although tempering the free market ethos somewhat.\nM\u0101ori arrival and settlement.\nNew Zealand was first settled by Polynesians from Eastern Polynesia. Linguistic and archaeological evidence suggests that humans emigrated from Taiwan via southeast Asia to Melanesia and then radiated eastwards into the Pacific in pulses and waves of discovery which gradually colonised islands from Samoa and Tonga all the way to Hawaii, the Marquesas, Easter Island, the Society Islands and, finally, New Zealand. According to oral tradition, the heroic explorer Kupe was the first discoverer of New Zealand or \u201cAotearoa\u201d. In an early European synthesised interpretation of these accounts, around 750 CE he had discovered New Zealand and later, around 1350, one great fleet of settlers set out from Hawaiki in eastern Polynesia. However, from the late 20th century, this story has been increasingly relegated to the realm of legend and myth, and an alternative view has emerged from fresh archaeological and scientific evidence.\nRegarding the arrival of these Polynesian settlers, there are no human remains, artefacts or structures which are confidently dated to earlier than the Kaharoa Tephra, a layer of volcanic debris deposited by the Mount Tarawera eruption around 1314 CE. Samples of rat bone, rat-gnawed shells and seed cases have given dates later than the Tarawera eruption except for three of a decade or so earlier. Radiocarbon dating and pollen evidence of widespread forest fires shortly before the eruption might also indicate a pre-eruption human presence. The 1999 dating of some kiore (Polynesian rat) bones to as early as 100 CE was later found to be an error; new samples of rat bone (and also of rat-gnawed shells and woody seed cases) mostly gave dates later than the Tarawera eruption with only three samples giving slightly earlier dates. Additionally, mitochondrial DNA variability within the M\u0101ori populations suggest that Eastern Polynesians first settled the New Zealand archipelago between 1250 and 1300, Therefore, current opinion is that, whether or not some settlers arrived before 1314, the main settlement period was in the subsequent decades, possibly involving a coordinated mass migration. It is also the broad consensus of historians that the Polynesian settlement of New Zealand was planned and deliberate.\nOver the centuries that followed, the settlers developed a distinct culture now known as M\u0101ori. This scenario is also consistent with a much debated third line of oral evidence, traditional genealogies () which point to around 1350 as a probable arrival date for many of the founding canoes (waka) from which many M\u0101ori trace their descent.\nThe descendants of these settlers became known as the M\u0101ori, forming a distinct culture of their own. The latter settlement of the tiny Chatham Islands in the east of New Zealand about 1500 produced the Moriori; linguistic evidence indicates that the Moriori were mainland M\u0101ori who ventured eastward. There is no evidence of a pre-M\u0101ori civilisation in mainland New Zealand.\nThe original settlers quickly exploited the abundant large game in New Zealand, such as moa, which were large flightless ratites pushed to extinction by about 1500. As moa and other large game became scarce or extinct, M\u0101ori culture underwent major change, with regional differences. In areas where it was possible to grow taro and k\u016bmara, horticulture became more important. This was not possible in the south of the South Island, but wild plants such as fernroot were often available and cabbage trees were harvested and cultivated for food. M\u0101ori cleared approximately 40% of New Zealand\u2019s original forest cover, especially in the North Island practicing slash-and-burn agriculture.\nWarfare also increased in importance, reflecting increased competition for land and other resources. In this period, fortified p\u0101 became more common, although there is debate about the actual frequency of warfare. As elsewhere in the Pacific, cannibalism was part of warfare.\nLeadership was based on a system of chieftainship, which was often but not always hereditary, although chiefs (male or female) needed to demonstrate leadership abilities to avoid being superseded by more dynamic individuals. The most important units of pre-European M\u0101ori society were the wh\u0101nau or extended family, and the hap\u016b or group of wh\u0101nau. After these came the iwi or tribe, consisting of groups of hap\u016b. Related hap\u016b would often trade goods and co-operate on major projects, but conflict between hap\u016b was also relatively common. Traditional M\u0101ori society preserved history orally through narratives, songs, and chants; skilled experts could recite the tribal genealogies (\"whakapapa\") back for hundreds of years. Arts included whaik\u014drero (oratory), song composition in multiple genres, dance forms including haka, as well as weaving, highly developed wood carving, and t\u0101 moko (tattoo).\nNew Zealand has no native land mammals (apart from some rare bats) so birds, fish and sea mammals were important sources of protein. M\u0101ori cultivated food plants which they had brought with them from Polynesia, including sweet potatoes (called k\u016bmara), taro, gourds, and yams. They also cultivated the cabbage tree, a plant endemic to New Zealand, and exploited wild foods such as fern root, which provided a starchy paste.\nEarly contact periods.\nEarly European exploration.\nThe first Europeans known to have reached New Zealand were the crew of Dutch explorer Abel Tasman who arrived in his ships \"Heemskerck\" and \"Zeehaen\". Tasman anchored at the northern end of the South Island in Golden Bay (he named it Murderers' Bay) in December 1642, and sailed northward to Tonga following an attack by local M\u0101ori, Ng\u0101ti T\u016bmatak\u014dkiri. Tasman sketched sections of the two main islands' west coasts. Tasman called them \"Staten Landt\", after the \"States General of the Netherlands\", and that name appeared on his first maps of the country. In 1645 Dutch cartographers changed the name to \"Nova Zeelandia\" in Latin, from \"Nieuw Zeeland\", after the Dutch province of \"Zeeland\".\nOver 100 years elapsed before Europeans returned to New Zealand; in 1769, British naval captain James Cook of HM Bark \"Endeavour\" visited New Zealand, and coincidentally, only two months later, Frenchman Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Surville, in command of his own expedition, reached the country. When Cook left on his first voyage, the sealed orders given to him by the British Admiralty ordered him to proceed \"...to the Westward between the Latitude beforementioned and the Latitude of 35\u00b0 until' you discover it, or fall in with the Eastern side of the Land discover'd by Tasman and now called \"New Zeland.\"\" He would return to New Zealand on both of his subsequent voyages of discovery.\nVarious claims have been made that New Zealand was reached by other non-Polynesian voyagers before Tasman, but these are not widely accepted. Peter Trickett, for example, argues in \"Beyond Capricorn\" that the Portuguese explorer Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o de Mendon\u00e7a reached New Zealand in the 1520s, and the Tamil bell discovered by missionary William Colenso has given rise to a number of theories, but historians generally believe the bell \"is not in itself proof of early Tamil contact with New Zealand\". A 2014 article claimed to have found a Dutch shipwreck that post-dated Tasman's arrival. The claim was dismissed due to flawed methodology.\nFrom the 1790s, the waters around New Zealand were visited by British, French and American whaling, sealing and trading ships. Their crews traded European goods, including guns and metal tools, for M\u0101ori food, water, wood, flax and sex. M\u0101ori were reputed to be enthusiastic and canny traders, even though the levels of technology, institutions and property rights differed greatly from the standards in European societies. Although there were some conflicts, such as the killing of French explorer Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne in 1772 and the destruction of the \"Boyd\" in 1809, most contact between M\u0101ori and Europeans was peaceful.\nEarly European settlement.\nP\u0101keh\u0101 settlement increased through the early decades of the 19th century, with numerous trading stations established, especially in the North Island. Christianity was introduced to New Zealand in 1814 by Samuel Marsden, who travelled to the Bay of Islands where he founded a mission station on behalf of the Church of England's Church Missionary Society. By 1840 over 20 stations had been established. From missionaries, the M\u0101ori learnt not just about Christianity but also about European farming practices and trades, and how to read and write. Building on the work of the Church Missionary Society missionary Thomas Kendall, beginning in 1820, linguist Samuel Lee worked with M\u0101ori chief Hongi Hika to transcribe the M\u0101ori language into written form. In 1835 the country's first successful printing was two books from the Bible produced by Church Missionary Society printer William Colenso, translated into M\u0101ori by the Rev. William Williams.\nThe first European missionary settlement was at Rangihoua Bay, the land purchased on 24 February 1815, where the first full-blooded European infant in the territory, Thomas Holloway King, was born on 21 February 1815 at the Oihi Mission Station near Hohi Bay in the Bay of Islands. Kerikeri, founded in 1822, and Bluff founded in 1823, both claim to be the oldest European settlements in New Zealand. Many European settlers bought land from M\u0101ori, but misunderstanding and different concepts of land ownership led to conflict and bitterness.\nM\u0101ori response.\nThe effect of contact on M\u0101ori varied. In some inland areas life went on more or less unchanged, although a European metal tool such as a fish-hook or hand axe might be acquired through trade with other tribes. At the other end of the scale, tribes that frequently encountered Europeans, such as Ng\u0101puhi in Northland, underwent major changes.\nPre-European M\u0101ori had no distance weapons except for tao (spears) and the introduction of the musket had an enormous effect on M\u0101ori warfare. Tribes with muskets would attack tribes without them, killing or enslaving many. As a result, guns became very valuable and M\u0101ori would trade huge quantities of goods for a single musket. From 1805 to 1843 the Musket Wars raged until a new balance of power was achieved after most tribes had acquired muskets. In 1835, the Moriori of the Chatham Islands were attacked, enslaved, and nearly exterminated by mainland Ng\u0101ti Mutunga and Ng\u0101ti Tama M\u0101ori. In the 1901 census, only 35 Moriori were recorded. Tommy Solomon, the last full-blooded Moriori, died in 1933.\nAround this time, many M\u0101ori converted to Christianity. In 1845, 64,000 M\u0101ori were attending church services, over half of the estimated population of 110,000. By then, there was probably a higher proportion of M\u0101ori attending Church in New Zealand than British people in the United Kingdom, and their moral practices and spiritual lives were transformed. The New Zealand Anglican Church, (the missionary church), was, and is, the largest M\u0101ori denomination. M\u0101ori made Christianity their own and spread it throughout the country often before European missionaries arrived.\nM\u0101ori Declaration of Independence.\nIn response to complaints from missionaries, and to a petition from M\u0101ori chiefs calling for King William IV to be a \"friend and guardian\" of New Zealand, in the context of there being lawless sailors and adventurers in New Zealand, the British Government appointed James Busby as British Resident in 1832. A British Resident is a position with limited authority, and no power to make or enforce any law. In 1834 Busby encouraged M\u0101ori chiefs from the northern part of the North Island to assert what he called their sovereignty by signing the Declaration of the Independence of New Zealand (\"\"), in 1835, that Busby had written. It asserted that sovereign power and authority in the land ('Ko te Kingitanga ko te mana i te w[h]enua') resided with the Confederation of United Tribes (Te Whakaminenga), and that no foreigners could make laws. The Confederation was to meet at Waitangi each autumn to frame laws, and in return for the chiefs' protection of British subjects in their territory they sought King William's protection against threats to their mana. They also thanked the King for acknowledging their flag.\nThe declaration was sent to King William IV and was recognised by Britain. Busby was provided with neither legal authority nor military support and was thus ineffective in controlling the P\u0101keh\u0101 population.\nTreaty of Waitangi.\nIn 1839, the New Zealand Company announced plans to buy large tracts of land and to colonise New Zealand. This and the increased commercial interests of merchants in Sydney and London spurred the British Government to take stronger action. The Government sent Captain William Hobson to New Zealand to be lieutenant governor. In reaction to the New Zealand Company's moves, on 15 June 1839 the issue of new Letters Patent expanded the territory of New South Wales to include all of New Zealand. Governor of New South Wales George Gipps was appointed governor over New Zealand.\nOn 6 February 1840, Hobson and about forty M\u0101ori chiefs signed the Treaty of Waitangi at Waitangi in the Bay of Islands. The British subsequently took copies of the Treaty around the islands of New Zealand for signature by other chiefs. A significant number refused to sign or were not asked but, in total, more than five hundred M\u0101ori eventually signed.\nTwo versions of the treaty were signed, one in English, the other in M\u0101ori. The meaning of each version is not the same which has led to various interpretations (see interpretations of the Treaty). Since 1940, issues relating to the treaty have played an increasingly active social and governmental role in New Zealand.\nBritain was motivated by the desire to forestall the New Zealand Company and other European powers (France established a very small settlement at Akaroa in the South Island later in 1840), to facilitate settlement by British subjects and, possibly, to end the lawlessness of European (predominantly British and American) whalers, sealers and traders. Officials and missionaries had their own positions and reputations to protect. M\u0101ori chiefs were motivated by a desire for protection from foreign powers, for the establishment of governorship over European settlers and traders in New Zealand, and for allowing wider European settlement that would increase trade and prosperity for M\u0101ori.\nGovernor Hobson died on 10 September 1842. Robert FitzRoy, the new governor (in office: 1843\u20131845), took some legal steps to recognise M\u0101ori custom.\nHowever, his successor, George Grey, promoted rapid cultural assimilation and reduction of the land-ownership, influence and rights of the M\u0101ori. The practical effect of the Treaty was, in the beginning, only gradually felt, especially in predominantly M\u0101ori regions, where the settler government had little or no authority.\nColonial period.\nThe Colony of New South Wales was founded by 1788. According to the future Governor, Captain Arthur Phillip's amended Commission, dated 25 April 1787 the colony of New South Wales included \"all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitudes of 10\u00b037'S and 43\u00b039'S\". In 1825 with Van Diemen's Land becoming a separate colony, the southern boundary of New South Wales was altered to the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean with a southern boundary of 39\u00b012'S which included only the northern half of the North Island. However, these boundaries had no real effect as the New South Wales administration had little interest in New Zealand.\nNew Zealand was first mentioned in British statute in the Murders Abroad Act 1817. It made it easier for a court to punish \"murders or manslaughters committed in places not within His Majesty's dominions\", and the Governor of New South Wales was given increased legal authority over New Zealand. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of New South Wales over New Zealand was initiated in the New South Wales Act 1823, and lesser offences were included at that time.\nEstablishing the colony.\nWilliam Hobson declared British sovereignty over all New Zealand on 21 May 1840, at which point he became its Lieutenant governor. At first New Zealand was administered from Australia as part of the colony of New South Wales, and from 16 June 1840 New South Wales laws were deemed to operate in New Zealand. This was a transitional arrangement, and the British Government issued the Charter for Erecting the Colony of New Zealand on 16 November 1840. The Charter stated that the Colony of New Zealand would be established as a Crown colony separate from New South Wales on 3 May 1841.\nSettlement continued under British plans, inspired by a vision of New Zealand as a new land of opportunity. In 1846, the British Parliament passed the New Zealand Constitution Act 1846 for self-government for the 13,000 settlers in New Zealand. The new Governor, George Grey, suspended the plans. He argued that the P\u0101keh\u0101 could not be trusted to pass laws that would protect the interests of the M\u0101ori majority \u2013 already there had been Treaty violations \u2013 and persuaded his political superiors to postpone its introduction for five years.\nThe Church of England sponsored the Canterbury Association colony with assisted passages from Great Britain in the early 1850s. As a result of the influx of settlers, the P\u0101keh\u0101 population grew explosively from fewer than 1000 in 1831 to 500,000 by 1881. Some 400,000 settlers came from Britain, of whom 300,000 stayed permanently. Most were young people and 250,000 babies were born. The passage of 120,000 was paid by the colonial government. After 1880, immigration reduced, and growth was due chiefly to the excess of births over deaths.\nNew Zealand Company.\nThe New Zealand Company was responsible for 15,500 settlers coming to New Zealand. Company prospectuses did not always tell the truth, and often colonists would only find out the reality once they had arrived in New Zealand. This private colonisation project was part of the reason that the British Colonial Office decided to speed up its plans for the annexation of New Zealand. Edward Gibbon Wakefield (1796\u20131862) had a far-reaching influence by helping create the New Zealand Company. Due to his conviction and three-year imprisonment for abducting an heiress, his role in forming the New Zealand Company was necessarily out of sight from the public. Wakefield's colonisation programmes were over-elaborate and operated on a much smaller scale than he hoped for, but his ideas influenced law and culture, especially his vision for the colony as the embodiment of post-Enlightenment ideals, the notion of New Zealand as a model society, and the sense of fairness in employer-employee relations.\nNew Zealand Wars.\nM\u0101ori had welcomed P\u0101keh\u0101 for the trading opportunities and guns they brought. However it soon became clear that they had underestimated the number of settlers that would arrive in their lands. Iwi (tribes) whose land was the base of the main settlements quickly lost much of their land and autonomy through government acts. Others prospered\u00a0\u2013 until about 1860 the city of Auckland bought most of its food from M\u0101ori who grew and sold it themselves. Many iwi owned flour mills, ships and other items of European technology, and some exported food to Australia for a brief period during the 1850s gold rush. Although race relations were generally peaceful in this period, there were conflicts over who had ultimate power in particular areas\u00a0\u2013 the Governor or the M\u0101ori chiefs. One such conflict was the Northern or Flagstaff War of the 1840s, during which Kororareka was sacked.\nAs the P\u0101keh\u0101 population grew, pressure grew on M\u0101ori to sell more land. Land was used communally but under the mana of chiefs. In M\u0101ori culture, there was no such idea as selling land until the arrival of Europeans. The means of acquiring land was to defeat another hapu or iwi in battle and seize their land. Te Rauparaha seized the land of many iwi in the lower North Island and upper South Island during the musket wars. Land was usually not given up without discussion and consultation. When an iwi was divided over the question of selling this could lead to great difficulties as at Waitara.\nP\u0101keh\u0101 had little understanding of M\u0101ori views on land and accused M\u0101ori of holding onto land they did not use efficiently. Competition for land was one important cause of the New Zealand Wars of the 1860s and 1870s, in which the Taranaki and Waikato regions were invaded by colonial troops and M\u0101ori of these regions had some of their land taken from them. The wars and confiscation left bitterness that remains to this day. After the conclusion of the wars some iwi, especially in the Waikato, such as Ngati Haua sold land freely.\nSome iwi () sided with the government and later fought with the government. They were motivated partly by the thought that an alliance with the government would benefit them, and partly by old feuds with the iwi they fought against. One result of their co-operation strategy was the establishment of the four M\u0101ori electorates in the House of Representatives, in 1867.\nAfter the wars, some M\u0101ori began a strategy of passive resistance, most famously the ploughing campaigns at Parihaka on 26 May 1879 in Taranaki. Most, such as Ng\u0101puhi and Te Arawa, continued co-operating with P\u0101keh\u0101. For example, tourism ventures were established by Te Arawa around Rotorua. Resisting and co-operating iwi both found that P\u0101keh\u0101 desire for land remained. In the last decades of the century, most iwi lost substantial amounts of land through the activities of the Native Land Court. Due to its Eurocentric rules, the high fees, its location remote from the lands in question, and unfair practices by some P\u0101keh\u0101 land agents, its main effect was to allow M\u0101ori to sell their land without restraint from other tribal members.\nThe effects of disease, as well as war, confiscations, assimilation and intermarriage, land loss leading to poor housing and alcohol abuse, and general disillusionment, caused a fall in the M\u0101ori population from around 86,000 in 1769 to around 70,000 in 1840 and around 48,000 by 1874, hitting a low point of 42,000 in 1896. Subsequently, their numbers began to recover.\nSelf-government, 1850s.\nIn response to increased petitioning for self-governance from the growing number of British settlers, the British Parliament passed the New Zealand Constitution Act 1852, setting up a central government with an elected General Assembly (Parliament) and six provincial governments. The General Assembly did not meet until 24 May 1854, 16 months after the Constitution Act had come into force. Provinces were reorganised in 1846 and in 1853, when they acquired their own legislatures, and then abolished with effect in 1877. The settlers soon won the right to responsible government (with an executive supported by a majority in the elected assembly). But the governor, and through him the Colonial Office in London, retained control of native policy until the mid-1860s.\nFarming and mining.\nThe M\u0101ori tribes at first sold the land to the settlers, but the government voided the sales in 1840. Now only the government was allowed to purchase land from M\u0101ori, who received cash. The government bought practically all the useful land, then resold it to the New Zealand Company, which promoted immigration, or leased it for sheep runs. The Company resold the best tracts to British settlers; its profits were used to pay the travel of the immigrants from Britain.\nBecause of the vast distances involved, the first settlers were self-sufficient farmers. By the 1840s, however, large scale sheep stations were exporting large quantities of wool to the textile mills of England. Most of the early settlers were brought over by a programme operated by the New Zealand Company and were located in the central region on either side of Cook Strait, and at Wellington, Wanganui, New Plymouth and Nelson. These settlements had access to some of the richest plains in the country and after refrigerated ships appeared in 1882, they developed into closely settled regions of small-scale farming. Outside these compact settlements were the sheep runs. Pioneer pastoralists, often men with experience as squatters in Australia, leased lands from the government at the annual rate of \u00a35 plus \u00a31 for each 1,000 sheep above the first 5,000. The leases were renewed automatically, which gave the wealthy pastoralists a strong landed interest and made them a powerful political force. In all between 1856 and 1876, 8.1\u00a0million acres were sold for \u00a37.6\u00a0million, and 2.2\u00a0million acres were given free to soldiers, sailors and settlers. With an economy based on agriculture, the landscape was transformed from forest to farmland.\nGold discoveries in Otago (1861) and Westland (1865), caused a worldwide gold rush that more than doubled the population in a short period, from 71,000 in 1859 to 164,000 in 1863. The value of trade increased fivefold from \u00a32 million to \u00a310 million. As the gold boom ended, Colonial Treasurer and later (from 1873) Premier Julius Vogel borrowed money from British investors and launched in 1870 an ambitious programme of public works and infrastructure investment, together with a policy of assisted immigration. Successive governments expanded the programme with offices across Britain that enticed settlers and gave them and their families one-way tickets.\nFrom about 1865, the economy lapsed into a long depression as a result of the withdrawal of British troops, peaking of gold production in 1866 and Vogel's borrowing and the associated debt burden (especially on land). Despite a brief boom in wheat, prices for farm products sagged. The market for land seized up. Hard times led to urban unemployment and sweated labour (exploitative labour conditions) in industry. The country lost people through emigration, mostly to Australia.\nVogel era.\nIn 1870 Julius Vogel introduced his \"grand go-ahead policy\" to dispel the slump with increased immigration and overseas borrowing to fund new railways, roads and telegraph lines. Local banks \u2013 notably the Bank of New Zealand and the Colonial Bank of New Zealand \u2014 were \"reckless\" and permitted \"a frenzy of private borrowing\". The public debt had increased from \u00a37.8 million in 1870 to \u00a318.6 million in 1876. But of railway had been built with under construction. of road had been opened, and electric telegraph lines increased from in 1866 to in 1876. A record number of immigrants arrived in 1874 (32,000 of the 44,000 were government assisted) and the population rose from 248,000 in 1870 to 399,000 in 1876.\nWomen.\nAlthough norms of masculinity were dominant, strong minded women originated a feminist movement starting in the 1860s, well before women gained the right to vote in 1893. Middle-class women employed the media (especially newspapers) to communicate with each other and define their priorities. Prominent feminist writers included Mary Taylor, Mary Colclough (pseud. Polly Plum), and Ellen Elizabeth Ellis. The first signs of a politicised collective female identity came in crusades to pass the Contagious Diseases Prevention Act.\nFeminists by the 1880s were using the rhetoric of \"white slavery\" to reveal men's sexual and social oppression of women. By demanding that men take responsibility for the right of women to walk the streets in safety, New Zealand feminists deployed the rhetoric of white slavery to argue for women's sexual and social freedom. Middle-class women successfully mobilised to stop prostitution, especially during the First World War.\nM\u0101ori women developed their own form of feminism, derived from M\u0101ori nationalism rather than European sources.\nIn 1893 Elizabeth Yates was elected mayor of Onehunga, making her the first woman in the British Empire to hold the office. She was an able administrator: she cut the debt, reorganised the fire brigade, and improved the roads and sanitation. Many men were hostile however, and she was defeated for re-election. Hutching argues that after 1890 women were increasingly well organised through the National Council of Women, the Women's Christian Temperance Union, the Women's International League, and others. By 1910 they were campaigning for peace, and against compulsory military training, and conscription. They demanded arbitration and the peaceful resolution of international disputes. The women argued that women-hood (thanks to motherhood) was the repository of superior moral values and concerns and from their domestic experience they knew best how to resolve conflicts.\nSchools.\nPrior to 1877 schools were operated by the provincial government, churches, or by private subscription. Education was not a requirement and many children did not attend any school, especially farm children whose labour was important to the family economy. The quality of education provided varied substantially depending on the school. The Education Act of 1877 created New Zealand's first free national system of primary education, establishing standards that educators should meet, and making education compulsory for children aged 5 to 15.\nImmigration.\nFrom 1840 there was considerable European settlement, primarily from England and Wales, Scotland and Ireland; and to a lesser extent the United States, India, China, and various parts of continental Europe, including the province of Dalmatia in what is now Croatia, and Bohemia in what is now the Czech Republic. Already a majority of the population by 1859, the number of P\u0101keh\u0101 settlers increased rapidly to reach over one million by 1916.\nIn the 1870s and 1880s, several thousand Chinese men, mostly from Guangdong, migrated to New Zealand to work on the South Island goldfields. Although the first Chinese migrants had been invited by the Otago Provincial government they quickly became the target of hostility from white settlers and laws were enacted specifically to discourage them from coming to New Zealand.\nGold Rush and South Island growth.\nIn 1861 gold was discovered at Gabriel's Gully in Central Otago, sparking a gold rush. Dunedin became the wealthiest city in the country and many in the South Island resented financing the North Island's wars. In 1865 Parliament defeated a proposal to make the South Island independent by 17 to 31.\nThe South Island was home to most of the P\u0101keh\u0101 population until around 1911 when the North Island again took the lead, and has supported an ever-greater majority of the country's total population through the 20th century and into the 21st.\nScottish immigrants dominated the South Island and evolved ways to bridge the old homeland and the new. Many local Caledonian societies were formed. They organised sports teams to entice the young and preserved an idealised Scottish national myth (based on Robert Burns) for the elderly. They gave Scots a path to assimilation and cultural integration as Scottish New Zealanders. The settlement of Scots in the Deep South is reflected in the lasting predominance of Presbyterianism in the South Island.\n1890\u20131914.\nPolitics.\nThe pre-war era saw the advent of party politics, with the establishment of the Liberal Government. The landed gentry and aristocracy ruled Britain at this time. New Zealand never had an aristocracy but it did have wealthy landowners who largely controlled politics before 1891. The Liberal Party set out to change that by a policy it called \"populism\". Richard Seddon had proclaimed the goal as early as 1884: \"It is the rich and the poor; it is the wealthy and the landowners against the middle and labouring classes. That, Sir, shows the real political position of New Zealand.\" The Liberal strategy was to create a large class of small land-owning farmers who supported Liberal ideals.\nTo obtain land for farmers the Liberal government from 1891 to 1911 purchased 3.1\u00a0million acres of M\u0101ori land. The government also purchased 1.3\u00a0million acres from large estate holders for subdivision and closer settlement by small farmers. The Advances to Settlers Act of 1894 provided low-interest mortgages, while the Agriculture Department disseminated information on the best farming methods.\nThe 1909 Native Land Act allowed the M\u0101ori to sell land to private buyers. M\u0101ori still owned five million acres by 1920; they leased three million acres and used one million acres for themselves. The Liberals proclaimed success in forging an egalitarian, anti-monopoly land policy. The policy built up support for the Liberal party in rural North Island electorates. By 1903 the Liberals were so dominant that there was no longer an organised opposition in Parliament.\nThe Liberal government laid the foundations of the later comprehensive welfare state: introducing old age pensions; maximum hour regulations; pioneering minimum wage laws; and developing a system for settling industrial disputes, which was accepted by both employers and trade unions, to start with. In 1893 it extended voting rights to women, making New Zealand the first country in the world to enact universal female suffrage.\nNew Zealand gained international attention for its reforms, especially how the state regulated labour relations. The effect was especially strong on the .\nColeman argues that the Liberals in 1891 lacked a clear-cut ideology to guide them. Instead they approached the nation's problems pragmatically, keeping in mind the constraints imposed by democratic public opinion. To deal with the issue of land distribution, they worked out innovative solutions to access, tenure, and a graduated tax on unimproved values.\nEconomic developments.\nIn the 1870s Julius Vogel's \"grand go-ahead policy\" of borrowing overseas had increased the public debt from \u00a37.8 million in 1870 to \u00a318.6 million in 1876, but had constructed many miles of railways, roads and telegraph lines and attracted many new migrants.\nIn the 1880s, New Zealand's economy grew from one based on wool and local trade to the export of wool, cheese, butter and frozen beef and mutton to Britain. The change was enabled by the invention of refrigerated steamships in 1882 and a result of the large market demands overseas. In order to increase production, alongside a more intensive use of factor inputs a transformation of production techniques was necessary. The required capital came mainly from outside of New Zealand. Refrigerated shipping remained the basis of New Zealand's economy until the 1970s. New Zealand's highly productive agriculture gave it probably the world's highest standard of living, with fewer at the rich and poor ends of the scale.\nDuring this era (c.\u20091880\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091914) the banking system was weak and there was little foreign investment, so businessmen had to build up their own capital. Historians have debated whether the \"long depression\" of the late 19th century stifled investment, but the New Zealanders found a way around adverse conditions. Hunter has studied the experiences of 133 entrepreneurs who started commercial enterprises between 1880 and 1910. The successful strategy was to deploy capital economising techniques, and reinvesting profits rather than borrowing. The result was slow but stable growth that avoided bubbles and led to long-lived family owned firms.\nOption of becoming a state within the Commonwealth of Australia.\nThe premier of New Zealand, Richard Seddon, opposed the idea of uniting the colonies. He set up a Royal Commission on the topic in 1900. Despite some support for becoming an Australian state from the farming community which feared new trade restrictions if New Zealand did not unite with Australia, there was majority opposition to the idea. The prevailing opinion was that Australians were more economic rivals than partners, with New Zealand trade being mostly with the United Kingdom. New Zealand remained a separate colony when the Commonwealth of Australia was created on 1 January 1901, ushering in the 20th century.\nDominion status.\nIn 1907, New Zealand underwent a change of name to be known as a dominion instead of a colony. Dominion status was seen by some as a public mark of the responsible self-governance that had evolved over half a century. However, the change was not universally popular, with others seeing it as unnecessary. Just under one million people lived in New Zealand in 1907 and cities such as Auckland and Wellington were growing rapidly.\nTemperance and prohibition.\nIn New Zealand, prohibition was a moralistic reform movement begun in the mid-1880s by the Protestant evangelical and Nonconformist churches and the Women's Christian Temperance Union New Zealand and after 1890 by the Prohibition League. It never achieved its goal of national prohibition. It was a middle-class movement which accepted the existing economic and social order; the effort to legislate morality assumed that individual redemption was all that was needed to carry the colony forward from a pioneering society to a more mature one. However, both the Church of England and the largely Irish Catholic Church rejected prohibition as an intrusion of government into the church's domain, while the growing labour movement saw capitalism rather than alcohol as the enemy. Reformers hoped that the women's vote, in which New Zealand was a pioneer, would swing the balance, but the women were not as well organised as in other countries. Prohibition had a majority in a national referendum in 1911, but needed a 60% majority to pass. The movement kept trying in the 1920s, losing three more referendums by close votes; it managed to keep in place a 6\u00a0pm closing hour for pubs and Sunday closing (leading to the so-called six o'clock swill). The Depression and war years effectively ended the movement.\nFirst World War.\nThe country remained an enthusiastic member of the British Empire. The date the outbreak of World War I is marked in New Zealand is 4 August. During the war, more than 120,000 New Zealanders enlisted to the New Zealand Expeditionary Force, and around 100,000 served overseas; 18,000 died, 499 were taken prisoner, and about 41,000 men were listed as wounded. Conscription had been in force since 1909, and while it was opposed in peacetime there was less opposition during the war. The labour movement was pacifistic, opposed the war, and alleged that the rich were benefiting at the expense of the workers. It formed the New Zealand Labour Party in 1916. M\u0101ori tribes that had been close to the government sent their young men to volunteer. Unlike in Britain, relatively few women became involved. Women did serve as nurses; 640 joined the services and 500 went overseas.\nNew Zealand forces captured Western Samoa from Germany in the early stages of the war, and New Zealand administered the country until Samoan Independence in 1962. However Samoans greatly resented the imperialism, and blamed inflation and the catastrophic 1918 flu epidemic on New Zealand rule.\nMore than 2700 men died in the Gallipoli Campaign. The heroism of the soldiers in the failed campaign made their sacrifices iconic in New Zealand memory, and is often credited with securing the psychological independence of the nation.\nImperial loyalties.\nAfter the war New Zealand signed the Treaty of Versailles (1919), joined the League of Nations and pursued an independent foreign policy, while its defence was still controlled by Britain. New Zealand depended on Britain's Royal Navy for its military security during the 1920s and 1930s. Officials in Wellington trusted Conservative Party governments in London, but not Labour. When the British Labour Party took power in 1924 and 1929, the New Zealand government felt threatened by Labour's foreign policy because of its reliance upon the League of Nations. The League was distrusted and Wellington did not expect to see the coming of a peaceful world order under League auspices. What had been the Empire's most loyal dominion became a dissenter as it opposed efforts by the first and second British Labour governments to trust the League's framework of arbitration and collective security agreements.\nThe governments of the Reform and United parties between 1912 and 1935 followed a \"realistic\" foreign policy. They made national security a high priority, were sceptical of international institutions, and showed no interest on the questions of self-determination, democracy, and human rights. However the opposition Labour Party was more idealistic and proposed a liberal internationalist outlook on international affairs.\nLabour movement.\nThe Labour Party emerged as a force in 1919 with a socialist platform. It won about 25% of the vote. However its appeals to working class solidarity were not effective because a large fraction of the working class voted for conservative candidates of the Liberal and Reform parties. (They merged in 1936 to form the New Zealand National Party.) As a consequence the Labour party was able to jettison its support for socialism in 1927 (a policy made official in 1951), as it expanded its reach into middle class constituencies. The result was a jump in strength to 35% in 1931, 47% in 1935, and peaking at 56% in 1938. From 1935 the First Labour Government showed a limited degree of idealism in foreign policy, for example opposing the appeasement of Germany and Japan.\nGreat Depression.\nLike many other countries, New Zealand suffered in the Great Depression of the 1930s, which affected the country via its international trade, with steep decreases in farm exports subsequently affecting the money supply and in turn consumption, investment and imports. The country was most affected around 1930\u20131932, when average farm incomes for a short time dipped below zero, and the unemployment rate peaked. Though actual unemployment numbers were not officially counted, the country was affected especially strongly in the North Island.\nUnlike in later years, there were no public benefit (\"dole\") payments\u00a0\u2013 the unemployed were given \"relief work\", much of which was however not very productive, partly because the size of the problem was unprecedented. Women also increasingly registered as unemployed, while M\u0101ori received government help through other channels such as the land-development schemes organised by Sir \u0100pirana Ngata, who served as Minister of Native Affairs from 1928 to 1934. In 1933, 8.5% of the unemployed were organised in work camps, while the rest received work close to their homes. Typical occupations in relief work included road work (undertaken by 45% of all part-time and 19% of all full-time relief workers in 1934, with park improvement works (17%) and farm work (31%) being the other two most common types of work for part-time and full-time relief workers respectively).\nBuilding the welfare state.\nAttempts by the United\u2013Reform Coalition to deal with the situation with spending cuts and relief work were ineffective and unpopular. In 1935, the First Labour Government was elected, and the post-depression decade showed that average Labour support in New Zealand had roughly doubled comparable to pre-depression times. By 1935 economic conditions had improved somewhat, and the new government had more positive financial conditions. Prime Minister Michael Joseph Savage proclaimed that: \"Social Justice must be the guiding principle and economic organisation must adapt itself to social needs.\"\nThe new government quickly set about implementing a number of significant reforms, including a reorganisation of the social welfare system and the creation of the state housing scheme. Labour also gained M\u0101ori votes by working closely with the R\u0101tana movement. Savage was idolised by the working classes, and his portrait hung on the walls of many houses around the country. The newly created welfare state promised government support to individuals \"from the cradle to the grave\", according to the Labour slogan. It included free health care and education, and state assistance for the elderly, infirm, and unemployed. The opposition attacked the Labour Party's more left-wing policies, and accused it of undermining free enterprise and hard work. The Reform Party and the United Party merged to become the National Party, and would be Labour's main rival in future years. However the welfare state system was retained and expanded by successive National and Labour governments until the 1980s.\n1930s foreign policy.\nIn foreign policy, the Labour Party in power after 1935 disliked the Versailles Treaty of 1919 as too harsh on Germany, opposed militarism and arms build-ups, distrusted the political conservatism of the National Government in Britain, sympathised with the Soviet Union, and increasingly worried about threats from Japan. It denounced Italy's role in Ethiopia and sympathised with the republican forces in the Spanish Civil War. Those policies favoured the left but it also was pro-German. It consistently advocated negotiations with Nazi Germany, signed a trade agreement with it, welcomed the Munich agreement of 1938 regarding the division of Czechoslovakia, discouraged public criticism of the Nazi regime, and pursued a slow rearmament programme. When World War II broke out in September 1939, it recommended to London a negotiated peace with Berlin; however after the fall of France in the spring of 1940, it did support the British war effort militarily and economically.\nSecond World War.\nWhen war broke out in 1939, New Zealanders saw their proper role as defending their proud place in the British Empire. It contributed some 120,000 troops. \nNew Zealand, with a population of 1.7\u00a0million, including 99,000 M\u0101ori, was highly mobilised during the war. The Labour party was in power and promoted unionisation and the welfare state. Agriculture expanded, sending record supplies of meat, butter and wool to Britain. When American forces arrived, they were fed as well.\nThe nation spent \u00a3574\u00a0million on the war, of which 43% came from taxes, 41% from loans and 16% from American Lend Lease. It was an era of prosperity as the national income soared from \u00a3158\u00a0million in 1937 to \u00a3292\u00a0million in 1944. Rationing and price controls kept inflation to only 14% during 1939\u201345.\nOver \u00a350\u00a0million was spent on defence works and military accommodation and hospitals, including of roads.\nMontgomerie shows that the war dramatically increased the roles of women, especially married women, in the labour force. Most of them took traditional female jobs. Some replaced men but the changes here were temporary and reversed in 1945. After the war, women left traditional male occupations and many women gave up paid employment to return home. There was no radical change in gender roles but the war intensified occupational trends under way since the 1920s.\nPost-war era.\nLabour to National.\nLabour remained in power after the Second World War and in 1945, Labour Prime Minister Peter Fraser played an important role in the establishment of the United Nations, of which New Zealand was a founding member. However, domestically Labour had lost the reforming zeal of the 1930s and its electoral support ebbed after the war. After Labour lost power in 1949, the conservative National Party began an almost continuous thirty-year stint in government, interrupted by single-term Labour governments in 1957 to 60 and 1972 to 75. National Prime Minister Sidney Holland called a snap election as a result of the 1951 waterfront dispute, an incident that reinforced National's dominance and severely weakened the union movement.\nThe British connection.\nFedorowich and Bridge argue that the demands of the Second World War produced long-term consequences for New Zealand's relationship with the government in London. The key component was the office of the high commissioner. By 1950 it was the main line of communications between the British and New Zealand governments.\n1950s New Zealand culture was deeply British, with the concept of \"fairness\" holding a central role. New immigrants, still mainly British, flooded in while New Zealand remained prosperous by exporting farm products to Britain.\nHowever, during the Korean War, cooperation with the United States set a direction of policy which resulted in the ANZUS Treaty between New Zealand, America and Australia in 1951. Decried by many, including British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, that the treaty excluding Britain, the ANZUS treaty was argued by the Government as complimenting British Commonwealth commitments.\nIn 1953 New Zealanders took pride that a countryman, Edmund Hillary, gave Queen Elizabeth II a coronation gift by reaching the summit of Mount Everest.\nFrom the 1890s, the economy had been based almost entirely on the export of frozen meat and dairy products to Britain, and in 1961, the share of New Zealand exports going to the United Kingdom was still at slightly over 51%, with approximately 15% going to other European countries.\nNew Zealand\u2019s entry into the Vietnam War provoked controversy and much protest. New Zealand's involvement in the Vietnam War signalled a major breakaway from British influence even though it was brought about primarily because of New Zealand's obligations under the ANZUS Treaty and growing concerns about Communist influences in the Asia-Pacific region. As a result, the United States pressured the governments of Australia and New Zealand to contribute to the war in Vietnam, eventually resulting in both nations sending forces, with New Zealand's first troops arriving in 1965. The Vietnam War was the first conflict that New Zealand entered that did not involve Britain.\nIrrespective of political developments, many New Zealanders perceived themselves as a distinctive outlying branch of the United Kingdom until at least the 1970s. In 1973 Britain joined the European Economic Community (precursor of the European Union) and abrogated its preferential trade agreements with New Zealand, forcing New Zealand to find new markets. The UK was New Zealand\u2019s largest trading partner, and New Zealanders felt a sense of betrayal recalling NZ\u2019s sacrifices during WW2 to aid Britain.\nM\u0101ori urbanisation.\nM\u0101ori always had a high birth rate; that was neutralised by a high death rate until modern public health measures became effective in the 20th century when tuberculosis deaths and infant mortality declined sharply. Life expectancy grew from 49 years in 1926 to 60 years in 1961 and the total numbers grew rapidly. Many M\u0101ori served in the Second World War and learned how to cope in the modern urban world; others moved from their rural homes to the cities to take up jobs vacated by P\u0101keh\u0101 servicemen. The shift to the cities was also caused by their strong birth rates in the early 20th century, with the existing rural farms in M\u0101ori ownership having increasing difficulty in providing enough jobs. M\u0101ori culture had meanwhile undergone a renaissance thanks in part to politician \u0100pirana Ngata. By the 1980s 80% of the M\u0101ori population was urban, in contrast to only 20% before the Second World War. The migration led to better pay, higher standards of living and longer schooling, but also exposed problems of racism and discrimination. By the late 1960s a M\u0101ori protest movement had emerged to combat racism, promote M\u0101ori culture and seek fulfilment of the Treaty of Waitangi.\nUrbanisation proceeded rapidly across the land. In the late 1940s, town planners noted that the country was \"possibly the third most urbanised country in the world\", with two-thirds of the population living in cities or towns. There was also increasing concern that this trend was badly managed, with it being noted that there was an \"ill-defined urban pattern that appears to have few of the truly desirable urban qualities and yet manifests no compensating rural characteristics\".\nThe Muldoon years, 1975\u20131984.\nThe country's economy suffered in the aftermath of the 1973 global energy crisis and the loss of New Zealand's biggest export market upon Britain's entry to the European Economic Community. Robert Muldoon, Prime Minister from 1975 to 1984, and his Third National Government responded to the crises of the 1970s by attempting to preserve the New Zealand of the 1950s. He attempted to maintain New Zealand's \"cradle to the grave\" welfare state, which dated to 1935. The Muldoon Government sought to give retirees 80% of the current wage, which would require large-scale borrowing; critics said it would bankrupt the Treasury. In response to the second oil shock (petrol shortage) in 1979, the government introduced carless days for motor vehicles; however this proved ineffective. The oil crisis increased inflation which was exacerbated by a boom in commodity prices. Muldoon's response to the crisis also involved imposing a total freeze on wages, prices, interest rates and dividends across the national economy.\nMuldoon's conservatism and antagonistic style exacerbated an atmosphere of conflict in New Zealand, most violently expressed during the 1981 Springbok Tour. In the 1984 elections Labour promised to calm down the increasing tensions, while making no specific promises; it scored a landslide victory.\nHowever, Muldoon's government was not entirely backward looking. Some innovations did take place, for example the Closer Economic Relations (CER) free-trade programme with Australia to liberalise trade, starting in 1982. The aim of total free trade between the two countries was achieved in 1990, five years ahead of schedule.\nThe radical 1980s reforms.\nIn 1984, the Fourth Labour Government, led by David Lange, was elected amid a constitutional and economic crisis. The crisis led the incoming government to review New Zealand's constitutional structures, which resulted in the Constitution Act 1986. In power from 1984 to 1990, the Labour government launched a major programme of restructuring the economy, radically reducing the role of government. A political scientist reports:\nBetween 1984 and 1993, New Zealand underwent radical economic reform, moving from what had probably been the most protected, regulated and state-dominated system of any capitalist democracy to an extreme position at the open, competitive, free-market end of the spectrum.\nThe economic reforms were led by Roger Douglas, finance minister from 1984 to 1988. Dubbed Rogernomics, it was a rapid programme of deregulation and public-asset sales. Subsidies to farmers and consumers were phased out. High finance was partly deregulated. Restrictions on foreign exchange were relaxed and the dollar was allowed to float and seek its natural level on the world market. The tax on high incomes was cut in half from 65% to 33%. The shares exchange entered a bubble, which then burst, with the total value of shares falling from $50 billion in 1987 to $15 billion in 1991; at one point the crash was \"the worst in world\". Economic growth fell from 2% a year to 1%. Douglas's reforms resembled the contemporaneous policies of Margaret Thatcher in Britain and Ronald Reagan in the United States.\nStrong criticism of Rogernomics came from the left, especially from Labour's traditional trade union support-base; Lange broke with Douglas's policies in 1987; both men were forced out and Labour was in confusion.\nIn keeping with the mood of the 1980s the government sponsored liberal policies and initiatives in a number of social areas; this included Homosexual Law Reform, the introduction of 'no-fault divorce', reduction in the gender pay gap and the drafting of a Bill of Rights. Immigration policy was liberalised, allowing an influx of immigrants from Asia; previously most immigrants to New Zealand had been European and especially British. The Treaty of Waitangi Amendment Act 1985 enabled the Waitangi Tribunal to investigate claims of breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi going back to 1840, and to settle grievances.\nThe Fourth Labour Government revolutionised New Zealand's foreign policy, making the country a nuclear-free zone and effectively withdrawing from the ANZUS alliance. The French intelligence service's sinking of the \"Rainbow Warrior\", and the diplomatic ramifications following the incident, did much to promote the anti-nuclear stance as an important symbol of New Zealand's national identity.\nIn the 1980s, immigration from the British Isles declined, while Australia became the largest contributor to New Zealand's migrant flows in both directions. By the end of the decade New Zealand faced a net annual loss of over 30,000 people, with nearly 60% \u2013 particularly many young M\u0101ori \u2013 moving to Australia.\nContinuing reform under National.\nVoters unhappy with the rapid speed and far-reaching extent of reforms elected a National government in 1990, led by Jim Bolger. However the new government continued the economic reforms of the previous Labour government, in what was known as Ruthanasia. Unhappy with what seemed to be a pattern of governments failing to reflect the mood of the electorate, New Zealanders in 1992 and 1993 voted to change the electoral system to mixed-member proportional (MMP), a form of proportional representation. New Zealand's first MMP election was held in 1996. Following the election National was returned to power in coalition with the New Zealand First party.\nWith the end of the Cold War in 1991, the nation's foreign policy turned increasingly to issues of its nuclear-free status and other military issues, its adjustment to neoliberalism in international trade relations, and its involvement in humanitarian, environmental and other matters of international diplomacy.\nDuring the 1990s, immigration to New Zealand from Asia sharply increased \u2013 particularly from Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea \u2013 following the 1991 introduction of a points-based immigration system. It was this immigration that gave the anti-immigration New Zealand First Party its \"Asian invasion\" slogan for the 1996 election.\n21st century.\nIn the 21st century, international tourism was a major contributor to the New Zealand economy, until it was brought almost to a halt by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and the service sector more generally has grown. Meanwhile, the traditional agricultural exports of meat, dairy and wool have been supplemented by other products such as fruit, wine and timber as the economy has diversified.\n2000s and 2010s.\nThe Fifth Labour Government led by Helen Clark was formed following the December 1999 election. In power for nine years, it maintained most of the previous governments' economic reforms\u00a0\u2013 restricting government intervention in the economy much more so than previous governments\u00a0\u2013 while putting more emphasis on social policy and outcomes. For example, employment law was modified to give more protection to workers, and the student loan system was changed to eliminate interest payments for New Zealand resident students and graduates.\nNew Zealand retains strong but informal links to Britain, with many young New Zealanders travelling to Britain for their \"OE\" (overseas experience) due to favourable working visa arrangements with Britain. Despite New Zealand's immigration liberalisation in the 1980s, Britons are still the largest group of migrants to New Zealand, due in part to recent immigration law changes that privilege fluent speakers of English. One constitutional link to Britain remains\u00a0\u2013 New Zealand's head of state, the King in Right of New Zealand, is a British resident. However, British imperial honours were discontinued in 1996, the governor-general has taken a more active role in representing New Zealand overseas, and appeals from the Court of Appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council were replaced by a local Supreme Court of New Zealand in 2003. There is public debate about whether New Zealand should become a republic, with public sentiment divided on the issue.\nForeign policy has been essentially independent since the mid-1980s. Under Prime Minister Clark, foreign policy reflected the priorities of liberal internationalism. She stressed the promotion of democracy and human rights, the strengthening of the role of the United Nations, the advancement of anti-militarism and disarmament, and the encouragement of free trade. She sent troops to the War in Afghanistan, but did not contribute combat troops to the Iraq War, although some medical and engineering units were sent.\nJohn Key led the National Party to victory in the November 2008. Key became Prime Minister of the Fifth National Government, which entered government at the beginning of the late-2000s recession. In February 2011, a major earthquake in Christchurch, the nation's third-largest urban area, significantly affected the national economy and the government formed the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority in response. In foreign policy, Key announced the withdrawal of New Zealand Defence Force personnel from their deployment in the war in Afghanistan, and signed the Wellington Declaration with the United States.\nA Labour-led coalition Government led by Left-leaning Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern was formed in October 2017. Among other issues, it hoped to tackle a burgeoning housing shortage crisis in New Zealand.\nOn 15 March 2019, a lone terrorist shooter attacked two mosques during Friday Prayer, killing 51 people and injuring 40 more, and live streamed the attack. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, who referred to the attack as \"one of New Zealand's darkest days\", led efforts to support the Muslim community and ban semi-automatic centerfire rifles.\n2020s.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic first reached New Zealand in early 2020 with widespread economic, societal, and political consequences. In March 2020, borders and entry ports of New Zealand were closed to all non-residents. A national lockdown was imposed by the government, beginning on 25 March 2020, with all restrictions (except border controls) lifted on 9 June. The government's elimination approach has been praised internationally. The government has a planned response to the projected severe economic consequences of the pandemic.\nThe 2020 general election resulted in a victory for the Labour Party\u2014the first outright majority for a single party since the introduction of MMP. The Labour party entered into cooperation agreement with the Green Party. During the 2020 election there were two referendums on the ballot. The first, which would have legalised recreational cannabis in New Zealand, was narrowly rejected; the second, which would legalise voluntary euthanasia, passed.\nPrime Minister Jacinda Ardern resigned in January 2023, being replaced by Chris Hipkins, who led the Labour Party into the 2023 general elections. On 25 January 2023, Prime Minister Chris Hipkins and his Deputy Prime Minister, Carmel Sepuloni, the first person of Pacific Islander descent to hold the role, were sworn in.\nIn October 2023, the centre-right National Party, led by Christopher Luxon, won enough votes to form a coalition government.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39942", "revid": "473822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39942", "title": "Jennifer Aniston", "text": "American actress (born 1969)\nJennifer Joanna Aniston (born February 11, 1969) is an American actress. She rose to international fame for her role as Rachel Green on the television sitcom \"Friends\" from 1994 to 2004, which earned her Primetime Emmy, Golden Globe, and Screen Actors Guild Awards. Aniston has consistently ranked among the world's highest-paid actresses, as of 2023.\nThe daughter of actors John Aniston and Nancy Dow, she began working as an actress at an early age with an uncredited role in the 1988 film \"Mac and Me\". Her first major film role came in the 1993 horror comedy \"Leprechaun\". She has since starred in a string of successful comedy films such as \"Office Space\" (1999), \"Bruce Almighty\" (2003), \"The Break-Up\" (2006), \"Marley &amp; Me\" (2008), \"Just Go with It\" (2011), \"Horrible Bosses\" (2011), \"We're the Millers\" (2013), \"Dumplin\"' (2018), and \"Murder Mystery\" (2019). Aniston also starred in the acclaimed independent films \"The Good Girl\" (2002), \"Friends with Money\" (2006), and \"Cake\" (2014). She returned to television in 2019, producing and starring in the Apple TV+ drama series \"The Morning Show\", for which she received a Screen Actors Guild Award.\nAniston has been included in numerous magazines' lists of the world's most beautiful women. Her net worth is estimated as US$300\u00a0million, and her box office gross is over $1.6 billion worldwide. She is the recipient of a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and is the co-founder of the production company Echo Films, established in 2008.\nEarly life.\nAniston was born on February 11, 1969, in the Sherman Oaks neighborhood of Los Angeles to Greek-born actor John Aniston and actress Nancy Dow. One of her maternal great-grandfathers, Louis Grieco, was from Italy. Her mother's other ancestry includes English, Irish, Scottish, and a small amount of Greek. Her father's ancestry is from the Greek island of Crete. Aniston has two half-brothers: John Melick, her older maternal half-brother; and Alex Aniston, her younger paternal half-brother. Her godfather was actor Telly Savalas, one of her father's best friends.\nHer family moved to New York City when she was a child. Despite her father's television career, she was discouraged from watching television, though she found ways around the prohibition. When she was six, she began attending a Waldorf school. Her parents divorced when she was nine.\nHaving discovered acting at age 11 at the Waldorf school, Aniston enrolled in Manhattan's Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music &amp; Art and Performing Arts, where she joined the school's drama society, and where Anthony Abeson was her drama teacher. She performed in \"The Sign in Sidney Brustein's Window\" by Lorraine Hansberry and \"Three Sisters\" by Anton Chekhov.\nCareer.\n1988\u20131993: Beginnings.\nAniston first worked in off-Broadway productions such as \"For Dear Life\" and \"Dancing on Checker's Grave\", and supported herself with part-time jobs including work as a telemarketer, waitress and bike messenger. In 1988, she had an uncredited minor role in the critically panned sci-fi adventure film \"Mac and Me\". The next year, she appeared on \"The Howard Stern Show\" as a spokesmodel for Nutrisystem, and moved back to Los\u00a0Angeles.\nHer first regular television role was in the TV series \"Molloy\" in 1990, and she appeared in the television adaptation of the 1986 film \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\"; both series were quickly canceled. She starred as a teenage summer camp counselor in the made-for-television film \"Camp Cucamonga\" (1990), and as a spoiled teenager followed by a vengeful leprechaun in the horror film \"Leprechaun\" (1993). A 2014 retrospective from \"Entertainment Weekly\" identified \"Leprechaun\" as her worst role, and Aniston herself has expressed embarrassment over it.\nAniston also appeared in the two failed television comedy series \"The Edge\" and \"Muddling Through\", and guest-starred in \"Quantum Leap\", \"Herman's Head\" and \"Burke's Law\".\n1994\u20132004: \"Friends\" and worldwide recognition.\nDepressed over her four unsuccessful television shows, Aniston approached TV executive Warren Littlefield at a Los Angeles gas station asking for reassurance. As the head of NBC entertainment, he encouraged her to continue acting, and a few months later helped cast her in \"Friends\", a sitcom set to debut on NBC's 1994\u20131995 fall lineup. The producer wanted Aniston to audition for the role of Monica Geller, but Courteney Cox was deemed more suitable, and Aniston was cast as Rachel Green. She was also offered a spot as a featured player on \"Saturday Night Live\", but turned it down in favor of \"Friends\". She played Rachel until the show ended in 2004, when Aniston took a 15-year hiatus from television save for occasional guest roles.\nThe program was a massive hit and Aniston, along with her co-stars, gained worldwide recognition. Her character was especially popular. She received five Primetime Emmy Award nominations (two for Supporting Actress, three for Lead Actress), and won for Lead Actress. She was also nominated for two Golden Globe Awards and won in 2003 as Best Actress \u2013 Television Series Musical or Comedy. According to the \"Guinness Book of World Records\", Aniston (along with her female co-stars) became the highest-paid television actress of all time with her $1\u00a0million-per-episode paycheck during the final season of \"Friends\". Her character's relationship with Ross Geller, portrayed by David Schwimmer, was widely popular among audiences; they were frequently voted television's favorite couple in polls and magazines.\nAfter a four-year hiatus, Aniston returned to film work in 1996, when she performed in the ensemble cast of romantic comedy \"She's the One\". Her first starring film vehicle was \"Picture Perfect\" (1997), where she played a struggling young advertising executive opposite Kevin Bacon and Jay Mohr. It received mixed reviews and was only a moderate commercial success; but Aniston's performance was more warmly received, with many critics suggesting that she had screen presence. In 1998, she appeared as a woman who falls for a gay man (played by Paul Rudd) in the romantic comedy \"The Object of My Affection\", and the next year she starred as a restaurant waitress in the cult film \"Office Space\". In 1999, Aniston had the first voice acting role of her career as a single mother in Brad Bird's animated science fiction film \"The Iron Giant\". Despite receiving critical acclaim, the film was considered a box office failure upon release, but has since earned a cult following.\nAniston appeared in the dramedy \"Rock Star\" (2001) opposite Mark Wahlberg and Dominic West. She starred in the independent dramedy \"The Good Girl\" (2002) as an unglamorous cashier who cheats on her husband. The film was a commercial success in limited release, taking in over $14\u00a0million in North America. Film critic Roger Ebert declared it her breakthrough: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After languishing in a series of overlooked movies that ranged from the entertaining \"Office Space\" to the disposable \"Picture Perfect\", Jennifer Aniston has at last decisively broken with her \"Friends\" image in an independent film of satiric fire and emotional turmoil. It will no longer be possible to consider her in the same way.\nAniston's biggest commercial success in film has been the comedy \"Bruce Almighty\" (2003), where she played the girlfriend of a television field reporter (Jim Carrey) offered the chance to be God for one week. With a worldwide box office gross of $484\u00a0million, it was the fifth-highest-grossing feature film of the year. Aniston next starred as the old classmate of a tightly wound newlywed in the romantic comedy \"Along Came Polly\" (2004) opposite Ben Stiller, which placed number one at the North American box office, earning $27.7\u00a0million in its opening weekend; it eventually made $172 million worldwide.\n2005\u20132013: Continued film success.\nIn 2005, Aniston appeared as an alluring woman having an affair with an advertising executive in the thriller \"Derailed\", and as an obituary and wedding announcement writer in the romantic comedy \"Rumor Has It\". Both films were moderate box office hits. Aniston took on the role of a single, cash-strapped woman working as a maid in the independent drama \"Friends with Money\" (2006), which received a limited release.\nHer next film was the romantic comedy \"The Break-Up\" (2006), alongside Vince Vaughn, in which she starred as one half of a couple having a complicated split when both refuse to move out of the pair's recently purchased home. It received mixed reviews but grossed approximately $39.17 million during its opening weekend and $204 million worldwide. \"The A.V. Club\"'s Keith Phipps gave the film a negative review, stating, \"It's like watching the 'we were on a break' episode of \"Friends\" stretched to feature length, and without the blessed relief of commercial breaks or the promise of \"Seinfeld\" around the corner.\" \"CinemaBlend\" gave the film a positive review stating, \"In an era of formulaic romantic movies that bear no resemblance to reality, \"The Break-Up\" offers a refreshing flipside.\"\nIn 2006, Aniston directed the short film \"Room 10\", set in a hospital emergency room and starring Robin Wright and Kris Kristofferson, as part of \"Glamour\"'s Reel Moments film series. She noted that she was inspired to direct by actress Gwyneth Paltrow, who also directed a short film that year. In 2007, Aniston guest-starred in an episode of \"Dirt\"\u2014playing the rival of Courteney Cox's character\u2014and in an episode of \"30 Rock\", playing a woman who stalks Jack Donaghy. For the latter she received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination as Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series.\nThe 2008 comedy drama \"Marley &amp; Me\", starring Aniston and Owen Wilson as the owners of the titular dog, set a record for the largest Christmas Day box office sales ever with $14.75 million. It earned a total of $51.7\u00a0million over the four-day weekend and placed number one at the box office, a position it maintained for two weeks. The total worldwide gross was $242.7 million. Her next film in wide release, the romantic comedy \"He's Just Not That Into You\" (2009), in which she starred opposite Ben Affleck, grossed $178.8 million globally and ranked number one at the United States box office for its opening weekend. While it received mixed reviews, Aniston, along with Affleck, Ginnifer Goodwin, and Jennifer Connelly, were praised by critics as standouts in the film.\nAniston appeared as the former wife of a bounty hunter (Gerard Butler) in the romantic comedy action film \"The Bounty Hunter\" (2010). The film was panned by critics, with \"The Hollywood Reporter\" writing that \"the mishmash ends up as a thoroughly unfunny adult cartoon.\" Nevertheless, it was a box office success, garnering over $130\u00a0million worldwide. A lukewarm box office reception greeted her next film, the romantic comedy \"The Switch\" (2010), in which she starred with Jason Bateman as a 30-something single woman who decides to have a child using a sperm bank. The film's opening weekend drew what \"The Hollywood Reporter\" dubbed \"a dispiriting $8.4\u00a0million\". The film received generally mixed reviews, with review site Metacritic showing 13 out of 30 critics delivering a positive verdict.\nIn 2010, Aniston was also a guest star on the season two premiere of ABC's sitcom \"Cougar Town\", playing a psychiatrist. Her announcement that she would appear on \"Cougar Town\" garnered excitement and was dubbed her return to television. \"The A.V. Club\" wrote, \"[her role] is a funny bit, and it highlights just how much Jennifer Aniston is built to be a TV star.\" In 2011, she starred opposite Adam Sandler as an office manager posing as the wife of a plastic surgeon in the romantic comedy \"Just Go with It\", and played a sexually aggressive dentist in \"Horrible Bosses\". \"Just Go with It\" and \"Horrible Bosses\" both made over $100 million in North America and $200\u00a0million worldwide.\nAniston appeared in the comedy \"Wanderlust\" (2012) with Paul Rudd, with whom she acted in \"The Object of My Affection\" and also \"Friends\", as a married couple who join a commune after losing their money and deciding modern life is not for them. The script for \"Wanderlust\", bought by Universal Pictures, was produced by Judd Apatow. \"Wanderlust\" received positive reviews but was a box office failure, grossing only $21\u00a0million worldwide, against a production budget of $35\u00a0million. Aniston starred as a struggling stripper who agrees to pose as a wife for a drug deal, with Jason Sudeikis, in \"We're the Millers\" (2013). The film received mixed reviews from critics, but was a financial success, grossing $269\u00a0million against a budget of $37\u00a0million.\n2014\u2013present: Film roles and return to television.\nAniston played the role of a stoic socialite who becomes the target of an ill-planned kidnapping plot in \"Life of Crime\" (2014), a film adaptation of Elmore Leonard's 1978 novel \"The Switch\". The film was released in limited theaters, to positive reviews. Catherine Shoard of \"The Guardian\" described her performance as \"endearingly comic\" and Eric Kohn of \"IndieWire\" wrote that \"Aniston tops any of her recent performances with a spirited turn that harkens back to her neurotic days on \"Friends\".\" She also reprised her role for \"Horrible Bosses 2\" (2014).\nIn \"Cake\" (2014), Aniston starred as an astringent woman named Claire Simmons who struggles with chronic pain. The film received mixed reviews; nonetheless, Aniston's performance was acclaimed, dubbed by some critics as \"Oscar-worthy\". The Toronto International Film Festival called her performance \"heartbreakingly good\", Gregory Ellwood of HitFix stated, \"It's really on most people's radar for being a rare dramatic turn for Jennifer Aniston, and she doesn't disappoint.\" He further stated, \"Aniston makes you believe in Claire's pain. She makes you believe this character is at her lowest point and only she can pull herself out of it. ... It's a complete performance from beginning to end and she deserves the appropriate accolades for it.\" For her performance, Aniston was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama, SAG Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, and Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. She was also nominated multiple nominations for its latter seasons.\nIn 2015, Aniston starred as a reluctant therapist in the screwball comedy \"She's Funny That Way\", which received mixed reviews and found a limited release in theaters, but her performance was once again noticed. Wesley Morris of \"Grantland\" called her \"one of the great screen comedians. ... Most of her scenes here are extraneous, but her vulgarity and tartness are so sharp that the movie needs them. ... This isn't just Aniston having the best stuff. It's her having the most fun with her talent. She's funny in every way.\"\nAniston starred as the recently divorced mother of two children in the romantic comedy \"Mother's Day\" (2016), directed by Garry Marshall, and opposite Julia Roberts and Kate Hudson. The film was panned by critics and a moderate commercial success. In 2016, she voiced a workaholic and overprotective mother in the animated film \"Storks\", alongside Andy Samberg and Kelsey Grammer, which was released to mostly positive reviews; it grossed over $183.4\u00a0million against a $70\u00a0million budget. Her last 2016 film role was that of a frigidly cold head honcho of a company in the comedy \"Office Christmas Party\", directed by Will Speck and Josh Gordon and opposite Jason Bateman and Kate McKinnon. It grossed $114.5\u00a0million worldwide.\nIn \"The Yellow Birds\", a war drama directed by Alexandre Moors, Aniston portrays the mother of a deceased soldier, alongside Alden Ehrenreich, Tye Sheridan, Jack Huston, and Toni Collette. While she said she does not \"normally gravitate toward being in war films\", she made an exception because the film was \"written so beautifully and in such a way [she] had never experienced\". The film, first presented at the 2017 Sundance Film Festival, received a video on demand release in June 2018. The \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote in its review: \"Toni Collette and Jennifer Aniston as the soldiers' quite different but equally concerned mothers, deliver uniformly naturalistic performances\".\nIn December 2018, Netflix released the musical comedy \"Dumplin\"', with Aniston as executive producer and star\u2014marking her first project for a streaming service. That year, she began work on another Netflix project, \"Murder Mystery\", a comedy that reunited her with Adam Sandler, which premiered on June 14, 2019. The two of them reunited for the sequel \"Murder Mystery 2\", which premiered on March 31, 2023.\nAniston made her return to television on November 1, 2019, producing and starring alongside Reese Witherspoon in the Apple TV+ drama \"The Morning Show\". It was her first main television role since the conclusion of \"Friends\" in 2004. For its first season, Aniston won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series, and received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series and two Golden Globe Award nominations for Best Actress \u2013 Television Series Drama and Best Television Series \u2013 Drama as a producer. The series' subsequent seasons earned her multiple additional nominations at Critics' Choice, Golden Globe, Primetime Emmy and SAG awards.\nShe reunited with her \"Friends\" cast mates for an HBO Max unscripted television special titled \"\" in May 2021. The special earned her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Pre-Recorded) for her producing credit.\nOther ventures.\nBusiness and endorsements.\nAniston has appeared in commercials and music videos throughout her career. After starting on \"Friends\", Aniston and her co-star Matthew Perry shot a 60-minute instructional video for the release of Microsoft's Windows 95 operating system. The next year she appeared in commercials for L'Or\u00e9al hair products.\nUnder a contract with Elizabeth Arden, Inc., Aniston worked for over a year on her first perfume, which was released in July\u00a02010. Original plans called for the perfume to be named \"Lolavie by Jennifer Aniston\", but to avoid confusion with a similarly named perfume, the name was changed to simply \"Jennifer Aniston\". In 2014, she launched her second perfume, named J, followed by Near Dusk (2015), Beachscape (2016), Luxe and Chapter One (both in 2017), Chapter Two (2018), Silver and Solstice Bloom (both in 2020). In 2021, Aniston launched the LolaVie haircare company.\nSince 2007, she has worked in a publicity campaign for the drink SmartWater; on March 7, 2011, she released a YouTube video for SmartWater, \"Jennifer Aniston Goes Viral\", which tripled online interest in the product within 24 hours of its release. In 2012, Aniston co-founded hair care brand Living Proof and also became its spokeswoman. She left when the company was sold to Unilever in 2016. In January 2013, she became the new spokeswoman of Aveeno Skincare. Aniston is paid \"eight figures\" for her endorsement. She became the new face of Emirates airline in 2015, which was reportedly a success. For pharmaceutical company Shire, she appeared in a 2016 campaign raising awareness about chronic dry eye.\nShe appeared in the 1996 Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers music video for \"Walls\", and in Melissa Etheridge's 2001 music video for \"I Want to Be in Love\". She also appeared in a 2005 Heineken commercial.\nAlong with Brad Pitt and Brad Grey, CEO of Paramount Pictures, Aniston founded the film production company Plan B Entertainment in 2002, although she and Grey withdrew in 2005. In 2008, she and producer Kristin Hahn formed Echo Films.\nPhilanthropy.\nAniston has been a celebrity advocate for numerous charities and received attention for her own donations. She has appeared in television commercials for St.\u00a0Jude's Children's Research Hospital, and hosted September 2008's Stand Up to Cancer show. In the \"It Can't Wait\" campaign to free Burma, Aniston directed and starred in a video. She is a supporter of Friends of El\u00a0Faro, a nonprofit organization that helps raise money for Casa Hogar Sion, an orphanage in Tijuana, Mexico.\nOn April 14, 2007, Aniston received GLAAD's Vanguard Award for her contributions to increased visibility and understanding of the LGBT community. In 2013, she was named the Entertainment Industry Foundation (EIF) ambassador for the Saks Fifth Avenue Key to the Cure campaign, which raises funds for the EIF Women's Cancer Research Fund. In 2015, she supported the Comic Relief, Inc. charity. Other charities that Aniston has publicly supported include Clothes Off Our Back, Feeding America, EB Medical Research Foundation, Project A.L.S., OmniPeace, and the Rape, Abuse &amp; Incest National Network.\nAniston donated $500,000 to Doctors Without Borders, Haitian health care provider Partners in Health and AmeriCares, and also participated in the Hope for Haiti Now telethon. She donated $500,000 to the Red Cross and another $500,000 to the Ricky Martin Foundation in 2017 to help victims of hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria.\nAfter being honored by SmartWater in 2016 for her ongoing philanthropic work for St.\u00a0Jude's, Aniston spoke of the importance of philanthropy in her life to \"InStyle\" magazine: \"We live an extremely beautiful, fortunate life being able to do what we get to do for a living. And so it's a way of being able to be in a position to do something for people who are less able. It's something that makes my heart smile.\"\nMedia image.\nThe media nicknamed Aniston \"America's sweetheart\" while she was starring in \"Friends\". In 2019, Rachel Simon of NBCNews.com said Aniston \"has filled the role of our most beloved celebrity for nearly two and a half decades now, and there are no signs of her being replaced anytime soon\", arguing that few celebrities have maintained the \"America's sweetheart\" title for as long as she has. Aniston has been included in various magazine lists of the world's most beautiful women. In 2005, she became the first \"GQ\" (Gentlemen's Quarterly) Woman of the Year. She has frequently appeared on \"People\" magazine's annual list of Most Beautiful Women, topping the ranking in 2004 and 2016. She also topped the magazine's Best Dressed List in 2006. She has been a regular on the \"FHM\" (For Him Magazine) 100 Sexiest Women in the World list since 1996, most recently ranking at number 79 in 2012. A survey of their patients by two Hollywood plastic surgeons, reported in 2011 by \"The Daily Telegraph\", identified her (alongside Gisele B\u00fcndchen and Pen\u00e9lope Cruz) as having one of the most sought-after body shapes. In the same year, readers of \"Men's Health\" voted her as the Sexiest Woman of All Time. \"Men's Health\" also included her on its 100 Hottest Sex Symbols of All Time list, explaining that \"Her down-to-earth persona makes her seem attainable, ... she makes even pieces of flair look good. She rarely plays the airhead, and she seldom overplays a role: she's funny in a quiet, refreshingly human way. And her all-too-human love life off screen inspires sympathy ... throughout her career Aniston has remained sexy, funny, and unmistakably real.\" Although Aniston disliked the hairstyle she wore during her first two years on \"Friends\", \"The Rachel\" became very popular.\nAniston was one of the world's highest-paid actresses in 2018. She has been on the \"Forbes\" Top Earning Actresses list for 15 years, every year since 2001\u2014and since then also on its Celebrity 100 list (based on \"earnings and fame\"), topping it in 2003. According to \"Forbes\", in October 2007, Aniston was the best-selling celebrity face of the entertainment industry. The magazine estimated her net worth at $110\u00a0million in 2007, and $200\u00a0million in 2017. It listed her earnings as $19.5\u00a0million in 2018.\nShe received a motion picture star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 22, 2012, located at 6270 Hollywood Boulevard. She was ranked third on \"Forbes\"' list of the 100 Most Powerful Actresses in Hollywood in 2013.\nIn July 2016, amidst media speculation over whether she was pregnant, Aniston penned an essay for \"The Huffington Post\" condemning the \"objectification and scrutiny we put women through\". She asserted: \"We are complete with or without a mate, with or without a child. We get to decide for ourselves what is beautiful when it comes to our bodies. [...] We don't need to be married or mothers to be complete. We get to determine our own 'happily ever after' for ourselves.\" The piece was supported by many celebrities and widely covered in the media.\nAfter years of aversion to social media, Aniston joined Instagram on October 15, 2019, causing the app to \"break\" (for hours the \"follow\" button became inoperable due to an overload of web traffic to her account) with the first picture of the planned for HBO Max (whose release was delayed until 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic). She broke the Guinness World Record for fastest time to reach one million followers on Instagram, by doing so within five hours and sixteen minutes.\nPersonal life.\nIn 2014, Aniston became a practitioner of Buddhism. She practices Hatha yoga and Budokan karate. In 2014, she spoke of her Transcendental Meditation practice. The following year, she said dyslexia had affected her education and self-esteem and that, after being diagnosed in her twenties, her outlook toward life changed. \"I thought I wasn't smart. I just couldn't retain anything. Now I had this great discovery. I felt like all of my childhood trauma-dies, tragedies, dramas were explained.\"\nAniston donated to Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign and took part in a fundraiser for Hillary Clinton during her 2016 presidential campaign. She endorsed Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election.\nAniston does not have any children. In November 2022, she appeared on the cover of \"Allure\" for their final print issue. In the accompanying interview, Aniston said she had undergone in vitro fertilization (IVF) to try to have children when she was in her thirties and forties, but the attempts did not result in any pregnancies. She said, \"All the years and years and years of speculation... It was really hard. I was going through IVF, drinking Chinese teas, you name it. I was throwing everything at it.\" In July 2024, after comments about \"childless cat ladies\" that Republican vice presidential nominee JD Vance made in 2021 went viral, Aniston stated on social media that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, she said Adam Sandler's family sent her flowers every year on Mother's Day.\nRelationships.\nAniston met Brad Pitt in 1998, and their relationship was highly publicized. After two years of dating, they married on July 29, 2000, in a lavish Malibu, California, wedding. For a few years, their marriage was considered a rare Hollywood success. On January 7, 2005, they announced their separation, and finalized their divorce on October 2. During their divorce proceedings, news media speculated that Pitt had been unfaithful to Aniston with his \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" co-star Angelina Jolie, with whom he began a relationship soon after the split. In the months following, the public's reaction towards the divorce played out as \"Team Aniston\" and \"Team Jolie\" T-shirts appeared throughout the country. In 2015, Aniston said, \"Nobody did anything wrong... It was just like, sometimes things [happen].\"\nAniston said the divorce prompted her to reach out to her mother, Nancy, from whom she had been estranged for nearly a decade. Nancy had talked about her daughter on a television show and written \"From Mother and Daughter to Friends: A Memoir\" (1999). \nIn 2006, Aniston said she had been devastated by the death of her longtime therapist, whom she credited for helping make her separation from Pitt easier. She said she did not regret her relationship with Pitt, describing it as \"very intense\" and \"a beautiful, complicated relationship\".\nAniston began a relationship with actor, director, and screenwriter Justin Theroux in May 2011. The following January, they purchased a home in the Bel Air neighborhood of Los Angeles for roughly $22\u00a0million. They became engaged on August 10, 2012 and had wedding ceremony on August 5, 2015, at their estate. They separated at the end of 2017.\nActing credits and awards.\nAniston received five Primetime Emmy Award nominations, two Golden Globe Award nominations, and nine SAG Award nominations for her role in \"Friends\". From these, she won one of each. She also garnered a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for her guest appearance in \"30 Rock\", while her performance in \"Cake\" earned her nominations at the Golden Globe and SAG awards. Aniston additionally won a SAG Award and was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award for the first season of \"The Morning Show\", and earned multiple nominations at Critics' Choice, Golden Globe, Primetime Emmy and SAG awards for its subsequent seasons. As a producer, she was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award and three Golden Globe Awards.\nAccording to review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes and the box-office site Box Office Mojo, Aniston's most critically acclaimed and commercially successful films are \"Office Space\" (1999), \"The Good Girl\" (2002), \"Bruce Almighty\" (2003), \"Friends with Money\" (2006), \"The Break-Up\" (2006), \"Marley &amp; Me\" (2008), \"Just Go with It\" (2011), \"Horrible Bosses\" (2011), \"We're the Millers\" (2013), and \"Dumplin'\" (2018).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39943", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39943", "title": "History of Malta", "text": "Maltese history \nMalta has been inhabited since 6400\u00a0BC initially by Mesolithic hunter gatherers, who were replaced by Neolithic farmers from Sicily around 5400\u00a0BC. These farmers practiced mixed farming after clearing most of the existing conifer forest that dominated the islands, but their agricultural methods degraded the soil until the islands became uninhabitable. The islands were repopulated around 3850\u00a0BC by a civilization that at its peak built the Megalithic Temples, which today are among the oldest surviving buildings in the world. Their civilization collapsed in around 2350\u00a0BC; the islands were repopulated by Bronze Age warriors soon afterwards.\nMalta's prehistory ends in around 700\u00a0BC, when the islands were colonized by the Phoenicians. They ruled the islands until they fell in 218\u00a0BC to the Roman Republic. The island was acquired by the Eastern Romans or Byzantines in the 6th\u00a0century\u00a0AD, who were expelled by Aghlabids following a siege in 870\u00a0AD. Malta may have been sparsely populated for a few centuries until being repopulated by Arabs in the 11th century. The islands were invaded by the Norman County of Sicily in 1091, and a gradual re-Christianization of the islands followed. At this point, the islands became part of the Kingdom of Sicily and were dominated by successive feudal rulers, including the Swabians, the Aragonese, and eventually the Spanish. The islands were given to the Order of St.\u00a0John in 1530, which ruled them as a vassal state of Sicily. In 1565, the Ottoman Empire attempted to take the islands in the Great Siege of Malta, but the invasion was repelled. The Order continued to rule Malta for over two centuries, and this period was characterized by a flourishing of the arts and architecture and an overall improvement in the social order. The Order was expelled after the French First Republic invaded the islands in 1798, marking the beginning of the French occupation of Malta.\nAfter a few months of French rule, the Maltese rebelled and the French were expelled in 1800. Malta became a British protectorate, becoming a \"de facto\" colony in 1813. The islands became an important naval base for the British, serving as the headquarters of the Mediterranean Fleet. During the last quarter of the 19th century, there were advancements in technology and finance. In subsequent years, the Anglo-Egyptian Bank was established in 1882 and the Malta Railway began operating in 1883. In 1921, London granted self-government to Malta. This resulted in the establishment of a bicameral parliament consisting of a Senate (which was later eliminated in 1949) and an elected Legislative Assembly. The Crown Colony of Malta was self-governing in 1921\u20131933, 1947\u20131958, and 1962\u20131964.\nDuring World War II British forces in Malta were heavily attacked by Italian and German air power, but the British held firm. In 1942 the island was awarded the George Cross, which today appears on Malta's flag and coat of arms.\nIn 1964 Malta became an independent Commonwealth realm known as the State of Malta, and in 1974 it became a republic while remaining in the Commonwealth. Since 2004 the country has been a member state of the European Union.\nPleistocene.\nSome caverns in Malta containing sediments of Pleistocene age have revealed bones of dwarf elephants, and dwarf hippopotamuses, as well as other extinct animals, which are thought to have crossed over from Sicily (and ultimately from mainland Italy) due to a submarine plateau that was exposed as dry land connecting Malta and Sicily during glacial periods. Although it has been claimed that Neanderthals were present on the island, because molar teeth were found in Ghar Dalam cave exhibiting taurodonty, this feature is also found among some modern human teeth and is thus not a definitive indicator that the teeth belong to Neanderthals, and the context of the finds is unclear, so this claim is not widely accepted. Supplementary material\nMesolithic (6500\u20135400 BC).\nMalta has been inhabited from at least circa 6500 BC, with the arrival of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers likely originating from Sicily. Discoveries at Latnija Cave led by the Maltese archaeologist Eleanor Scerri included the remains of hearths, stone tools and an abundant and diverse range of animal bones. These included indigenous red deer that are now extinct, fish and marine mammals, as well as abundant edible marine gastropods. To arrive on Malta, these hunter-gatherers had to cross around 100\u00a0km of open water, documenting the longest yet-known sea crossing by hunter-gatherers in the Mediterranean. The extinction of the dwarf hippos, giant swans and dwarf elephants has historically been linked to the earliest arrival of humans on Malta. However this seems unlikely since recent work suggests these animals went extinct many thousands of years before the arrival of the first people, and no such animals were found in association with the earliest known Mesolithic hunter-gatherers.\nNeolithic (5400 BC\u20132350 BC).\nNeolithic Farmers from Sicily arrived on Malta by around 5400 BC, replacing the pre-existing hunter-gatherer population.\nThey were mainly farming and fishing communities, with some evidence of hunting activities. They apparently lived in caves and open dwellings. During the centuries that followed there is evidence of further contacts with other cultures, which left their influence on the local communities, evidenced by their pottery designs and colours. The farming methods degraded the soil; at the same time prolonged drought set in, and the islands became too dry to sustain agricultural practices. This occurred partly due to climate change and drought, and the islands were uninhabited for about a millennium.\nResearch carried out as part of the FRAGSUS project, comprising analysis of soil cores from valleys, which contained ancient pollen and animal evidence from past environments, revealed that \"climate change fluctuations made Malta uninhabitable in some periods of prehistory. There was a substantial break of around 1,000\u00a0years between the first settlers and the next group who settled permanently on the Maltese islands and eventually built the megalithic temples.\"\nTemple period (3850 BC\u20132350 BC).\nA second wave of colonization arrived from Sicily in around 3850\u00a0BC. Prof.\u00a0Caroline Malone has said: \"Given the restricted land space of Malta, it is remarkable that the second colonisation survived for 1,500\u00a0years. This sort of settlement stability is unheard of in Europe and is impressive in terms of how they were able to live on an ever-degrading land for such a period of time.\"\nOne of the most notable periods of Malta's history is the temple period, starting around 3600\u00a0BC. The \u0120gantija Temple in Gozo is one of the oldest free-standing buildings in the world. The name of the complex stems from the Maltese word \"\u0121gant\", which reflects the magnitude of the temple's size. Many of the temples are in the form of five semicircular rooms connected at the centre. It has been suggested that these might have represented the head, arms, and legs of a deity, since one of the commonest kinds of statue found in these temples comprises obese human figures, popularly termed \"fat ladies\" despite their ambiguity of gender, and often considered to represent fertility.\nThe civilization which built the temples lasted for about 1,500\u00a0years until about 2350\u00a0BC, at which point the culture seems to have disappeared. There is speculation about what might have happened and whether they were completely wiped out or assimilated, but it is thought that the collapse occurred due to climate conditions and drought.\nProf. Malone has stated: \"We can learn a lot from the mistakes made by the first Maltese. The lack of water, coupled with the destruction of soil that takes centuries to form, can cause the failure of a civilisation. The second group of inhabitants to Malta in 3850\u20132350\u00a0BC managed their resources adequately and harnessed soil and food for over 1,500\u00a0years. It was only when climate conditions and drought became so extreme that they failed.\"\nBetween 2600 and 2400 BC, half of those who died were children.\nBronze Age (2350 BC\u2013700 BC).\nAfter the Temple period came the Bronze Age. From this period there are remains of a number of settlements and villages, as well as dolmens \u2014 altar-like structures made out of very large slabs of stone. They are claimed to belong to a population certainly different from that which built the previous megalithic temples.\nIt is presumed the population arrived from Sicily because of the similarity to the constructions found in the largest island of the Mediterranean sea.\nOne surviving menhir, which was used to build temples, still stands at Kirkop; it is one of the few still in good condition.\nAmong the most interesting and mysterious remnants of this era are the so-called cart ruts as they can be seen at a place on Malta called Misra\u0127 G\u0127ar il-Kbir (informally known as Clapham Junction). These are pairs of parallel channels cut into the surface of the rock, and extending for considerable distances, often in an exactly straight line. Their exact use is unknown. One suggestion is that beasts of burden used to pull carts along, and these channels would guide the carts and prevent the animals from straying. The society that built these structures eventually died out or at any rate disappeared.\nBetween 1400 BC and 1200 BC there was a Mycenaean influence on the Malta, which is evidenced by presence of Mycenaean artefacts.\nAntiquity.\nPhoenicians and Carthage.\nPhoenicians\u2014possibly from Tyre\u2014began to colonize the islands around the early 8th century BC, using it as an outpost from which they expanded sea exploration and trade in the Mediterranean. They called the principal island Ann (, \u02beNN). Necropolises have been found at Rabat on Malta and Rabat on Gozo, suggesting the main settlements were at present-day Mdina on Malta and Cittadella on Gozo. The former settlement was also known as Ann, suggesting it served as the colony's seat of government. The principal port, meanwhile, was at Cospicua on the Grand Harbor. Known simply as Maleth (, ML\u1e6c, \"The Port\"), it was probably the namesake of the Greeks' and Romans' names for the entire island.\nThe Maltese Islands fell under the hegemony of Carthage around the middle of 6th century BC, along with most other Phoenician colonies in the western Mediterranean. By the late 4th century BC, Malta had become a trading post linking southern Italy and Sicily to Tripolitania. This resulted in the introduction of Hellenistic features in architecture and pottery. It is not known if Malta was settled like a traditional Greek , so some support that Malta was never a Greek colony. Hellenistic architectural features can be seen in the Punic temple at Tas-Sil\u0121 and a tower in \u017burrieq. The Greek language also began to be used in Malta, as shown in the bilingual Phoenician and Greek inscriptions found on the Cippi of Melqart. In the 18th century, French scholar Jean-Jacques Barth\u00e9lemy deciphered the extinct Phoenician alphabet using the inscriptions on these cippi.\nIn 255 BC, the Romans raided Malta during the First Punic War, devastating much of the island.\nRoman rule.\nAccording to Latin historian Livy, the Maltese Islands passed into the hands of the Romans at the start of the Second Punic War in the year 218 BC. Livy reports the commander of the Punic garrison on the Island surrendered without resistance to Tiberius Sempronius Longus, one of the two consuls for that year, who was on his way to North Africa. The archipelago\u2014known to the Romans as Melita or Melite\u2014became part of the province of Sicily, but by the 1st century it had its own local senate and people's assembly. By this time, both Malta and Gozo minted distinctive coins based on Roman weight measurements.\nServing as the administrative hub of the islands, Mdina also became known as Melita. Its size grew to its maximum extent, occupying the entire area of present-day Mdina and large parts of Rabat, extending to what is now St Paul's Church. Remains show that the city was surrounded by thick defensive walls and was also protected by a protective ditch that ran along the same line of St Rita Street, which was built directly above it. Remains hint that a religious centre with a number of temples was built on the highest part of the promontory. The remains of one impressive residence known as the Domus Romana have been excavated, revealing well-preserved Pompeian style mosaics. This seems to have been the residence of a rich Roman aristocrat, and it is believed to have been built in the 1st century BC and abandoned in the 2nd century AD.\nThe islands prospered under Roman rule, and were eventually distinguished as a Municipium and a Foederata Civitas. Many Roman antiquities still exist, testifying to the close link between the Maltese inhabitants and Sicily. Throughout the period of Roman rule, Latin became Malta's official language, and Roman religion was introduced in the islands. Despite this, the local Punic-Hellenistic culture and language is thought to have survived until at least the 1st century AD.\nIn AD 60, the Acts of the Apostles records that Saint Paul was shipwrecked on an island named Melite, which many Bible scholars and Maltese conflate with Malta; there is a tradition that the shipwreck took place on the shores of the aptly named \"St. Paul's Bay\". In Acts 28, Saint Paul is welcomed by the islanders who build him a fire. As Paul is gathering wood for the fire, a poisonous viper in the wood is driven out by the heat and bites Paul. Paul is unaffected by the bite, leading the people of Malta to believe he is a god. This assumption allows Paul the opportunity to introduce the Gospel to the island.\nMalta remained part of the Roman Empire until the early 6th century. The Vandals and later the Ostrogoths might have briefly occupied the islands in the 5th century, but there is no archaeological evidence to support this.\nMiddle Ages.\nByzantine rule.\nIn 533, Byzantine general Belisarius may have landed at Malta while on his way from Sicily to North Africa, and by 535, the islands were integrated into the Byzantine province of Sicily. During the Byzantine period, the main settlements remained the city of Melite on mainland Malta and the Citadel on Gozo, while Marsaxlokk, Marsaskala, Marsa and Xlendi are believed to have served as harbours. The relatively high quantity of Byzantine ceramics found in Malta suggests that the island might have had an important strategic role within the empire from the 6th to 8th centuries.\nFrom the late 7th century onward, the Mediterranean was being threatened by Muslim expansion. At this point, the Byzantines probably improved the defences of Malta, as can be seen by defensive walls built around the basilica at Tas-Sil\u0121 around the 8th century. The Byzantines might have also built the retrenchment which reduced Melite to one-third of its original size.\nArab period.\nIn 870 AD, Malta was occupied by Muslims from North Africa. According to Al-Himyar\u012b, Aghlabids led by Halaf al-H\u0101dim besieged the Byzantine city of Melite, which was ruled by governor Amros (probably Ambrosios). Al-H\u0101dim was killed in the fighting, and Saw\u0101da Ibn Mu\u1e25ammad was sent from Sicily to continue the siege following his death. The duration of the siege is unknown, but it probably lasted for some weeks or months. After Melite fell to the invaders, the inhabitants were massacred, the city was destroyed and its churches were looted. Marble from Melite's churches was used to build the castle of Sousse.\nAccording to Al-Himyar\u012b, Malta remained almost uninhabited until it was resettled in around 1048 or 1049 by a Muslim community and their slaves, who rebuilt the city of Melite as Medina, making it \"a finer place than it was before\". However, archaeological evidence suggests that Melite/Medina was already a thriving Muslim settlement by the beginning of the 11th century, so Al-Himyar\u012b's account might be unreliable.\nIn 1053\u201354, the Byzantines besieged Medina but they were repelled by its defenders.\nAlthough their rule was relatively short, the Arabs left a significant impact on Malta. In addition to their language, Siculo-Arabic, cotton, oranges and lemons and many new techniques in irrigation were introduced. Some of these, like the \"noria\" (waterwheel), are still used, unchanged, today. Many place names in Malta date to this period.\nA long historiographic controversy loomed over Medieval Muslim Malta. According to the \"Christian continuity thesis\", spearheaded by Giovanni Francesco Abela and still most present in popular narratives, the Maltese population continuously inhabited the islands from the early Christian Era up to today, and a Christian community persisted even during Muslim times. This was contested in the 1970s by the medieval historian Godfrey Wettinger, who claimed that nothing indicated the continuity of Christianity from the late 9th to the 11th century on the Maltese Islands \u2013 the Maltese must have integrated into the new Arab Islamic society. The Christian continuity thesis had a revival in 2010 following the publication of \"Tristia ex Melitogaudo\" by Stanley Fiorini, Horatio Vella and Joseph Brincat, who challenged Wettinger's interpretation based on a line of a Byzantine poem (which later appeared to have been mistranslated). Wettinger subsequently reaffirmed his thesis, based on sources from the Arab historians and geographers Al Baqri, Al-Himyar\u012b, Ibn Hauqal, Qazwini, who all seemed to be in agreement that \"the island of Malta remained after that a ruin without inhabitants\" \u2013 thus ruling out any continuity whatsoever between the Maltese prior to 870 and after. This is also consistent with Joseph Brincat\u2019s finding of no further substrata beyond Arabic in the Maltese language, a very rare occurrence which may only be explained by a drastic lapse between one period and the following. To the contrary, the few Byzantine words in Maltese language can be traced to the 400 Rhodians coming with the knights in 1530, as well as to the influx of Greek rite Christians from Sicily.\nNorman Kingdom of Sicily rule.\nMalta returned to Christian rule with the Norman conquest. It was, with Noto on the southern tip of Sicily, the last Arab stronghold in the region to be retaken by the resurgent Christians. In 1091, Count Roger I of Sicily, invaded Malta and turned the island's Muslim rulers into his vassals. In 1127, his son Roger II of Sicily fully established Norman rule in Malta, paving the way for the islands' Christianization.\nMalta was part of the Kingdom of Sicily for nearly 440 years. During this period, Malta was sold and resold to various feudal lords and barons and was dominated successively by the rulers of Swabia, Anjou, the Crown of Aragon, the Crown of Castile and Spain. Eventually, the Crown of Aragon, which then ruled Malta, joined with Castile in 1469, and Malta became part of the Spanish Empire.\nMeanwhile, Malta's administration fell in the hands of local nobility who formed a governing body called the \"Universit\u00e0\".\nThe islands remained largely Muslim-inhabited long after the end of Arab rule. The Arab administration was also kept in place and Muslims were allowed to practise their religion freely until the 13th century. Muslims continued to demographically and economically dominate Malta for at least another 150\u00a0years after the Norman conquest.\nIn 1122, Malta experienced a Muslim uprising and in 1127 Roger II of Sicily reconquered the islands.\nEven in 1175, Burchard, bishop of Strasbourg, an envoy of Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, had the impression, based upon his brief visit to Malta, that it was exclusively or mainly inhabited by Muslims.\nIn 1192, Tancred of Sicily appointed Margaritus of Brindisi the first Count of Malta, perhaps for his unexpected success in capturing Empress Constance contender to the throne. Between 1194 and 1530, the Kingdom of Sicily ruled the Maltese islands and a process of gradual Italianization and Christianization started in Malta.\nIn 1224, Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, sent an expedition against Malta to establish royal control and prevent its Muslim population from helping a Muslim rebellion in the Kingdom of Sicily.\nAfter the Norman conquest, the population of the Maltese islands kept growing mainly through immigration from the north (Sicily and Italy), with the exile to Malta of the entire male population of the town of Celano (Italy) in 1223, the stationing of a Norman and Sicilian garrison on Malta in 1240 and the settlement in Malta of noble families from Sicily between 1372 and 1450. As a consequence of this, Capelli et al. found in 2005 that \"the contemporary males of Malta most likely originated from Southern Italy, including Sicily and up to Calabria.\"\nAccording to a report in 1240 or 1241 by Gililberto Abbate, who was the royal governor of Frederick II of Sicily during the Genoese Period of the County of Malta, in that year the islands of Malta and Gozo had 836\u00a0Muslim families, 250\u00a0Christian families and 33\u00a0Jewish families.\nAround 1249, some Maltese Muslims were sent to the Italian colony of Lucera, established for Sicilian Muslims. For some historians, including Godfrey Wettinger, who follow on this Ibn Khaldun, this event marked the end of Islam in Malta. According to Wettinger, \"there is no doubt that by the beginning of Angevin times [i.e. shortly after 1249] no professed Muslim Maltese remained either as free persons or even as serfs on the island.\" The Maltese language nevertheless survived \u2013 an indication that either a large number of Christians already spoke Maltese, or that many Muslims converted and remained behind.\nIn 1266, Malta was turned over in fiefdom to Charles of Anjou, brother of France's King Louis\u00a0IX, who retained it in ownership until 1283. Eventually, during Charles's rule religious coexistence became precarious in Malta, since he had a genuine intolerance of religions other than Roman Catholicism. However, Malta's links with Africa would still remain strong until the beginning of Aragonese and Spanish rule in 1283, following the War of the Sicilian Vespers.31\nIn September\u00a01429, Hafsid Saracens attempted to capture Malta but were repelled by the Maltese. The invaders pillaged the countryside and took about 3,000\u00a0inhabitants as slaves.\nBy the end of the 15th\u00a0century, all Maltese Muslims would be forced to convert to Christianity and had to find ways to disguise their previous identities by Latinizing or adopting new surnames.\nHospitaller rule (1530\u20131798).\nMalta was ruled by the Order of Saint John as a vassal state of the Kingdom of Sicily from 1530 to 1798.\nEarly years.\nIn the early 16th\u00a0century, the Ottoman Empire started spreading over the region, reaching South East Europe. The Spanish king Charles\u00a0V feared that if Rome fell to the Turks, it would be the end of Christian Europe. In 1522, Suleiman\u00a0I drove the Knights Hospitaller of St.\u00a0John out of Rhodes. They dispersed to their commanderies in Europe. Wanting to protect Rome from invasion from the south, in 1530, Charles\u00a0V handed over the island to these knights.\nFor the next 275\u00a0years, the \"Knights of Malta\" made the island their domain and made the Italian language official. They built towns, palaces, churches, gardens, and fortifications, they embellished the island with numerous works of art, and enhanced cultural heritage.\nThe order of the Knights of St.\u00a0John was originally established to set up outposts along the route to the Holy Land, to assist pilgrims going in either direction. Owing to the many confrontations that took place, one of their main tasks was to provide medical assistance, and even today the eight-pointed cross is still in wide use in ambulances and first aid organisations. In return for the many lives they saved, the Order received many newly conquered territories that had to be defended. Together with the need to defend the pilgrims in their care, this gave rise to the strong military wing of the knights. Over time, the Order became strong and rich. From hospitallers first and military second, these priorities reversed. Since much of the territory they covered was around the Mediterranean region, they became notable seamen.\nFrom Malta the knights resumed their seaborne attacks of Ottoman shipping, and before long the Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent ordered a final attack on the Order. By this time the Knights had occupied the city of Birgu, which had excellent harbours to house their fleet. Birgu was one of the two major urban places at that time, the other most urban place being Mdina the old capital city of Malta. The defences around Birgu were enhanced and new fortifications built on the other point where now there is Senglea. A small fort was built at the tip of the peninsula where the city of Valletta now stands and was named Fort Saint Elmo.\nGreat Siege.\nOn 18\u00a0May 1565, Suleiman the Magnificent laid siege to Malta. By the time the Ottoman fleet arrived the Knights were as ready as they could be. First, the Ottomans attacked the newly built fort of St.\u00a0Elmo and after a whole month of fighting the fort was in rubble and the soldiers kept fighting until they were wiped out. After this the Turks started attacking Birgu and the fortifications at Senglea but to no gain.\nAfter a protracted siege ended on 8\u00a0September of the same year, which became known in history as Great Siege of Malta, the Ottoman Empire conceded defeat as the approaching winter storms threatened to prevent them from leaving. The Ottoman Empire had expected an easy victory within weeks. They had 40,000\u00a0men arrayed against the Knights' 9,000, most of them Maltese soldiers and simple citizens bearing arms. Their loss of thousands of men was very demoralising. The Ottomans made no further attempts to conquer Malta and the Sultan died in the next year.\nAfter the siege.\nThe year after, the Order started work on a new city with fortifications like no other, on the Sciberras Peninsula which the Ottomans had used as a base during the siege. It was named Valletta after Jean Parisot de Valette, the Grand Master who had seen the Order through its victory. Since the Ottoman Empire never attacked again, the fortifications were never put to the test, and today remain one of the best-preserved fortifications of this period.\nUnlike other rulers of the island, the Order of St.\u00a0John did not have a \"home country\" outside the island. The island became their home, so they invested in it more heavily than any other power. Besides, its members came from noble families, and the Order had amassed considerable fortunes due to its services to those en route to the Holy Land. The architectural and artistic remains of this period remain among the greatest of Malta's history, especially in their \"prize jewel\" \u2014 the city of Valletta.\nHowever, as their main \"raison d'\u00eatre\" had ceased to exist, the Order's glory days were over. In the last three decades of the eighteenth century, the Order experienced a steady decline. This was a result of a number of factors, including the bankruptcy that was a result of some lavish rule of the last Grand Masters, which drained the finances of the Order. Due to this, the Order also became unpopular with the Maltese.\nIndeed, in 1775, a revolt known as the Rising of the Priests occurred. Rebels managed to capture Fort St Elmo and Saint James Cavalier, but the revolt was suppressed and some of the leaders were executed while others were imprisoned or exiled.\nFrench occupation (1798\u20131800).\nOver the years, the power of the knights declined; their reign ended in 1798 when Napoleon Bonaparte's expeditionary fleet stopped off there en route to his Egyptian expedition. Napoleon asked for safe harbour to resupply his ships, and when they refused to supply him with water, Napoleon Bonaparte sent a division to scale the hills of Valletta. Grand Master Hompesch capitulated on 11\u00a0June. The following day a treaty was signed by which the order handed over sovereignty of the island of Malta to the French Republic. In return the French Republic agreed to \"employ all its credit at the congress of Rastatt to procure a principality for the Grand Master, equivalent to the one he gives up\".\nDuring his very short stay (six days), Napoleon accomplished quite a number of reforms, notably the creation of a new administration with a Government Commission, the creation of twelve municipalities, the setting up of a public finance administration, the abolition of all feudal rights and privileges, the abolition of slavery and the granting of freedom to all Turkish slaves (2000 in all). On the judicial level, a family code was framed and twelve judges were nominated. Public education was organised along principles laid down by Bonaparte himself, providing for primary and secondary education. Fifteen primary schools were founded and the university was replaced by an \u2019Ecole centrale\u2019 in which there were eight chairs, all very scientific in outlook: notably, arithmetic and stereometry, algebra and stereotomy, geometry and astronomy, mechanics and physics, navigation, chemistry, etc.\nHe then sailed for Egypt leaving a substantial garrison in Malta. Since the Order had also been growing unpopular with the local Maltese, the latter initially viewed the French with optimism. This illusion did not last long. Within months the French were closing convents and seizing church treasures, most notably the sword of Jean de Valette which has since been returned to Malta in 2017, after a century in Paris, and for many years exhibited at the Louvre, in Paris. The Maltese people rebelled, and the French garrison of General Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois retreated into Valletta. After several failed attempts by the locals to retake Valletta, the British were asked for their assistance. Rear Admiral Lord Horatio Nelson decided on a total blockade in 1799. The French garrison surrendered in 1800.\nMalta in the British Empire (1800\u20131964).\nBritish Malta in the 19th and early 20th centuries.\nIn 1800, Malta voluntarily became part of the British Empire as a protectorate. Under the terms of the 1802 Treaty of Amiens with France, Britain was supposed to evacuate the island, but failed to keep this obligation \u2013 one of several mutual cases of non-adherence to the treaty, which eventually led to its collapse and the resumption of war between the two countries.\nAlthough initially the island was not given much importance, its excellent harbours became a prized asset for the British, especially after the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. The island became a military and naval fortress, the headquarters of the British Mediterranean fleet.\nHome rule was refused to the Maltese until 1921 although a partly elected legislative council was created as early as 1849 (the first Council of Government under British rule had been held in 1835), and the locals sometimes suffered considerable poverty. This was due to the island being overpopulated and largely dependent on British military expenditure which varied with the demands of war. Throughout the 19th\u00a0century, the British administration instituted several liberal constitutional reforms which were generally resisted by the Church and the Maltese elite who preferred to cling to their feudal privileges. Political organisations, like the Nationalist Party, were created or had as one of their aims, the protection of the Italian language in Malta.\nIn 1813 Malta was granted the Bathurst Constitution; in 1814 it was declared free of the plague, while the 1815 Congress of Vienna reaffirmed the British rule under the 1814 Treaty of Paris. In 1819, the local Italian-speaking \"Universit\u00e0\" was dissolved.\nThe year 1828 saw the revocation of the right of sanctuary, following the Vatican Church-State proclamation. Three years later, the See of Malta was made independent of the See of Palermo. In 1839, press censorship was abolished, and the construction of St.\u00a0Paul's Anglican Cathedral began.\nFollowing the 1846 Carnival riots, in 1849 a Council of Government with elected members under British rule was set up. In 1870 a referendum was held on ecclesiastics serving on Council of Government, and in 1881 an Executive Council under British rule was created; in 1887, the Council of Government was entrusted with \"dual control\" under British rule. A backlash came in 1903, with the return to the 1849 form of Council of Government under British rule.\nThe last quarter of the century saw technical and financial progress in line with the Belle \u00c9poque: The following years saw the foundation of the Anglo-Egyptian Bank (1882) and the beginning of operation of the Malta Railway (1883); the first definitive postage stamps were issued in 1885, and in 1904 tram service began.\nIn 1886 Surgeon Major David Bruce discovered the microbe causing the Malta Fever, and in 1905 Themistocles Zammit discovered the fever's sources.\nFinally, in 1912, Dun Karm Psaila wrote his first poem in Maltese.\nBetween 1915 and 1918, during World War I, Malta became known as \"the Nurse of the Mediterranean\" due to the large number of wounded soldiers who were accommodated in Malta.\nInterwar period.\nIn 1919, the \"Sette Giugno\" (7\u00a0June) riots over the excessive price of bread led to greater autonomy for the locals during the 1920s. After Filippo Sciberras had convened a National Assembly, in 1921 self-government was granted under British rule. Malta obtained a bicameral parliament with a Senate (later abolished in 1949) and an elected Legislative Assembly. Joseph Howard was named Prime Minister. In 1923 the \"Innu Malti\" was played for the first time in public, and the same year Francisco Buhagiar became Prime Minister, followed in 1924 by Sir\u00a0Ugo Pasquale Mifsud and in 1927 by Sir\u00a0Gerald Strickland.\nThe 1930s saw a period of instability in the relations between the Maltese political elite, the Maltese Catholic church, and the British authorities; the 1921 Constitution was suspended twice. First in 1930\u20131932, when British authorities assumed that a free and fair election would not be possible following a clash between the governing Constitutional Party and the Church and the latter's subsequent imposition of mortal sin on voters of the party and its allies, thus making a free and fair election impossible. Again, in 1933 the Constitution was withdrawn over the Government's budgetary vote for the teaching of Italian in elementary schools, after just 13\u00a0months of a Nationalist administration. Malta thus reverted to the Crown Colony status it held in 1813.\nBefore the arrival of the British, the official language since 1530 (that of the handful of educated elite) had been Italian, but this was downgraded by the increased use of English. In 1934 Maltese was declared an official language, which brought the number up to three. Two years later, the Letters Patent of the 1936 constitution declared that Maltese and English were the only official languages, thereby legally settling the long-standing 'Language Question' that had dominated Maltese politics for over half a century.\nIn 1934, only about 15% of the population could speak Italian fluently. This meant that out of 58,000\u00a0males qualified by age to be jurors, only 767 could qualify by language, as only Italian had until then been used in the courts.\nIn 1936 the Constitution was revised to provide for the nomination of members to Executive Council under British rule (similar to the 1835 constitution) and in 1939 to provide again for a partly elected Council of Government under British rule.\nBritish Malta during the Second World War.\nBefore World War\u00a0II, Valletta was the location of the Royal Navy's Mediterranean Fleet's headquarters. However, despite Winston Churchill's objections, the command was moved to Alexandria, Egypt, in April 1937 fearing it was too susceptible to air attacks from Europe. At the time of the Italian declaration of war (10\u00a0June 1940), Malta had a garrison of less than four thousand soldiers and about five weeks of food supplies for the population of about three hundred thousand. In addition, Malta's air defences consisted of about forty-two anti-aircraft guns (thirty-four \"heavy\" and eight \"light\") and four Gloster Gladiators, for which three pilots were available.\nBeing a British colony, situated close to Sicily and the Axis shipping lanes, Malta was bombarded by the Italian and German air forces. Malta was used by the British to launch attacks on the Italian navy and had a submarine base. It was also used as a listening post, reading German radio messages including Enigma traffic.\nThe first air raids against Malta occurred on 11\u00a0June 1940; there were six attacks that day. The island's biplanes ability to defend the island was limited due to the Luqa Airfield being unfinished; however, the airfield was ready by the seventh attack. Initially, the Italians would fly at about 5,500\u00a0m, then they dropped down to three thousand metres (in order to improve the accuracy of their bomb-aiming). Journalist Mabel Strickland spoke of the Italian bombing efforts as such: \"The Italians decided they didn't like [the Gladiators and AA guns], so they dropped their bombs twenty miles off Malta and went back.\" Despite these words, the accuracy of Italian bombers improved after repeated attempts, causing a great deal of devastation to both military and civilian infrastructure in Malta. However, these raids proved ineffective to the Axis siege efforts, as any damage incurred was eventually repaired before a new wave of bombers could launch bombing runs over the islands.\nBy the end of August, the Gladiators were reinforced by twelve Hawker Hurricanes which had arrived via HMS \"Argus\". During the first five months of combat, the island's aircraft destroyed or damaged about thirty-seven Italian aircraft, while suffering even greater losses than the Italians. Italian fighter pilot Francisco Cavalera observed, \"Malta was really a big problem for us\u2014very well-defended.\". Nevertheless, the Italian bombing campaign was causing serious damage to the island's infrastructure and the ability of the Royal Navy to operate effectively in the Mediterranean.\nOn Malta, 330\u00a0people had been killed and 297 were seriously wounded from the war's inception until December\u00a01941. In January\u00a01941, the German X. \"Fliegerkorps\" arrived in Sicily as the Afrika Korps arrived in Libya. Over the next four months 820\u00a0people were killed and 915 seriously wounded.\nOn 15\u00a0April 1942, King George\u00a0VI awarded the George Cross (the highest civilian award for gallantry) \"to the island fortress of Malta \u2014 its people and defenders\". Franklin D. Roosevelt arrived on 8\u00a0December 1943, and presented a United States Presidential Citation to the people of Malta on behalf of the people of United States. He presented the scroll on 8\u00a0December but dated it 7\u00a0December for symbolic reasons. In part it read: \"Under repeated fire from the skies, Malta stood alone and unafraid in the centre of the sea, one tiny bright flame in the darkness \u2013 a beacon of hope for the clearer days which have come.\" (The complete citation now stands on a plaque on the wall of the Grand Master's Palace on Republic Street, in the town square of Valletta.)\nIn 1942, a convoy code-named Operation Pedestal was sent to relieve Malta. Five ships, including the tanker SS \"Ohio\", managed to arrive in the Grand Harbour, with enough supplies for Malta to survive. In the following year Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill visited Malta. George VI also arrived in Grand Harbour for a visit.\nDuring the Second World War, Ugo Mifsud and George Borg Olivier were the only remaining Nationalist members of parliament of Malta. Mifsud fainted after delivering a very passionate defence against the deportation to concentration camps in Uganda of Enrico Mizzi and 49\u00a0other Italian Maltese accused of pro-Italian political activities. He died a few days later.\nIn 1943, the Allies coordinated the invasion of Sicily from the Lascaris War Rooms in Valletta. Following the Armistice of Cassibile later in 1943, a large part of the Italian Navy surrendered to the British in Malta.\nThe Malta Conference was held in 1945, in which Churchill and Roosevelt met prior to the Yalta Conference with Joseph Stalin.\nThe 1946 National Assembly resulted in a new constitution in 1947. This restored Malta's self-government, with Paul Boffa as Prime Minister. On 5\u00a0September 1947, universal suffrage for women in Malta was granted. That year, Agatha Barbara was the first woman elected as a Maltese Member of Parliament.\nFrom home rule to independence.\nAfter the Second World War, the islands achieved self-rule, with the Malta Labour Party (MLP) of Dom Mintoff seeking either full integration with the UK or else \"self-determination\" (independence) and the Partit Nazzjonalista (PN) of George Borg Olivier favouring independence, with the same \"dominion status\" that Canada, Australia and New Zealand enjoyed.\nThe 1953 Coronation incident (where, initially, no invitation was sent for a Maltese delegation to attend the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II), temporarily united Maltese politicians. After the MLP's electoral victory in 1955, in December Round Table Talks were held in London, on the future of Malta, namely the Integration proposal put forward by Mintoff. It was attended by the new Prime Minister Dom Mintoff, Borg Olivier, and other Maltese politicians, along with the British Colonial Secretary, Alan Lennox-Boyd. The British government agreed to offer the islands their own representation in British Parliament, with three seats in the House of Commons, with the Home Office taking over responsibility for Maltese affairs from the Colonial Office.\nUnder the proposals, the Maltese Parliament would retain authority over all affairs except defence, foreign policy, and taxation. The Maltese were also to have social and economic parity with the UK, to be guaranteed by the British Ministry of Defence (MoD) the islands' main source of employment.\nA UK integration referendum was held on 11 and 12\u00a0February 1956, in which 77.02% of voters were in favour of the proposal, but owing to a boycott by the Nationalist Party and the Church, only 59.1% of the electorate voted, thereby rendering the result inconclusive.\nThere were also concerns expressed by British MPs that the representation of Malta at Westminster would set a precedent for other colonies, and influence the outcome of general elections.\nIn addition, the decreasing strategic importance of Malta to the Royal Navy meant that the British government was increasingly reluctant to maintain the naval dockyards. Following a decision by the Admiralty to dismiss 40\u00a0workers at the dockyard, Mintoff declared that \"representatives of the Maltese people in Parliament declare that they are no longer bound by agreements and obligations toward the British government\" (the 1958 \"Caravaggio incident\"). In response, the Colonial Secretary sent a cable to Mintoff, stating that he had \"recklessly hazarded\" the whole integration plan.\nUnder protest, Dom Mintoff resigned as Prime Minister along with all the MLP deputies on 21 April 1958. Georgio Borg Olivier was offered to form an alternative government by Governor Laycock but refused. This led to the Governor declaring a state of emergency thus suspending the constitution and Malta was placed under direct colonial administration from London. The MLP had now fully abandoned support for integration (when Mintoff's demands for financial guarantees were not accepted) and now advocated full independence from Britain. In 1959, an Interim Constitution provided for an Executive Council under British rule.\nWhile France had implemented a similar policy in its colonies, some of which became overseas departments, the status offered to Malta from Britain constituted a unique exception. Malta was the only British colony where integration with the UK was seriously considered, and subsequent British governments have ruled out integration for remaining overseas territories, such as Gibraltar.\nFrom 1959 Malta's British governor started to pursue a plan of economic development based on promoting tourism and tax competition, offering very low tax rates on pensions, royalties and dividends to attract British (referred to as \u2018sixpenny settlers\u2019) and former colonial pensioners. Malta saw a large influx of Britons from Rhodesia after 1967.\nIn 1961, the Blood Commission provided for a new constitution allowing for a measure of self-government and recognising the \"State\" of Malta. Giorgio Borg Olivier became Prime Minister the following year, when the Stolper report was delivered.\nIndependent Malta (since 1964).\nNationalist governments (1964\u20131971).\nFollowing the passage of the Malta Independence Act 1964 (c. 86) by the British Parliament and the approval of a new Maltese constitution by 54.5% of voters in a referendum, the State of Malta () was formed on 21\u00a0September 1964 as an independent constitutional monarchy, with Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta and head of state. The date continues to be celebrated annually as Independence Day (), a national holiday in Malta. On 1\u00a0December 1964, Malta was admitted to the United Nations.\nIn the first two post-independence electoral rounds, in 1962 and 1966 the Nationalist Party emerged as the largest party, gaining a majority of the Parliamentary seats. In these years, relations with Italy were of the utmost importance to secure independence and establish linkages with continental Europe. Malta signed four cooperation agreements with Italy in 1967, during a visit of Aldo Moro to the island.\nIn 1965 Malta joined the Council of Europe, and in 1970, Malta signed an Association Treaty with the European Economic Community.\nLabour governments (1971\u20131987).\nThe elections of 1971 saw the Labour Party (MLP) under Dom Mintoff win by just over 4,000\u00a0votes.\nThe Labour government immediately set out to re-negotiate the post-Independence military and financial agreements with the United Kingdom. The government also undertook nationalization programmes and the expansion of the public sector and the welfare state. Employment laws were updated with gender equality being introduced in salary pay. Concerning civil law, civil marriage was introduced and homosexuality and adultery were decriminalised (1973); capital punishment for murder was abolished in 1971. The following year, Malta entered into a Military Base Agreement with the United Kingdom and other NATO countries, after mediation by Italy's Aldo Moro.\nThrough a package of constitutional reforms, Malta became a republic on 13\u00a0December 1974, with the last Governor-General, Sir Anthony Mamo, as its first President. The \"\u0120ie\u0127 ir-Repubblika\" Act, promulgated the following year, abolished all titles of nobility in Malta and mandated that they cease to be recognised.\nThe Party was confirmed in office in the 1976 elections. Between 1976 and 1981 Malta went through difficult times and the Labour government demanded that the Maltese tighten their belts in order to overcome the difficulties Malta was facing. There were shortages of essential items; water and electricity supplies were systematically suspended for two or three days a week. Political tensions increased, notably on Black Monday, when following an attempted assassination of the Prime Minister, the premises of the \"Times of Malta\" were burned and the house of the Leader of Opposition was attacked.\nEnd of British presence and new regional alliances.\nOn 1\u00a0April 1979 the last British forces left the island after the end of the economic pact to stabilise the Maltese economy. This is celebrated as Freedom Day (\"Jum Il-\u0126elsien\") on 31 March. Celebrations start with a ceremony in Floriana near the War Memorial. A popular event on this memorable day is the traditional regatta. The regatta is held at the Grand Harbour and the teams taking part in it give it their best shot to win the much coveted aggregate Regatta Shield.\nUnder Mintoff's premiership, Malta began establishing close cultural and economic ties with Muammar Gaddafi's Libya, as well as diplomatic and military ties with North Korea.\nDuring the Mintoff years, Libya had loaned several million dollars to Malta to make up for the loss of rental income which followed the closure of British military bases in Malta. These closer ties with Libya meant a dramatic new (but short-lived) development in Maltese foreign policy: Western media reported that Malta appeared to be turning its back on NATO, the UK, and Europe generally.\nHistory books were published that began to spread the idea of a disconnection between the Italian and Catholic populations, and instead tried to promote the theory of closer cultural and ethnic ties with North Africa. This new development was noted by Boissevain in 1991: \"The Labour government broke off relations with NATO and sought links with the Arab world. After 900\u00a0years of being linked to Europe, Malta began to look southward. Muslims, still remembered in folklore for savage pirate attacks, were redefined as blood brothers\".\nMalta and Libya had entered into a \"Friendship and Cooperation Treaty\", in response to repeated overtures by Gaddafi for a closer, more formal union between the two countries; and, for a brief period, Arabic had become a compulsory subject in Maltese secondary schools. In 1984 the Mariam Al-Batool Mosque was officially opened by Muammar Gaddafi in Malta, two years after its completion.\nIn 1980 an oil rig of the Italian company Saipem commissioned by Texaco to drill on behalf of the Maltese government 68\u00a0nautical miles south-east of Malta had to stop operations after being threatened by a Libyan gunboat. Both Malta and Libya claimed economic rights to the area and this incident raised tensions. The matter was referred to the International Court of Justice in 1982 but the court's ruling in 1985 dealt only with the delineation of a small part of the contested territory.\nIn 1980, Malta signed a neutrality agreement with Italy, under which Malta agreed not to enter into any alliance and Italy agreed to guarantee Malta's neutrality. Malta's relations with Italy have been described as \"generally excellent\".\nConstitutional crisis in the 1980s.\nThe 1981 general elections saw the Nationalist Party (NP) gaining an absolute majority of votes, yet the Labour winning the majority of parliamentary seats under the Single Transferable Vote and Mintoff remained Prime Minister, leading to a political crisis. The Nationalists, now led by Eddie Fenech Adami, refused to accept the electoral result and also refused to take their seats in Parliament for the first years of the legislature, mounting a campaign demanding that Parliament should reflect the democratic will of the people. Despite this, the Labour government remained in power for the full five-year term. Mintoff resigned as Prime Minister and Party leader and appointed Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici as his successor in 1984.\nThe Mifsud Bonnici years were characterised by political tensions and violence. After a five-year debate, Fenech Adami, through the intervention of Dom Mintoff, reached an agreement with Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici to improve the constitution. Constitutional amendments were made voted and made effective in January 1987 which guaranteed that the party with an absolute majority of votes would be given a majority of parliamentary seats in order to govern. This paved the way for the return of the Nationalist Party to government later that year.\nAccession process to the European Union (1987\u20132004).\nThe general elections that followed in 1987 saw the Nationalist Party achieve such a majority of votes. The new Nationalist administration of Edward Fenech Adami sought to improve Malta's ties with Western Europe and the United States.\nThe Nationalist Party advocated Malta's membership in the European Union presenting an application on 16 July 1990. This became a divisive issue, with Labour opposing membership.\nA wide-ranging programme of liberalisation and public investments meant the confirmation in office of the Nationalists with a larger majority in the 1992 elections. In 1993, local councils were re-established in Malta.\nGeneral elections were held in Malta on 26 October 1996; although Labour received the most votes, the Nationalists won the most seats. The 1987 constitutional amendments had to be used for the second time, and the Labour Party was awarded an additional four seats to ensure they had a majority in Parliament.\nMalta's EU application was subsequently frozen.\nA split in the Labour Party in 1998, between the PM Sant and the former PM Mintoff (died in 2012) resulted in the government losing the majority. Notwithstanding the President of the Republic's preference for a negotiated solution, all attempts proved futile, and he had no other option but to accept Sant and his government's resignation and a call for early elections.\nOn being returned to office in the 1998 elections with a wide 13,000\u00a0vote margin, the Nationalist Party reactivated the EU membership application. Malta was formally accepted as a candidate country at the Helsinki European Council of December\u00a01999.\nIn 2000, capital punishment was abolished also from the military code of Malta.\nEU accession negotiations were concluded late in 2002 and a referendum on membership in 2003 saw 90.86% casting a valid vote of which 53.65% were \"yes\" votes. Labour stated that it would not be bound by this result were it returned to power in the following general election that year. In the circumstances, elections were called and the Nationalist Party, led by Prime minister Fenech Adami, won another mandate, In April 2004, Eddie Fenech Adami was sworn in as President of Malta. Lawrence Gonzi succeeded him as Prime Minister and the leader of the Nationalist Party. The accession treaty was signed and ratified and Malta joined the EU on 1\u00a0May 2004. A consensus on membership was subsequently achieved with Labour saying it would respect this result. Joe Borg was appointed as first Maltese European commissioner in the first Barroso Commission.\nMalta in the European Union (2004\u2013present).\nMalta's accession to the European Union in 2004 had important implications for the state's foreign policy. Notably, Malta was required to withdraw from the Non-Aligned Movement of which the state had been an active member since 1971.\nIn the context of EU membership, Malta joined the Eurozone on 1\u00a0January 2008; the 2008 election confirmed Gonzi in the premiership, while in 2009 George Abela became President of Malta.\nOn 28 May 2011, the Maltese voted 'yes' in the consultative divorce referendum. At that time, Malta was one of only three countries in the world, along with the Philippines and the Vatican City, in which divorce was not permitted. As a consequence of the referendum outcome, a law allowing divorce under certain conditions was enacted in the same year.\nFollowing a corruption scandal John Dalli had to resign and was replaced by Tonio Borg as Maltese commissioner in 2012. A snap election was called for March\u00a02013 after the Gonzi government lost the Parliamentary majority. The Nationalist Party lost the election after having governed Malta more than 15 years since 1987 (except for a period from 1996 to 1998). Labour Party leader Joseph Muscat was elected as Prime Minister.\nIn April 2019, the parliament elected George Vella as the 10th President of the Republic of Malta to succeed Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca.\nOn 16 October 2017, Maltese journalist and anti-corruption activist Daphne Caruana Galizia was assassinated in a car bomb near her residence in Bidnija. Her murder caused an uproar of criticism for the Labour government and the judicial system on the islands. Following evidence of implication between Joseph Muscat's close circle and the arrest of Yorgen Fenech, a long series of protests on the islands and international criticism precipitated the 2019\u20132020 political crisis. This resulted in the resignation of Prime Minister Joseph Muscat, Minister Konrad Mizzi, and Prime Minister's Chief of Staff Keith Schembri. An internal election on 11\u00a0January 2020 within the Maltese Labour party elected Robert Abela, son of former president George Abela, as party leader, and Prime Minister of Malta.\nMalta became the first country in the European Union to legalize recreational use of cannabis on 14 December 2021.\nIn March 2022, the ruling Labour party, led by Prime Minister Robert Abela, won its third successive election. It gained even bigger victory than in 2013 and in 2017. On 4 April 2025, Myriam Spiteri Debono was sworn in as the President of Malta.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39945", "revid": "50862690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39945", "title": "Negro league baseball", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Subinfobox bodystyle/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Negro leagues were professional baseball leagues primarily in the United States comprising teams of African Americans. The term may be used broadly to include professional black teams outside the leagues and it may be used narrowly for the seven relatively successful leagues beginning in 1920 that are sometimes termed \"Negro Major Leagues\".\nIn the late 19th century, the baseball color line developed, excluding African Americans from play in major baseball leagues and affiliated minor leagues (collectively known as organized baseball). The first professional baseball league consisting of all-black teams, the National Colored Base Ball League, was organized strictly as a minor league but failed in 1887 after only two weeks owing to low attendance. After several decades of mostly independent play by a variety of teams, the first Negro National League was formed in 1920 by Rube Foster. Ultimately, seven Negro major leagues existed at various times over the next thirty years. After integration of organized baseball began in the late 1940s, the quality of the Negro leagues slowly deteriorated; the Negro American League's 1951 season is generally considered the last Negro league season, although the last professional club, the Indianapolis Clowns, operated as a humorous sideshow rather than competitively from the mid-1960s to the 1980s.\nIn December 2020, Major League Baseball announced that based on recent decades of historical research, it classified the seven \"Negro major leagues\" as additional major leagues, adding them to the six historical \"major league\" designations it made in 1969, thus recognizing statistics and approximately 3,400 players who played from 1920 to 1948. On May 28, 2024, Major League Baseball announced that it had integrated Negro league statistics into its records, which among other changes gives Josh Gibson the highest single-season major league batting average at .466 (1943) and the highest career batting average at .372.\nEtymology.\nDuring the formative years of black baseball, the term \"colored\" was the established usage when referring to African-Americans. References to black baseball prior to the 1930s are usually to \"colored\" leagues or teams, such as the Southern League of Colored Base Ballists (1886), the National Colored Base Ball League (1887) and the Eastern Colored League (1923), among others. By the 1920s or 1930s, the term \"Negro\" came into use which led to references to \"Negro\" leagues or teams. The black World Series was referred to as the Colored World Series from 1924 to 1927, and the Negro World Series from 1942 to 1948.\nThe National Association for the Advancement of Colored People petitioned the public to recognize a capital \"N\" in negro as a matter of respect for black people. By 1930, essentially every major US outlet had adopted \"Negro\" as the accepted term for black people. By about 1970, the term \"Negro\" had fallen into disfavor, but by then the Negro leagues were mere historic artifacts.\nHistory of the Negro leagues.\nAmateur era.\nBecause black people were not being accepted into the major and minor baseball leagues due to racism which established the color line, they formed their own teams and had made professional teams by the 1880s. The first known baseball game between two black teams was held on November 15, 1859, in New York City. The Henson Base Ball Club of Jamaica, Queens, defeated the Unknowns of Weeksville, Brooklyn, 54 to 43.\nImmediately after the end of the American Civil War in 1865 and during the Reconstruction period that followed, a black baseball scene formed in the East and Mid-Atlantic states. Comprising mainly ex-soldiers and promoted by some well-known black officers, teams such as the Jamaica Monitor Club, Albany Bachelors, Philadelphia Excelsiors and Chicago Uniques started playing each other and any other team that would play against them.\nBy the end of the 1860s, the black baseball mecca was Philadelphia, which had an African-American population of 22,000. Two former cricket players, James H. Francis and Francis Wood, formed the Pythian Base Ball Club. They played in Camden, New Jersey, at the landing of the Federal Street Ferry, because it was difficult to get permits for black baseball games in the city. Octavius Catto, the promoter of the Pythians, decided to apply for membership in the National Association of Base Ball Players, normally a matter of sending delegates to the annual convention; beyond that, a formality. At the end of the 1867 season, \"the National Association of Baseball Players voted to exclude any club with a black player.\" In some ways \"Blackball\" thrived under segregation, with the few black teams of the day playing not only each other but white teams as well. \"Black teams earned the bulk of their income playing white independent 'semipro' clubs.\"\nProfessional baseball.\nBaseball featuring African American players became professionalized by the 1870s. The first known professional black baseball player was Bud Fowler, who appeared in a handful of games with a Chelsea, Massachusetts club in April 1878 and then pitched for the Lynn, Massachusetts team in the International Association.\nMoses Fleetwood Walker and his brother, Welday Wilberforce Walker, were the first two recognizably black players in the major leagues. They both played for the 1884 Toledo Blue Stockings in the American Association, which was considered a major league at the time. Then in 1886 second baseman Frank Grant joined the Buffalo Bisons of the International League, the strongest minor league, and hit .340, third highest in the league. Several other black American players joined the International League the following season, including pitchers George Stovey and Robert Higgins, but 1888 was the last season blacks were permitted in that or any other high minor league.\nThe first nationally known black professional baseball team was founded in 1885 when three clubs, the Keystone Athletics of Philadelphia, the Orions of Philadelphia, and the Manhattans of Washington, D.C., merged to form the Cuban Giants.\nThe success of the Cubans led to the creation of the first recognized \"Negro league\" in 1887\u2014the National Colored Base Ball League. It was organized strictly as a minor league and founded with six teams: Baltimore Lord Baltimores, Boston Resolutes, Louisville Fall City, New York Gorhams, Philadelphia Pythians, and Pittsburgh Keystones. Two more joined before the season but never played a game, the Cincinnati Browns and Washington Capital Citys. The league, led by Walter S. Brown of Pittsburgh, applied for and was granted official minor league status and thus \"protection\" under the major league-led National Agreement. This move prevented any team in organized baseball from signing any of the NCBBL players, which also locked the players to their particular teams within the league. The reserve clause would have tied the players to their clubs from season to season but the NCBBL failed. One month into the season, the Resolutes folded. A week later, only three teams were left.\nBecause the original Cuban Giants were a popular and business success, many similarly named teams came into existence\u2014including the Cuban X-Giants, a splinter and a powerhouse around 1900; the Genuine Cuban Giants, the renamed Cuban Giants, the Columbia Giants, the Brooklyn Royal Giants, and so on. The early \"Cuban\" teams were all composed of African Americans rather than Cubans; the purpose was to increase their acceptance with white patrons, as Cuba was on very friendly terms with the United States during those years. Beginning in 1899 several Cuban baseball teams played in North America, including the All Cubans, the Cuban Stars (West), the Cuban Stars (East), and the New York Cubans. Some of them included white Cuban players, and some were Negro league players.\nThe few players on the white minor league teams were constantly dodging verbal and physical abuse from both competitors and fans. The Compromise of 1877 removed the few remaining obstacles from the South enacting Jim Crow laws, allowing legal discrimination against blacks. On July 14, 1887, Cap Anson's Chicago White Stockings were scheduled to play the Newark Giants of the International League, which had Fleet Walker and George Stovey on its roster. After Anson marched his team onto the field in military style as was his custom, he declared that his team would not play unless Walker and Stovey were barred from the field. Newark capitulated, and later that same day, league owners voted to refuse future contracts to blacks, citing the \"hazards\" imposed by such athletes.\nIn 1888, the Middle States League was formed and it admitted two all-black teams to its otherwise all-white league, the Cuban Giants and their arch-rivals, the New York Gorhams. Despite the animosity between the two clubs, they managed to form a traveling team, the Colored All Americans. This enabled them to make money barnstorming while fulfilling their league obligations. In 1890, the Giants returned to their independent, barnstorming identity, and by 1892, they were the only black team in the East still in operation on a full-time basis.\nFrank Leland.\nAlso in 1888, Frank Leland got some of Chicago's black businessmen to sponsor the black amateur Union Base Ball Club. Through Chicago's city government, Leland obtained a permit and lease to play at the South Side Park, a 5,000-seat facility. Eventually, his team went pro and became the Chicago Unions.\nAfter his stint with the Gorhams, Bud Fowler caught on with a team out of Findlay, Ohio. While his team was playing in Adrian, Michigan, Fowler was persuaded by two white local businessmen, L. W. Hoch and Rolla Taylor to help them start a team financed by the Page Woven Wire Fence Company, the Page Fence Giants. The Page Fence Giants went on to become a powerhouse team that had no home field. Barnstorming through the Midwest, they would play all comers. Their success became the prototype for black baseball for years to come.\nAfter the 1898 season, the Page Fence Giants were forced to fold because of finances. Alvin H. Garrett, a black businessman in Chicago, and John W. Patterson, the left fielder for the Page Fence Giants, reformed the team under the name the Columbia Giants. In 1901, the Giants folded because of a lack of a place to play. Leland bought the Giants in 1905 and merged it with his Unions (despite the fact that not a single Giant player ended up on the roster), and named them the Leland Giants.\nRube Foster.\nThe Philadelphia Giants, owned by Walter Schlichter, a white businessman, rose to prominence in 1903 when they lost to the Cuban X-Giants in their version of the \"Colored Championship\". Leading the way for the Cubans was a young pitcher by the name of Andrew \"Rube\" Foster. The following season, Schlichter, in the finest blackball tradition, hired Foster away from the Cubans and beat them in their 1904 rematch. Philadelphia remained on top of the blackball world until Foster left the team in 1907 to play and manage the Leland Giants (Frank Leland renamed his Chicago Union Giants the Leland Giants in 1905).\nAround the same time, Nat Strong, a white businessman, started using his ownership of baseball fields in the New York City area to become the leading promoter of blackball on the East coast. Just about any game played in New York, Strong would get a cut. Strong eventually used his leverage to almost put the Brooklyn Royal Giants out of business, and then he bought the club and turned it into a barnstorming team.\nWhen Foster joined the Leland Giants, he demanded that he be put in charge of not only the on-field activities but the bookings as well. Foster immediately turned the Giants into \"the\" team to beat. He indoctrinated them to take the extra base, to play hit and run on nearly every pitch, and to rattle the opposing pitcher by taking them deep into the count. He studied the mechanics of his pitchers and could spot the smallest flaw, turning his average pitchers into learned craftsmen. Foster also was able to turn around the business end of the team as well, by demanding and getting 40 percent of the gate instead of the 10 percent that Frank Leland was getting.\nBy the end of the 1909, Foster demanded that Leland step back from all baseball operations or he (Foster) would leave. When Leland would not give up complete control, Foster quit, and in a heated court battle, got to keep the rights to the Leland Giants' name. Leland took the players and started a new team named the Chicago Giants, while Foster took the Leland Giants and started to encroach on Nat Strong's territory.\nAs early as 1910, Foster started talking about reviving the concept of an all-black league. The one thing he was insistent upon was that black teams should be owned by black men. This put him in direct competition with Strong. After 1910, Foster renamed his team the Chicago American Giants to appeal to a larger fan base. During the same year, J. L. Wilkinson started the All Nations traveling team. The All Nations team would eventually become one of the best-known and popular teams of the Negro leagues, the Kansas City Monarchs.\nOn April 6, 1917, the United States entered World War I. Manpower needed by the defense plants and industry accelerated the migration of blacks from the South to the North. This meant a larger and more affluent fan base with more money to spend. By the end of the war in 1919, Foster was again ready to start a Negro baseball league.\nOn February 13 and 14, 1920, talks were held in Kansas City, Missouri, that established the Negro National League and its governing body the National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs. The league was initially composed of eight teams: Chicago American Giants, Chicago Giants, Cuban Stars, Dayton Marcos, Detroit Stars, Indianapolis ABCs, Kansas City Monarchs, and St. Louis Giants. Foster was named league president and controlled every aspect of the league, including which players played on which teams, when and where teams played, and what equipment was used (all of which had to be purchased from Foster). Foster, as booking agent of the league, took a five percent cut of all gate receipts.\nThe success of the early Negro Leagues, in particular the early Negro National League, was a direct reflection of the influence Foster had for the league. He was known as the \"father of black baseball.\" He was a good ball player and played alongside Jack Johnson, but his greatest accomplishments were found within the owner's box. Foster had a passion for fighting for his players rights and equality within the sport and outside of it. Under his stewardship, the Negro Leagues became arguably one of the largest and certainly the most geographically diverse black-owned businesses in the United States. \nFoster not only made a difference within the lives of his players, but for the sport of Baseball. The Major Leagues gave him quiet respect. Managers would arrive unannounced to Foster's games and take lessons from his teachings, and it was from Foster that the game gained the bunt-and-run. The man was a turning point for baseball and especially the Negro Leagues. When he passed away in 1930, the Negro Leagues collapsed after he died. In 1981, he was finally inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.\nGolden age.\nOn May 2, 1920, the Indianapolis ABCs beat Charles \"Joe\" Green's Chicago Giants (4\u20132) in the first game played in the inaugural season of the Negro National League, played at Washington Park in Indianapolis. However, because of the Chicago Race Riot of 1919, the National Guard still occupied the Giants' home field, Schorling's Park (formerly South Side Park). This forced Foster to cancel all the Giants' home games for almost a month and threatened to become a huge embarrassment for the league. On March 2, 1920, the Negro Southern League was founded in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1921, the Negro Southern League joined Foster's National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs. As a dues-paying member of the association, it received the same protection from raiding parties as any team in the Negro National League.\nFoster then admitted John Connors' Atlantic City Bacharach Giants as an associate member to move further into Nat Strong's territory. Connors, wanting to return the favor of helping him against Strong, raided Ed Bolden's Hilldale Daisies team. Bolden saw little choice but to team up with Foster's nemesis, Nat Strong. Within days of calling a truce with Strong, Bolden made an about-face and signed up as an associate member of Foster's Negro National League.\nOn December 16, 1922, Bolden once again shifted sides and, with Strong, formed the Eastern Colored League as an alternative to Foster's Negro National League, which started with six teams: Atlantic City Bacharach Giants, Baltimore Black Sox, Brooklyn Royal Giants, New York Cuban Stars, Hilldale, and New York Lincoln Giants. The National League was having trouble maintaining continuity among its franchises: three teams folded and had to be replaced after the 1921 season, two others after the 1922 season, and two more after the 1923 season. Foster replaced the defunct teams, sometimes promoting whole teams from the Negro Southern League into the NNL. Finally Foster and Bolden met and agreed to an annual World Series beginning in 1924.\nAlthough this was a strong beginning to the Negro Leagues, throughout the 1920s the leagues were very unorganized, having teams play uneven numbers of games. Teams would skip official games for non-league matchups which would be more lucrative for the team. Players would jump from franchise to franchise, looking for the highest pay, causing imbalance within the leagues. \n1925 saw the St. Louis Stars come of age in the Negro National League. They finished in second place during the second half of the year due in large part to their pitcher turned center fielder, Cool Papa Bell, and their shortstop, Willie Wells. A gas leak in his home nearly asphyxiated Rube Foster in 1926, and his increasingly erratic behavior led to him being committed to an asylum a year later. While Foster was out of the picture, the owners of the National League elected William C. Hueston as new league president. In 1927, Ed Bolden suffered a similar fate as Foster, by committing himself to a hospital because the pressure was too great. The Eastern League folded shortly after that, marking the end of the World Series between the NNL and the ECL.\nAfter the Eastern League folded following the 1927 season, a new eastern league, the American Negro League, was formed to replace it. The makeup of the new ANL was nearly the same as the Eastern League, the exception being that the Homestead Grays joined in place of the now-defunct Brooklyn Royal Giants. The ANL lasted just one season. In the face of harder economic times, the Negro National League folded after the 1931 season. Some of its teams joined the only Negro league then left, the Negro Southern League. Only strong independent clubs were able to survive the hard economic turn that affected the country, such as the Kansas City Monarchs. During this time, strong clubs would build teams that had potential to beat the teams in the major leagues with new players and tactics that many have never seen before. \nOn March 26, 1932, the Chicago \"Defender\" announced the end of Negro National League.\nSatchel Paige, Josh Gibson, and Gus Greenlee.\nJust as Negro league baseball seemed to be at its lowest point and was about to fade into history, along came Cumberland Posey and his Homestead Grays. Posey, Charlie Walker, John Roesnik, George Rossiter, John Drew, Lloyd Thompson, and L.R. Williams got together in January 1932 and founded the East\u2013West League. Eight cities were included in the new league: \"Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Detroit, Baltimore, Cleveland, Newark, New York, and Washington, D.C.\". By May 1932, the Detroit Wolves were about to collapse, and instead of letting the team go, Posey kept pumping money into it. By June the Wolves had disintegrated and all the rest of the teams, except for the Grays, were beyond help, so Posey had to terminate the league.\nAcross town from Posey, Gus Greenlee, a reputed gangster and numbers runner, had just purchased the Pittsburgh Crawfords. Greenlee's main interest in baseball was to use it as a way to launder money from his numbers games. But, after learning about Posey's money-making machine in Homestead, he became obsessed with the sport and his Crawfords. On August 6, 1931, Satchel Paige made his first appearance as a Crawford. With Paige on his team, Greenlee took a huge risk by investing $100,000 in a new ballpark to be called Greenlee Field. On opening day, April 30, 1932, the pitcher-catcher battery was made up of the two most marketable icons in all of black baseball: Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson.\nIn 1933, Greenlee, riding the popularity of his Crawfords, became the next man to start a Negro league. In February 1933, Greenlee and delegates from six other teams met at Greenlee's Crawford Grill to ratify the constitution of the National Organization of Professional Baseball Clubs. The name of the new league was the same as the old league Negro National League which had disbanded a year earlier in 1932. The members of the new league were the Pittsburgh Crawfords, the Columbus Blue Birds, the Indianapolis ABCs, the Baltimore Black Sox, the Brooklyn Royal Giants, Cole's American Giants (formerly the Chicago American Giants), and the Nashville Elite Giants. Greenlee also came up with the idea to duplicate the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, except, unlike the big league method in which the sportswriters chose the players, the fans voted for the participants. The first game, known as the East\u2013West All-Star Game, was held September 10, 1933, at Comiskey Park in Chicago before a crowd of 20,000.\nWorld War II.\nWith the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the United States was thrust into World War II. Remembering World War I, black America vowed it would not be shut out of the beneficial effects of a major war effort: economic boom and social unification.\nJust like the major leagues, the Negro leagues saw many stars miss one or more seasons while fighting overseas. While many players were over 30 and considered \"too old\" for service, Monte Irvin, Larry Doby and Leon Day of Newark; Ford Smith, Hank Thompson, Joe Greene, Willard Brown and Buck O'Neil of Kansas City; Lyman Bostock of Birmingham; and Lick Carlisle and Howard Easterling of Homestead all served. But the white majors were barely recognizable, while the Negro leagues reached their highest plateau. Millions of black Americans were working in war industries and, making good money, they packed league games in every city. Business was so good that promoter Abe Saperstein (famous for the Harlem Globetrotters) started a new circuit, the Negro Midwest League, a minor league similar to the Negro Southern League. The Negro World Series was revived in 1942, this time pitting the winners of the eastern Negro National League and midwestern Negro American League. It continued through 1948 with the NNL winning four championships and the NAL three.\nIn 1946, Saperstein partnered with Jesse Owens to form another Negro league, the West Coast Baseball Association (WCBA); Saperstein was league president and Owens was vice-president and the owner of the league's Portland (Oregon) Rosebuds franchise. The WCBA disbanded after only two months.\nIntegration era.\nJudge Kenesaw M. Landis, the first Commissioner of Baseball, was an intractable opponent of integrating the white majors. During his quarter-century tenure, he blocked all attempts at integrating the game. A popular story has it that in 1943, Bill Veeck planned to buy the moribund Philadelphia Phillies and stock them with Negro league stars. However, when Landis got wind of his plans, he and National League president Ford Frick scuttled it in favor of another bid by William D. Cox.\nAfter Landis's death in 1944, Happy Chandler was named his successor. Chandler was open to integrating the game, even at the risk of losing his job as Commissioner. He later said in his biography that he could not, in good conscience, tell black players they could not play baseball with whites when they had fought for their country [although they had fought in segregated units].\nIn March 1945, the white majors created the Major League Committee on Baseball Integration. Its members included Joseph P. Rainey, Larry MacPhail and Branch Rickey. Because MacPhail, who was an outspoken critic of integration, kept stalling, the committee never met. Under the guise of starting an all-black league, Rickey sent scouts all around the United States, Mexico and Puerto Rico, looking for the perfect candidate to break the color line. His list was eventually narrowed down to three: Roy Campanella, Don Newcombe and Jackie Robinson.\nOn August 28, 1945, Jackie Robinson met with Rickey in Brooklyn, where Rickey gave Robinson a \"test\" by berating him and shouting racial epithets that Robinson would hear from day one in the white game. Having passed the test, Robinson signed the contract which stipulated that from then on, Robinson had no \"written or moral obligations\" to any other club. By the inclusion of this clause, precedent was set that would raze the Negro leagues as a functional commercial enterprise.\nTo throw off the press and keep his intentions hidden, Rickey got heavily involved in Gus Greenlee's newest foray into black baseball, the United States League. Greenlee started the league in 1945 as a way to get back at the owners of the Negro National League teams for throwing him out. Rickey saw the opportunity as a way to convince people that he was interested in cleaning up blackball, not integrating it. In midsummer 1945, Rickey, almost ready with his Robinson plan, pulled out of the league. The league folded after the end of the 1946 season.\nPressured by civil rights groups, the Fair Employment Practices Act was passed by the New York State Legislature in 1945. This followed the passing of the Quinn-Ives Act banning discrimination in hiring. At the same time, NYC Mayor La Guardia formed the Mayor's Commission on Baseball to study integration of the major leagues. All this led to Rickey announcing the signing of Robinson much earlier than he would have liked. On October 23, 1945, Montreal Royals president Hector Racine announced that, \"We are signing this boy.\"\nEarly in 1946, Rickey signed four more black players, Campanella, Newcombe, John Wright and Roy Partlow, this time with much less fanfare. After the integration of the major leagues in 1947, marked by the appearance of Jackie Robinson with the Brooklyn Dodgers that April, interest in Negro league baseball waned. Black players who were regarded as prospects were signed by major league teams, often without regard for any contracts that might have been signed with Negro league clubs. Negro league owners who complained about this practice were in a no-win situation: They could not protect their own interests without seeming to interfere with the advancement of players to the majors. By 1948, the Dodgers, along with Veeck's Cleveland Indians, had integrated.\nThe Negro leagues also \"integrated\" around the same time, as Eddie Klep pitched for the Cleveland Buckeyes during the 1946 season, becoming the first white American to play in the Negro leagues.\nThese moves came despite strong opposition from the owners; Rickey was the only one of the 16 owners to support integrating the sport in January 1947. Chandler's decision to overrule them may have been a factor in his ouster in 1951 in favor of Ford C. Frick.\nEnd of the Negro leagues.\nSome proposals were floated to bring the Negro leagues into \"organized baseball\" as developmental leagues for black players, but that was recognized as contrary to the goal of full integration. And so, the Negro leagues, once among the largest and most prosperous black-owned business ventures, were allowed to fade into oblivion.\nFirst a trickle and then a flood of players signed with major league baseball teams. Most signed minor league contracts and many languished, shuttled from one bush league team to another despite their success at that level.\nThe Negro National League folded after the 1948 season when the Grays withdrew to resume barnstorming, the Newark Eagles moved from New Jersey to Houston, Texas, and the New York Black Yankees folded. The Grays folded one year later after losing $30,000 in the barnstorming effort. The Negro American League was the only \"major\" Negro league operating in 1949. Within two years it had been reduced to minor league caliber and it played its last game in 1958.\nThe last All-Star game was held in 1962, and by 1966 the Indianapolis Clowns were the last Negro league team still playing. The Clowns continued to play exhibition games into the 1980s, but as a humorous sideshow rather than a competitive sport.\nNegro major leagues.\nWhile organized leagues were common in black baseball, there were only seven leagues that are considered to be of the top quality of play at the time of their existence. In 2020, Major League Baseball announced their official determination and designation of Negro Leagues by seasons as \"Major Leagues\", including the incorporation of applicable player records into the official baseball statistics. None materialized prior to 1920 and by 1950, due to integration, they were in decline. Even though teams were league members, most still continued to barnstorm and play non-league games against local or semi-pro teams. Those games, sometimes approaching 100 per season, did not count in the official standings or statistics. However, some teams were considered \"associate\" teams and games played against them did count, but an associate team held no place in the league standings.\nColored and Negro World Series.\nThe NNL(I) and ECL champions met in a World Series, usually referred to as the \"Colored World Series\", from 1924 to 1927 (1924, 1925, 1926, 1927).\nThe NNL(II) and NAL also met in a World Series, usually referred to as the \"Negro World Series\" from 1942 to 1948 (1942, 1943, 1944, 1945, 1946, 1947, 1948).\nFive of those years with a World Series at the end also saw a \"Championship Series\" played to determine the pennant winner that went to the Series. In years without a World Series, leagues would either award a championship to the team that had the best record/percentage at the end of the year or had a \"Championship Series\" to determine the winner between first half and second half champions. Eleven seasons exist with a postseason series held to determine a pennant winner, although one (1936) was not completed.\nNegro minor leagues.\nEarly professional leagues cannot be called major or minor. Until the twentieth century, not one completed even half of its planned season. Two leagues can be considered the prototypes for Negro league baseball:\nEventually, some teams were able to survive and even profit by barnstorming small towns and playing local semi-pro teams as well as league games. Two important leagues of this era are:\nEarly Negro leagues were unable to attract and retain top talent due to financial, logistical and contractual difficulties. Some early dominant teams did not join a league since they could pull in larger profits independently. The early leagues were specifically structured as minor leagues. With the integration of Organized Baseball, beginning 1946, all leagues simply lost elite players to white leagues, and historians do not consider any Negro league \"major\" after 1950.\nA number of leagues from the major-league era (post-1900) are recognized as Negro minor leagues. A rule of thumb was leagues in the north were major while leagues in the south were minor, due mainly to population and economic disparities. Below are some of the better-documented leagues:\nBy default, leagues established after integration are considered minor league, as is the one of two 1940s majors that continued after 1950. Also at this time, leagues began to appear in the west, just as in other sports, due to the post-War boom and improved transportation modes. Below are some of the better-documented leagues:\nThe Negro leagues and the Hall of Fame.\nIn his Baseball Hall of Fame induction speech in 1966, Ted Williams made a strong plea for inclusion of Negro league stars in the Hall. After the publication of Robert Peterson's landmark book \"Only the Ball was White\" in 1970, the Hall of Fame found itself under renewed pressure to find a way to honor Negro league players who would have been in the Hall had they not been barred from the major leagues due to the color of their skin.\nAt first, the Hall of Fame planned a \"separate but equal\" display, which would be similar to the Ford C. Frick Award for baseball commentators, in that this plan meant that the Negro league honorees would not be considered members of the Hall of Fame. This plan was criticized by the press, the fans and the players it was intended to honor, and Satchel Paige himself insisted that he would not accept anything less than full-fledged induction into the Hall of Fame. The Hall relented and agreed to admit Negro league players on an equal basis with their Major League counterparts in 1971. A special Negro league committee selected Satchel Paige in 1971, followed by (in alphabetical order) Cool Papa Bell, Oscar Charleston, Mart\u00edn Dihigo, Josh Gibson, Monte Irvin, Judy Johnson, Buck Leonard and John Henry Lloyd. Of the nine players selected, only Irvin and Paige spent any time in the integrated major leagues. The Veterans Committee later selected Ray Dandridge, as well as choosing Rube Foster on the basis of meritorious service.\nOther members of the Hall who played in both the Negro leagues and Major League Baseball are Hank Aaron, Ernie Banks, Roy Campanella, Larry Doby, Willie Mays, and Jackie Robinson. Except for Doby, their play in the Negro leagues was a minor factor in their selection: Aaron, Banks, and Mays played in Negro leagues only briefly and after the leagues had declined with the migration of many black players to the integrated minor leagues; Campanella (1969) and Robinson (1962) were selected before the Hall began considering performance in the Negro leagues.\nFrom 1995 to 2001, the Hall made a renewed effort to honor luminaries from the Negro leagues, one each year. There were seven selections: Leon Day, Bill Foster, Bullet Rogan, Hilton Smith, Turkey Stearnes, Willie Wells, and Smokey Joe Williams.\nIn February 2006, a committee of twelve baseball historians elected 17 more people from black baseball to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, twelve players and five executives.\nEffa Manley, co-owner (with her husband Abe Manley) and business manager of the Newark Eagles club in the Negro National League, is the first woman elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.\nThe committee reviewed the careers of 29 Negro league and 10 Pre-Negro league candidates. The list of 39 had been pared from a roster of 94 candidates by a five-member screening committee in November 2005. The voting committee was chaired by Fay Vincent, Major League Baseball's eighth Commissioner and an Honorary Director of the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum.\nTable of Hall of Fame players.\nPlayers whose careers also included American League or National League teams are noted with a dagger(\u2020).\nThe below players were inducted for their Major League Baseball career but started their careers in the Negro leagues.\nLegacy.\nLast Negro leaguers.\nHank Aaron was the last Negro league player to hold a regular position in Major League Baseball.\nMinnie Mi\u00f1oso was the last Negro league player to play in a major league game when he appeared in two games for the Chicago White Sox in 1980.\nBuck O'Neil was the most recent former Negro league player to appear in a professional game when he made two appearances (one for each team) in the Northern League All-Star Game in 2006.\n2008 Negro leagues special draft.\nOn June 5, 2008, Major League Baseball held a special draft of the surviving Negro league players to acknowledge and rectify their exclusion from the major leagues on the basis of race. The idea of the special draft was conceived by Hall of Famer Dave Winfield. Each major league team drafted one player from the Negro leagues. Bobo Henderson, Joe B. Scott, Mule Miles, Lefty Bell, James \"Red\" Moore, Mack \"The Knife\" Pride and his brother Charley Pride (who went on to a legendary career in country music) were among the players selected. Also drafted, by the New York Yankees, was Emilio Navarro, who, at 102 years of age at the time of the draft, was believed to be the oldest living professional ballplayer.\nMuseum.\nThe Negro Leagues Baseball Museum is located in the 18th and Vine District in Kansas City, Missouri.\nPostage stamp recognition.\nOn July 17, 2010, the U.S. Postal Service issued a se-tenant pair of 44-cent U.S. commemorative postage stamps, to honor the all-black professional baseball leagues that operated from 1920 to about 1960. The stamps were formally issued at the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, during the celebration of the museum's twentieth anniversary. One of the stamps depicts Rube Foster.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nHistories and encyclopedias\nBiographies and autobiographies"}
{"id": "39946", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39946", "title": "Charles XV", "text": "King of Sweden and Norway from 1859 to 1872\nCharles XV and IV (\"Carl Ludvig Eugen\"; Swedish and Norwegian officially: \"Karl\"; 3 May 1826 \u2013 18 September 1872) was King of Sweden and King of Norway, there often referred to as Charles IV, from 8 July 1859 until his death in 1872. Charles was the third Swedish monarch from the House of Bernadotte. He was the first one to be born in Sweden, the first to grow up speaking Swedish as his first language, and the first to be raised from birth in the Lutheran faith.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Stockholm Palace, Stockholm, in 1826 and dubbed Duke of Scania at birth. Born the eldest son of Crown Prince Oscar of Sweden and his wife Crown Princess Josephine, he would be second in line to the throne of his grandfather, the ruling King Charles XIV John of Sweden. During his childhood he was placed in the care of the royal governess, Countess Christina Ulrika Taube. When he was 15, he was given his first officer's commission in 1841 by his grandfather the king.\nCrown Prince.\nThe aging King Charles XIV John would suffer a stroke on his 81st birthday in 1844, dying little more than a month later. His successor would be his son, Charles's father Oscar, who ascended the throne as King Oscar I of Sweden. Upon his father's accession to the throne in 1844, the youth Charles was made a chancellor of the universities of Uppsala and Lund, and in 1853 chancellor of Royal Swedish Academy of Arts. On 11 February 1846, he was made an honorary member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nThe Crown Prince was Viceroy of Norway briefly in 1856 and 1857. He became Regent on 25 September 1857, and king on the death of his father on 8 July 1859. As grandson of Augusta of Bavaria, he was a descendant of Gustav I of Sweden and Charles IX of Sweden, whose Vasa blood returned to the throne after being lost in 1818 when Charles XIII of Sweden died.\nOn 19 June 1850, he married in Stockholm Louise of the Netherlands, niece of William II of the Netherlands through her father and niece of William I of Prussia, German Emperor, through her mother. The couple was personally quite dissimilar; Louise was a cultured and refined woman, however, she was considered to be quite plain and Charles was disappointed with her appearance. Louise was in love with her husband, whereas he preferred other women, saddening her deeply. His well-known mistresses included the actress Laura Bergn\u00e9hr, the countess Josephine Sparre, Wilhelmine Schr\u00f6der and the actresses Hanna Styrell and Elise Hwasser, and the Crown Prince neglected his shy wife. On the other hand, his relationship to his only daughter, Louise, was warm and close.\nReign.\nAs Crown Prince, Charles's brusque manner had led many to regard his future accession with some apprehension, yet he proved to be one of the most popular of Scandinavian kings and a constitutional ruler in the best sense of the word. His reign was remarkable for its manifold and far-reaching reforms. Sweden's existing municipal law (1862), ecclesiastical law (1863) and criminal law (1864) were enacted appropriately enough under the direction of a king whose motto was: \"Land skall med lag byggas\" \u2013 \"With law shall the land be built\". Charles also helped Louis De Geer to carry through his reform of the Parliament of Sweden in 1866. He also declared the freedom of women by passing the law of legal majority for unmarried women in 1858 \u2013 his sister Princess Eugenie became the first woman who was declared mature.\nThough known as King Charles XV (15th) in Sweden (and also on contemporary Norwegian coins), he was actually the ninth Swedish king by that name, as his predecessor Charles IX (reigned 1604\u20131611) had adopted a numeral according to a fictitious history of Sweden.\nCharles, like his father Oscar I, was an advocate of Scandinavianism and the political solidarity of the three northern kingdoms, and his friendship with Frederick VII of Denmark, it is said, led him to give half promises of help to Denmark on the eve of the war of 1864, which, in the circumstances, were perhaps misleading and unjustifiable. In view, however, of the unpreparedness of the Swedish army and the difficulties of the situation, Charles was forced to observe a strict neutrality. On behalf of Charles, Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek, Dutch diplomat in Japan, concluded a \"V\u00e4nskaps-, handels- och sj\u00f6fartstraktat\" (\"Friendship, Trade and Maritime Treaty\") between Sweden-Norway and Japan on 11 November 1868 (see the Treaty of Yokohama). The treaty opened Hakodate, Yokohama, Nagasaki, Kobe and Osaka to trade for Swedish and Norwegian traders (Article 3). The treaty also gave Sweden-Norway the opportunity to send consuls to the newly opened ports, where they were given the right to exercise jurisdiction over Swedes and Norwegians (consular jurisdiction). \nPlagued by ill-health for the last years of his life, Charles succumbed to abdominal tuberculosis in Malm\u00f6 on 18 September 1872.\nHe was followed on the thrones of both Norway and Sweden by his brother, crowned Oscar II.\nPersonal life.\nCharles XV attained some eminence as a painter and as a poet. In 1872, Charles XV had controversial plans to enter a non-morganatic marriage with the Polish countess Maria Beatrix Krasi\u0144ska through the assistance of Ohan Demirgian, plans that aroused opposition both in the Royal house and Government and which were interrupted only by his death.\nCharles's popularity often had him referred to colloquially as \"Kron-Kalle\" (\"Crown-Charlie\").\nIssue.\nBy his wife, Louise of the Netherlands, Charles had two children, a son who died in infancy and a daughter who married the King of Denmark. The early death of Charles's only legitimate son meant that he was succeeded on the thrones of Sweden and Norway by his younger brother Oscar II.\nCharles also sired an illegitimate son, Carl Johan Bolander, (4 February 1854 \u2013 28 July 1903), the father of Bishop Nils Bolander, and daughter, Ellen Svensson Hammar (28 October 1865 \u2013 1931), and it has been widely rumored that Charles had many more extramarital children.\nA few weeks before Charles's death, his daughter Louise (then Crown Princess of Denmark) gave birth to her second son, Prince Carl of Denmark. In 1905, Prince Carl ascended to the throne of Norway with the regnal name \"Haakon VII\", thus becoming Charles's successor in that country.\nNo subsequent king of Sweden to this day is Charles's descendant. However, his descendants are on the thrones of Denmark, Luxembourg, Belgium and Norway.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39948", "revid": "50186069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39948", "title": "1301", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1301 (MCCCI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39949", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39949", "title": "1302", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1302 (MCCCII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39950", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39950", "title": "1303", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1303 (MCCCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39951", "revid": "519737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39951", "title": "1304", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1304 (MCCCIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39952", "revid": "1297125288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39952", "title": "1305", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1305 (MCCCV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39953", "revid": "1296324951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39953", "title": "1306", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1306 (MCCCVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39954", "revid": "45902543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39954", "title": "1309", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1309 (MCCCIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39955", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39955", "title": "1312", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1312 (MCCCXII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39956", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39956", "title": "1311", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1311 (MCCCXI) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39957", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39957", "title": "1310", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1310 (MCCCX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39958", "revid": "44909914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39958", "title": "1314", "text": "Calendar year\n1314 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39959", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39959", "title": "1315", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1315 (MCCCXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39960", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39960", "title": "1316", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1316 (MCCCXVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39961", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39961", "title": "1317", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1317 (MCCCXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.6693\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39962", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39962", "title": "1318", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1318 (MCCCXVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39963", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39963", "title": "1319", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1319 (MCCCXIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39964", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39964", "title": "1321", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1321 (MCCCXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39965", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39965", "title": "1324", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1324 (MCCCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39966", "revid": "45902543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39966", "title": "1325", "text": " \nCalendar year\n \nYear 1325 (MCCCXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39967", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39967", "title": "1327", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1327 (MCCCXXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39968", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39968", "title": "1328", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1328 (MCCCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39970", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39970", "title": "1329", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1329 (MCCCXXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39971", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39971", "title": "1330", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1330 (MCCCXXX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39972", "revid": "114797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39972", "title": "1332", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1332 (MCCCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39973", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39973", "title": "1335", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1335 (MCCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDate unknown.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39974", "revid": "40539365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39974", "title": "1337", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1337 (MCCCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39975", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39975", "title": "1339", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1339 (MCCCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39976", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39976", "title": "1298", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1298 (MCCXCVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39977", "revid": "7088832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39977", "title": "1296", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1296 (MCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39978", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39978", "title": "1295", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1295 (MCCXCV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBirths.\n\"some dates approximate\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39979", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39979", "title": "1294", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1294 (MCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39980", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39980", "title": "1293", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1293 (MCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39981", "revid": "230475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39981", "title": "1292", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1292 (MCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39982", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39982", "title": "1291", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1291 (MCCXCI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39983", "revid": "43056943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39983", "title": "1290", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1290 (MCCXC) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39984", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39984", "title": "1276", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1276 (MCCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39985", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39985", "title": "1275", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1275 (MCCLXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39986", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39986", "title": "1274", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1274 (MCCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39987", "revid": "19811170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39987", "title": "1273", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1273 (MCCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39988", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39988", "title": "1272", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1272 (MCCLXXII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39989", "revid": "50186069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39989", "title": "1271", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1271 (MCCLXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39990", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39990", "title": "1270", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1270 (MCCLXX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar, the 1270th year of the Common Era (CE) and \"Anno Domini\" (AD) designations, the 270th year of the 2nd millennium, the 70th year of the 13th century, and the 1st year of the 1270s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39991", "revid": "50664898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39991", "title": "1216", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1216 (MCCXVI) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39992", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39992", "title": "1217", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1217 (MCCXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39993", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39993", "title": "1218", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1218 (MCCXVIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39994", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39994", "title": "1219", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1219 (MCCXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39995", "revid": "15130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39995", "title": "1213", "text": "Year\nCalendar year\nYear 1213 (MCCXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39996", "revid": "15130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39996", "title": "1212", "text": "Year\nCalendar year\n \nYear 1212 (MCCXII) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39997", "revid": "15130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39997", "title": "1211", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1211 (MCCXI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39998", "revid": "41665874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39998", "title": "1210", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1210 (MCCX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39999", "revid": "47487737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39999", "title": "1208", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1208 (MCCVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40000", "revid": "29237824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40000", "title": "1207", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1207 (MCCVII) was a common year starting on Monday (full calendar) under the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40001", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40001", "title": "1206", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1206 (MCCVI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40002", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40002", "title": "1203", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1203 (MCCIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. It was also the first year to have all digits different from each other since 1098.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40003", "revid": "50772955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40003", "title": "1201", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1201 (MCCI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40004", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40004", "title": "1195", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1195 (MCXCV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40005", "revid": "88149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40005", "title": "1194", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1194 (MCXCIV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40006", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40006", "title": "1193", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1193 (MCXCIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40007", "revid": "43301693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40007", "title": "1191", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1191 (MCXCI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40008", "revid": "1290843910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40008", "title": "1190", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1190 (MCXC) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40009", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40009", "title": "1169", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1169 (MCLXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40010", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40010", "title": "1167", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1167 (MCLXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40011", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40011", "title": "1166", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1166 (MCLXVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40012", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40012", "title": "1162", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1162 (MCLXII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40014", "revid": "230475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40014", "title": "1160", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1160 (MCLX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40015", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40015", "title": "Skeleton at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "Skeleton returned to the program of the Winter Olympic Games for the first time in 54 years at the 2002 Games in Salt Lake City, Utah. This was the first time Olympic competitions in skeleton were held during an Olympics outside of St. Moritz. Both men and women competed, with women competing for the first time in Olympic history. Medals were awarded after five runs down the course. Both events were contested on February 20.\nParticipating NOCs.\nNineteen nations competed in the skeleton events at Salt Lake City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40017", "revid": "1294286966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40017", "title": "Ice hockey at the 2002 Winter Olympics", "text": "2002 edition of the ice hockey tournaments during the Olympic Winter Games\nHockey at the 2002 Winter Olympics was held at the E Center in West Valley City and Peaks Ice Arena in Provo, Utah, United States. The men's and women's tournaments were won by Canada, defeating the hosts United States in both finals.\nMen's tournament.\nQualifying.\nThe final standings at the end of the 1999 IIHF World Championship were used to determine the path to the Olympic tournament. The top six places were given direct entry to the first round, places seven and eight were given direct entry to the preliminary round, and all other participants were seeded in qualifying tournaments to fill the remaining six spots. https:// shows the seeding path for all nations, in detail.\nWomen's tournament.\nQualification.\nThe qualification process, and seedings for the Olympic tournament, came from the final standings of the 2000 IIHF Women's World Championship. The top six nations were given direct entry to the Olympics, the final two spots were contested in a qualification tournament. The nations ranked seven through ten played a round robin in Engelberg Switzerland February 8\u201311, 2001.\nFormat.\nThe eight teams were split into two equal divisions. All teams played three preliminary games within their division. Following the completion of the preliminary round, the top two teams from each division advanced to the medal round and competed in a playoff to determine the gold medalist. The other four played classification games. Team rosters were allowed to have between 15 and 18 skaters (forwards and defensemen).\nParticipating nations.\nA total of eight national teams competed in the women's ice hockey tournament.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40019", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40019", "title": "Yankee Stadium (1923)", "text": "Former baseball stadium in the Bronx, New York\nThe original Yankee Stadium was located in the Bronx in New York City. It was the home of the New York Yankees from 1923 to 2008, except for 1974\u20131975 when it was renovated. It hosted 6,581 Yankees regular season home games during its 85-year history. It was also the home of the New York Giants of the National Football League (NFL) from October 21, 1956 through September 23, 1973. The stadium's nickname is \"The House That Ruth Built\" which is derived from Babe Ruth, the baseball superstar whose prime years coincided with the stadium's opening and the beginning of the Yankees' winning history.\nThe stadium was built from 1922 to 1923 for $2.4\u00a0million ($43 million in 2023 dollars). Its construction was paid for entirely by Yankees owner Jacob Ruppert, who was eager to have his own stadium after sharing the Polo Grounds with the New York Giants baseball team the previous ten years. Yankee Stadium opened for the 1923 season and was hailed at the time as a unique facility in the country. Over the course of its history, it became one of the most famous venues in the United States, hosting a variety of events and historic moments during its existence. Many of these moments were baseball-related, including World Series games, no-hitters, perfect games, and historic home runs, but the stadium also hosted boxing matches, the 1958 NFL Championship Game, college football, concerts, and three Papal Masses. Its condition deteriorated in the 1960s and 1970s, prompting its closure for renovation from October 1973 through 1975. The renovation significantly altered the appearance of the venue and reduced the distance of the outfield fences.\nIn 2006, the Yankees began building a new $2.3\u00a0billion stadium in public parkland adjacent to the stadium, which included $1.2\u00a0billion in public subsidies. The design includes a replica of the frieze along the roof that had been part of the original Yankee Stadium. Monument Park, a Hall of Fame for prominent former Yankees, was relocated to the new stadium. Yankee Stadium closed following the 2008 season and the new stadium opened in 2009, adopting the \"Yankee Stadium\" moniker. The original Yankee Stadium was demolished in 2010, two years after it closed, and the site was converted into a public park called \"Heritage Field\".\nHistory.\nPlanning and construction.\nThe Yankees had played at the Polo Grounds in upper Manhattan since 1913, sharing the venue with the New York Giants. However, relations between the two teams were rocky, with the Giants harboring resentment towards the Yankees. The Yankees had been looking for a new and permanent venue since at least 1909. The local papers had periodic announcements about the Yankees acquiring and developing land in the Kingsbridge neighborhood for a new ballpark northeast of 225th and Broadway, and wrote about the park as if its construction was already in progress. The Kingsbridge pipe dream continued with new owners Ruppert and Huston, but nothing came of it. The Yankees would remain tenants at the Polo Grounds for ten years, the same length of time they had spent at Hilltop Park.\nFor the 1920 season, the Yankees acquired star slugger Babe Ruth and in his first year with his new team, the Yankees drew 1.3\u00a0million fans to the Polo Grounds, outdrawing the Giants. By the middle of 1920, the Giants had issued an eviction notice to the Yankees, which was soon rescinded. In 1921, the Yankees won their first American League pennant (but lost the then-best-of-nine 1921 World Series to the Giants in eight games, all played at the Polo Grounds). This exacerbated Giants owner Charles Stoneham's and manager John McGraw's resentment of the Yankees and reinforced their insistence that the Yankees find another place to play their home games. McGraw, always ready with a pointed quote for the sportswriters, derisively suggested that the Yankees relocate \"to Queens or some other out-of-the-way place\".\nTillinghast L'Hommedieu Huston and Jacob Ruppert, the Yankees' owners since January 1915, finally decided to put the club's dream into reality and build their own stadium. The owners did so at considerable financial risk and speculation. Baseball teams typically played in 30,000-seat facilities, but Huston and Ruppert invoked Ruth's name when asked how the Yankees could justify a ballpark with 60,000 seats. The doubt over the Yankees' lasting power was amplified by baseball's sagging popularity after the 1919 Black Sox Scandal, in which eight Chicago White Sox players were expelled for conspiring with gamblers to fix that year's World Series. Many people also felt three baseball teams could not prosper in New York City, but Huston and Ruppert were confident the Yankees could thrive amongst the more established New York Giants and Brooklyn Dodgers of the National League (their gamble eventually paid off: Both National League teams relocated to California following the 1957 season). The total bill for construction of the stadium was $2.5\u00a0million.\nHuston and Ruppert explored many areas for Yankee Stadium. Of the other sites being considered, the Hebrew Orphan Asylum, at Amsterdam Avenue between 136th and 138th streets in Manhattan, nearly became reality. Consideration was also given to building atop railroad tracks on the West Side of Manhattan (an idea revived in 1998) and to Long Island City, in Queens. The area Huston and Ruppert settled on was a lumberyard in the Bronx within walking distance from and in sight of, Coogan's Bluff. The Polo Grounds was located on the Manhattan side of the Harlem River, at 155th Street and Eighth Avenue. Huston and Ruppert purchased the lumberyard from William Waldorf Astor for $600,000, equal to $ today. Construction began May 5, 1922 and Yankee Stadium opened to the public less than a year later. The stadium's walls were built of \"an extremely hard and durable concrete that was developed by Thomas Edison\", with a total of of concrete used in the original structure.\n1923\u20131973.\nYankee Stadium officially opened on Wednesday, April 18, 1923, with the Yankees' first home game, against the Boston Red Sox. According to the \"New York Evening Telegram\", \"everything smelled of\u00a0... fresh paint, fresh plaster and fresh grass\". At 3\u00a0pm, the composer-conductor John Philip Sousa led the Seventh (\"Silk-Stocking\") Regiment Band in playing \"The Star-Spangled Banner\". After a parade of the players and dignitaries, Babe Ruth was presented with a case containing a symbolically big bat. New York Governor Al Smith threw out the first pitch directly into the glove of catcher Wally Schang rather than the customary couple of feet wide. The Yankees went on to defeat Ruth's former team, the Boston Red Sox, by a score of 4\u20131, with Ruth hitting a three-run home run into the right-field stands. Asked later for his opinion of the stadium, he replied, \"Some ball yard.\"\nUpon opening, Fred Lieb of the \"New York Evening Telegram\" dubbed it \"The House That Ruth Built\". The Yankees also won their first World Series during the Stadium's inaugural season. Future Yankee manager Casey Stengel hit the first post-season home run in stadium history while playing with the opposing New York Giants. The only other teams to do so prior to the 2006 St. Louis Cardinals in (the new) Busch Stadium had been the Pittsburgh Pirates, who won the 1909 World Series in Forbes Field's inaugural season, and the Boston Red Sox, who won the 1912 World Series in Fenway Park's first year. The Yankees accomplished this feat yet again in the New Yankee Stadium in the 2009 World Series.\nThe Stadium was the first facility in North America with three tiers, although the triple deck originally extended only to the left and right field corners. The concrete lower deck extended well into left field, with the obvious intention of extending the upper deck over it, which was accomplished during the 1927\u201328 off-season. As originally built, the stadium seated 58,000. For the stadium's first game, the announced attendance was 74,217 (with another 25,000 turned away); however, Yankees business manager Ed Barrow later admitted that the actual attendance was closer to 60,000. Regardless of what the figure was, it was undoubtedly more than the 42,000 fans who attended game five of the 1916 World Series at Braves Field, baseball's previous attendance record. However, during the 1920s and 1930s, the Yankees' popularity was such that crowds in excess of 80,000 were not uncommon. It was referred to as \"the Yankee Stadium\" (with the \"s\" in \"stadium\" sometimes lowercase) until the 1950s.\nYankee Stadium underwent more extensive renovations from 1936 through 1938. During the 1936 season, the wooden bleachers were replaced with concrete, shrinking the \"death valley\" area of left and center substantially, although the area was still much deeper than in most ballparks. During the 1937 season, the second and third decks were extended to short right center. Runways were left between the bleachers and the triple-deck on each end, serving as bullpens. By 1938, the Stadium had assumed the \"classic\" shape that it would retain for the next 35 years. In April 1945, Yankees president Larry MacPhail announced that after the War, the Yankees would install an additional tier of bleachers to increase stadium capacity to 100,000. In addition to the bleachers, he also planned to add 2,000 additional box-seats by lowering the field and shortening the distance from the backstop to home-plate from . However, the plans fell through and the expansion did not take place.\n Many sources incorrectly state that prior to the 1955 season, Yankee Stadium's Ballantine Beer scoreboard was sold to the Phillies for use in Shibe Park. Although the two scoreboards possessed some superficial resemblances, they differed in many details and the Yankee Stadium scoreboard remained at Yankee Stadium until 1959 when it was replaced, two years after a different Ballantine scoreboard was installed at Shibe (by then renamed Connie Mack Stadium).\nThe stadium was owned by the Yankees until December 17, 1953 when the ballclub's co-owners Dan Topping and Del Webb sold it and Blues Stadium for $6.5 million ($57,676,180 in 2016 dollars) to Arnold Johnson, who also dealt the land under the ballpark to the Knights of Columbus for $2 million ($17,746,517 in 2016 dollars). After he purchased the Philadelphia Athletics and transferred the franchise to Kansas City on November 8, 1954, Johnson sold Yankee Stadium to John W. Cox on March 22, 1955. Cox, a 1927 graduate of Rice University, donated the ballpark to his alma mater on July 19, 1962.\nIn the 1966\u201367 offseason, during the period in which Rice owned the stadium, the concrete exterior was painted white, and the interior was painted blue. The metal frieze circling the upper deck was painted white.\n1974\u201375 renovations and beyond.\nIn 1970, newly reelected Mayor John Lindsay approached team president Michael Burke of CBS, which owned the Yankees, with an offer to spend $25\u00a0million on improvements to Yankee Stadium. (Six years earlier, the Mets' new home, Shea Stadium, had opened in Queens at a similar public cost.) By this time, it was obvious that the stadium had significant structural issues; concrete chunks were seen by several fans falling from the stands.\nBurke floated two proposals to build a new stadium on the same site in the Bronx; one included a dome. CBS also asked for 10,000 additional parking spaces and road improvements to alleviate traffic. In August 1971, the New York Giants football team announced that it would leave Yankee Stadium for a new football-only stadium in the Meadowlands Sports Complex under development in New Jersey. In 1971, the city of New York forced (via eminent domain) Rice to sell the stadium for a mere $2.5\u00a0million (equivalent to $ today). That December, after significant lobbying by Lindsay, the New York City Board of Estimate approved $24\u00a0million ($140\u00a0million in 2014 dollars) for the city to renovate Yankee Stadium. The figure included $3.5\u00a0million for the purchase of the stadium and the piece of land from Rice University and the Knights of Columbus. At the time, New York City was on the brink of bankruptcy. In January 1973, CBS sold the Yankees to a group led by George Steinbrenner for $10\u00a0million. Yankee Stadium closed for renovation on September 30, 1973. The Yankees played their home games in 1974 and 1975 at Shea Stadium (The NFL Giants played their last Yankee Stadium game on September 23 (a tie), then went to the Yale Bowl through 1974, Shea in 1975, and the new Giants Stadium in 1976). When the renovated stadium opened in 1976 on April 15, the cost had ballooned to $160\u00a0million ($ in 2024 dollars); originally borne by New York City, it is now being paid off by New York State.\nThe outside shell of the stadium remained the same, with its original concrete walls painted over. Among the more noticeable changes after the renovation was the removal of 118 columns reinforcing each tier of the stadium's grandstand. The stadium's roof, including its distinctive metal frieze, was replaced by the new upper shell and new lights were added. A white painted concrete replica of the frieze was added atop the wall encircling the bleachers. The playing field was lowered by about and moved outward slightly. Escalators and ramps were added in three sections to make the upper deck more accessible. The original wooden stadium seats were replaced with wider plastic ones and the upper deck expanded upward nine rows, excluding the walkway. A new upper concourse was built above the old and original concourse exits were closed in by new seating. A new middle tier was built featuring a larger press box and 16 luxury boxes. About one-third of the bleacher seats were eliminated, their middle section converted to a blacked-out batter's eye. A wall was built behind the bleachers blocking the views from Gerard Avenue and the elevated subway platform above River Avenue. On this wall, the Yankees erected the first instant replay display in baseball, referred to in literature as a \"telescreen\". All told, the Stadium was reduced to a listed capacity of 57,545. The Stadium's playing field was drastically altered. \"Death Valley\" was reduced by more than while the right-field home-run porch was moved out. Monuments once in play were moved to a newly created Monument Park. In 1985, the left field fence was moved in and the stadium assumed its final dimensions in 1988. Although it was essentially the same structure, the renovations were significant enough that some sources consider them two different stadiums. The ESPN Sports Almanac, for instance, calls the original stadium \"Yankee Stadium I\" and the renovated stadium \"Yankee Stadium II\".\nOn April 13, 1998, an long beam fell onto a seat before a scheduled game causing the postponement of two games and the relocation of a third to nearby Shea Stadium while the stadium was inspected.\nReplacement, closing, and demolition.\nAfter years of speculation that the Yankees would build a new stadium to replace Yankee Stadium, construction began on August 16, 2006, with a groundbreaking ceremony across the street in Macombs Dam Park. The Yankees played their final two seasons in the stadium in 2007 and 2008 while the new venue was being built.\nAfter the final game in Yankee Stadium's history was played on September 21, 2008, public tours of Yankee Stadium continued until November 23, 2008. November 9, 2008 was the last day the public tours included Monument Park and the retired number area. On November 12, 2008, construction workers began removing memorials from Monument Park for relocation to the new facility. On November 8, 2008, former Yankees Scott Brosius, Paul O'Neill, David Cone and Jeff Nelson, all members of the 1998 World Series championship team, joined 60 children from two Bronx based youth groups Youth Force 2020 and the ACE Mentor Program in ceremoniously digging up home plate, the pitcher's mound pitching plate (rubber) and the surrounding dirt of both areas and transporting them to comparable areas of new Yankee Stadium.\nAn official closing ceremony was reportedly discussed to occur in November 2008, but was scrapped when the organization decided the final event should be a baseball game. Yankee officials said that while the team had contemplated a final ceremony (with any proceeds going to charity), talk of a concert was just media speculation.\nThe front office staff vacated the premises on January 23, 2009. Demolition began in March 2009 with the removal of the playing field. On May 13, 2009, the process of removing seats began and was completed on June 8. On September 3 and 4, the iconic white facade was dismantled.\nOn November 4, 2009, construction workers began tearing down the outfield bleachers. On November 12, demolition work began on the field level grandstand. By the end of November, most of the grandstand and bleachers at field level were gone. By the first week of December, demolition of the midlevel loge seats had begun. By January 2010, the loge level was gone and demolition began on the left field escalator bank adjacent to Gate 2. In February 2010, demolition work began on the upper deck and the outfield wall; the final part of the outfield wall (the Continental Airlines ad, the out-of-town scoreboard and the remaining part of the advertising panel to its right) was taken down February 24, 2010. By March 25, the entire upper deck was taken down.\nFollowing an unsuccessful attempt to save Gate 2 (the only portion of the original Yankee Stadium that mostly remained unaltered after the venue's renovation), demolition of the outer walls of the stadium began on March 29. Demolition of the original Yankee Stadium was completed on May 13, 2010.\nA park complex called Heritage Field was constructed on the old stadium site, accounting for 40% of the original parkland that is now occupied by the new Stadium. The groundbreaking ceremony for Heritage Field took place on June 29, 2010. Heritage Field was officially opened in April 2012. At its opening, a blue outline showing the location of the original Yankee Stadium diamond was interwoven into the grass, showing that second base on the new field is at the approximate location of home plate of the original diamond.\nFeatures.\nDesign.\nYankee Stadium was the first three-tiered sports facility in the United States and one of the first baseball venues to be given the lasting title of \"stadium\". The word \"stadium\" deliberately evoked ancient Greece, where a \"stade\" was a unit of measure\u2014the length of a footrace; the buildings that housed these footraces were called \"stadia\". Yankee Stadium was one of the first to be designed with the intent to be a multi-purpose facility. The field was initially surrounded by a (misshapen) running track, which effectively also served as a \"warning track\" for outfielders, the first in baseball, a feature now standard on all professional and major league fields. The left and right field bleacher sections were laid out roughly at a right angle to the third base stands, to be properly positioned for both track-and-field events and football. The large electronic scoreboard in right-center field, featuring both teams' lineups and scores of other baseball games, was the first of its kind.\nAs Yankee Stadium owed its creation largely to Ruth, its design partially accommodated the game's left-handed-hitting slugger. Initially the fence was from home plate down the right-field line, referred to as the \"short porch\" and to near right field, compared with to the deepest part of center field, nicknamed \"Death Valley\". The right-field bleachers were appropriately nicknamed \"Ruthville\". Although the right field fences were eventually pushed back after the 1974\u20131975 renovations, they were still relatively close to home plate and retained the \"short porch\" moniker, favoring future Yankee lefty sluggers such as Graig Nettles and Reggie Jackson. There is an urban legend that the stadium's field level was several feet below sea level, but that is easily disproven by observing how much higher the stadium site was (and is) than the level of the nearby Harlem River. The altitude of the old ballpark's site is above sea level.\nMonument Park.\nMonument Park was an open-air museum that contained the Yankees' retired numbers, as well as a collection of monuments and plaques honoring distinguished members of the New York Yankees. It was located beyond the left-center field fences, near the bullpens.\nThe origins of Monument Park can be traced to the original three monuments of Lou Gehrig, Miller Huggins and Babe Ruth that once used to stand in-play in center field. Over the years, the Yankees continued to honor players and personnel with additional monuments and plaques. After the 1974\u20131975 renovations of Yankee Stadium, the outfield fence was moved in, enclosing the monuments and plaques on the old fence and creating \"Monument Park\". A visual collection of retired numbers was soon added to this location. Monument Park remained there until the stadium's closing in 2008; after the new Yankee Stadium opened, the retired numbers, plaques, and monuments were moved into a new Monument Park in the new ballpark.\nFa\u00e7ade.\nOne of the most distinguishing characteristics of Yankee Stadium was the fa\u00e7ade, which consisted of a copper frieze that originally ran along the front of the roof of the triple-decked grandstand. The copper frieze developed a green patina over time until it was painted white during the 1960s. After the 1970s renovation, it ran a shorter distance, restricted to the top of the bleacher billboards and scoreboard.\nUntil the September 30, 1973 \u2013 April 14, 1976 renovation, the Yankees' American League championship pennants hung from the frieze. Tony Morante, who was in charge of tours at the Stadium, found most of these pennants in a box in 2004 and brought them to team executives to have them restored for display at the new Stadium.\nThe YES Network uses the frieze in its graphics. It was incorporated into the logo for the 2008 All-Star Game held at the Stadium. It is also used around the main grandstand at the team's spring training facility, which has the post-reconstruction dimensions.\nOutfield dimensions.\nDuring its 87-year existence, Yankee Stadium's dimensions were changed several times. The many photographs taken throughout the stadium's history serve as references, especially as the Yankees were among the first to post distance markers on the outfield walls, doing so beginning in 1928.\nIn its 1923 incarnation, the right and left field foul lines hit the box seat railings at a distance of only about 257 feet from home plate. This did not pose too much of a problem for pitchers, as the seating angled away sharply, especially in left field. The right field corner was a problem for the outfielders, as its construction tended to make a bounding fair ball take an unpredictable carom. This problem, dubbed the \"bloody angle\" by the players, was solved prior to the 1924 season by moving the infield some ten feet toward center and rotating it slightly. That resulted in a new left field distance of , and a new right field of (eventually posted as 295).\nBy 1928 some of the box seats had been chiseled away in the left field corner, allowing a somewhat longer foul line distance of . The seating curved away sharply and the far corner of the lower left stand was away. The large wooden bleachers remained well out of reach to most batters hitting toward left and center fields. In 1928 the deep left-center field corner was marked as , with the deep right-center field corner . For 1928 only, there was also a marker of , in direct center field. The \"straightaway\" right field distance (at an exit gate) was marked and the right field foul line . The right field area would remain the only hitter-friendly portion of the outfield before its 1970s remodeling.\nWhen the wooden bleachers were replaced by a concrete structure during the 1936 season, its left corner (now aligned with the main stand) was marked as . Deep left center shrank to a mere , behind the flagpole. As the monuments began to accumulate, the 461 sign was moved a few feet to the right. The deep right-center corner was , the right corner of the bleacher area was , and the right field line , with a sign about halfway between them. For the 1939 season, a sign was added to left-center's \"Death Valley\", between the 402/415 pair and the 461.\nThe 415 sign in deep left field appears in clips of Al Gionfriddo's catch of Joe DiMaggio's long drive in the 1947 World Series. That sign, and its 367 counterpart in right field, were both covered by auxiliary scoreboards which were built prior to the 1949 season. Those boards displayed the current game inning-by-inning along with runs-hits-errors.\nAs part of the upgrade for the 1967 season, the 461 marker was replaced by one reading , and a marker was added for direct center field.\nWhen the stadium reopened in 1976, the distance in straight-away center field was . The deepest part of the outfield was in left center at . The most recent field dimensions were reached primarily by moving the Yankee bullpen to left-center from right and making a few other changes so as to bring the left-center field wall in. The 1973-era left-center field wall locations could still be seen in 1976, as this is where the outfield bleacher seats began.\nThe following is a partial list of the stadium's dimensions throughout the years:\nAfter a mid-1960s remodeling, the 461 marker was replaced by a 463 marker slightly farther to the left of the pair of double doors and a 433 marker was added between the 463 and 407 markers ostensibly to represent true straightaway center field (being roughly at the midpoint of the batter's-eye screen).\nLegacy, traditions and mainstays.\nBob Sheppard.\nFrom 1951 through 2007, Bob Sheppard was the public address announcer at Yankee Stadium. His distinctive voice (Yankee legend Reggie Jackson has called him \"the Voice of God\") and the way he announced players for over half a century made him a part of the lore of the stadium and the team. Before a player's first at-bat of the game, Sheppard announced his position, his uniform number, his name, and his uniform number again. Example: \"Now batting for the Yankees, the shortstop, number 2, Derek Jeter, Number 2.\" For each following at-bat, Sheppard announced just the position and name: \"The shortstop, Derek Jeter.\" Due to health reasons, 96-year-old Sheppard announced his last game on September 5, 2007. He did sign a new two-year contract with the Yankees in March 2008 but lacked the strength necessary to do the job and missed the entire 2008 season, including the 2008 All-Star Game, which was played at Yankee Stadium. He could not announce the final game at the old stadium in September 2008, but recorded a video address that was played during the pregame ceremonies and also recorded the lineups for the game. He officially announced his retirement after the 2009 season. Sheppard died in July 2010. Following Sheppard's death, Derek Jeter used Sheppard's recorded announcement for his at-bats at Yankee Stadium until the end of his career.\nHammond Organ.\nThe Hammond Organ was installed at Yankee Stadium in 1967 and was primarily played by Eddie Layton from its introduction until his retirement after the 2003 season. The playing of the organ has added to the character of the stadium for many years, playing before games, introducing players, during the national anthem and the rendition of \"Take me out to the ball game\" during the seventh-inning stretch. After Layton's retirement, he got to pick his replacement, Paul Cartier. In recent years, the use of the organ has been decreased in favor of recorded music between innings and introducing players. Since the 2004 season, the national anthem has rarely been performed by the organists, opting for military recordings of the Star Spangled Banner. In 2005, a new Hammond Elegante was installed replacing the original Hammond Colonnade.\nMusic.\nOne of the most famous traditions for Yankee Stadium was playing Frank Sinatra's version of the \"Theme from New York, New York\" over the loudspeakers after every home win, since 1980. Sinatra's version was played after Yankees wins, whereas Liza Minnelli's was played after Yankee losses.\nAfter the September 11 attacks, all American Major League Baseball stadiums started playing \"God Bless America\" during the seventh-inning stretch for the remainder of the 2001 season. Many teams ceased this practice the following season, although it has continued in postseason events at many cities and become a tradition at Yankee Stadium alongside '\"Take Me Out to the Ballgame\". Usually, a recording of \"God Bless America\" by Kate Smith was played, although sometimes there was a live performance by Irish tenor Ronan Tynan. For part of the 2005 season, the Yankees used a recording of Tynan, but the Smith version was reinstated due to fan complaints about the long duration of the Tynan version. The tradition of playing Smith's version continued in the new stadium until April 2019, when accusations surfaced that some of her other songs contained racist lyrics. For the final game at Yankee Stadium, Tynan performed \"God Bless America\" live, including the rarely heard introduction to the song (which Tynan included every time he performed the song at a Yankees game). Currently, \"God Bless America\" is played on the organ at the new stadium during the seventh-inning stretch.\nWhen the Yankees scored a run, a version of the Westminster chime played as the last player to score in the at-bat gets to home plate. The version of the chime is the beginning of \"Workaholic\" by the music group 2 Unlimited. When the Yankees' closer Mariano Rivera entered a game, he was accompanied by Metallica's \"Enter Sandman\". Since 1996, the Yankees' World Series championships were celebrated with the playing of Queen's \"We Are the Champions\" followed by Frank Sinatra's \"New York, New York\".\nMeeting at \"the bat\".\nOutside the stadium's main entrance gate stands a tall exhaust pipe in the shape of a baseball bat, complete with tape at the handle that frays off at the end. It is sponsored by Hillerich &amp; Bradsby, makers of the famous Louisville Slugger line of baseball bats, which is specifically designed to look like a Babe Ruth model. As the most prominent feature on the stadium's exterior, recognizable even to first-time visitors, the bat was often used as a designated meeting spot for fans to meet their ticket holding friends before entering the stadium.\nThe \"Bat\" continues to stand outside the Metro North Station, built in 2009. A long pedestrian walkway and its staircase meet at the \"bat\".\nRoll call.\nBeginning in the 1990s and after the first pitch was thrown at the top of the first inning, the \"Bleacher Creatures\" in Section 39, usually led by a man nicknamed Bald Vinny, began chanting the names of every player in the defensive lineup (except the pitcher and catcher, with some rare exceptions), starting with the center fielder. They did not stop chanting the player's name until he acknowledged the Creatures (usually with a wave or a point), who then moved on to the next player. Other names called out during roll call from time to time have included Yankee broadcasters John Sterling and Michael Kay or Aaron Boone, Bucky Dent and Babe Ruth when the Yankees hosted the rival Boston Red Sox. Sometimes, after a long rain delay, the Creatures started another Roll Call for comedic effect. Often when a player was replaced in the field, their replacement was also welcomed with a chant. In 2008, center fielder Melky Cabrera booted a routine grounder while attempting to wave to the fans.\nStadium usage.\nBaseball.\nIn its 86 years of existence, Yankee Stadium hosted 6,581 regular season home games for the Yankees. Only Fenway Park (Boston), Wrigley Field (Chicago), Sportsman's Park (St. Louis), and Tiger Stadium (Detroit) have hosted more games. Due to the Yankees' frequent appearances in the World Series, Yankee Stadium played host to 161 postseason games, more than any other stadium in baseball history. The Stadium hosted 37 of the 83 possible World Series during its existence (not counting 1974\u201375, and the 1994 strike), with the Yankees winning 26 of them. In total, the venue hosted 100 World Series games.\n16 of the 17 World Series won in the Bronx were clinched at the 1923 Yankee Stadium, nine by the Yankees and seven by their opponents:\nThe Yankees won their first 26 World Series championships while playing in Yankee Stadium, with their 27th coming in the first year of playing at its namesake replacement (2009).\nPerhaps the most memorable moment in the venue's history came on July 4, 1939, designated as \"Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day\". Gehrig, forced out of action permanently by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and facing his impending death, gave a legendary farewell speech thanking his fans and colleagues for making him \"the luckiest man on the face of the earth\".\nMany memorable and historic games have been played at Yankee Stadium. Three out of the four perfect games thrown by Yankee pitchers have occurred at the Stadium. Don Larsen threw a perfect game on October 8, 1956, in the fifth game of the World Series, while David Wells and David Cone threw theirs on May 17, 1998, and July 18, 1999, respectively. (Domingo Germ\u00e1n threw his June 28, 2023 perfect game in Oakland.) No-hitters were thrown by Monte Pearson, Bob Feller, Allie Reynolds, Virgil Trucks, Dave Righetti, Jim Abbott, Dwight Gooden and a combination of six Houston Astros pitchers in one game.\nThe Stadium was the site of a nationally televised game on August 6, 1979, the same day as the funeral for departed Yankees captain Thurman Munson. The team attended the funeral in Canton, Ohio earlier in the day and flew to New York for an emotional game. Bobby Murcer drove in all five runs for the Yankees, including a game winning two-run single that defeated the Baltimore Orioles 5\u20134.\nMany historic home runs have been hit at Yankee Stadium. Babe Ruth hit the ballpark's first home run on its Opening Day in 1923. Ruth also set the then-league record for most home runs in a single season by hitting his 60th home run in 1927. Roger Maris would later break this record in 1961 at Yankee Stadium on the final day of the season by hitting his 61st home run. In 1967, Mickey Mantle slugged his 500th career home run. Chris Chambliss won the 1976 ALCS by hitting a \"walk-off\" home run in which thousands of fans ran onto the field as Chambliss circled the bases. A year later, in the 1977 World Series, Reggie Jackson hit three home runs on three consecutive pitches in the championship-clinching Game 6. In 1983, the Pine Tar Incident involving George Brett occurred; Brett's go-ahead home run in the ninth inning of the game was overturned for his bat having too much pine tar, resulting in him furiously charging out of the dugout. In Game 1 of the 1996 ALCS, Derek Jeter hit a fly ball to right-field that was interfered with by fan Jeffrey Maier but ruled a home run. In Game 7 of the 2003 ALCS, Aaron Boone hit an extra-inning \"walk-off\" home run to send the Yankees to the World Series. The Red Sox would get revenge coming back from 3-0 and beating their rivals in Yankee Stadium the following year. On August 6, 2007, Alex Rodriguez hit his 500th home run against the Kansas City Royals at the Stadium. Jos\u00e9 Molina hit the ballpark's last home run in its final game on September 21, 2008.\nIn 2001, six weeks after the September 11 attacks, Yankee Stadium hosted an emotional three games in the World Series. For Game 3, President George W. Bush hurled the ceremonial first pitch, throwing a strike. In Game 4, Tino Martinez hit a game-tying home run off Arizona Diamondbacks closer Byung-hyun Kim with two outs in the ninth inning. Derek Jeter hit the winning \"walk-off\" home run in extra innings off Kim, earning himself the nickname \"Mr. November\". The following night in Game 5, the Yankees replicated their heroics from the previous night; Scott Brosius hit a game-tying home run off Kim with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning en route to a win.\nAll-Star Games.\nOn July 11, 1939, Major League Baseball held its seventh All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium, in concert with the World's Fair being held at Flushing-Meadows in Queens. Yankees manager Joe McCarthy loaded his American League team with pinstripes: Bill Dickey (catcher), Joe DiMaggio (outfield), Joe Gordon (second base), Red Rolfe (third base), George Selkirk (outfield) and Red Ruffing (pitcher) were all in the starting lineup. Reserve players included Frank Crosetti (shortstop), Lou Gehrig (first base), Lefty Gomez (pitcher) and Johnny Murphy (pitcher). The American League won, 3\u20131, behind a home run by DiMaggio, in front of more than 62,000. This was the second All-Star Game held in New York; the Polo Grounds had hosted the event in 1934.\nFrom 1959 to 1962, Major League Baseball held two All-Star Games each year. On July 13, 1960, Yankee Stadium hosted baseball's second All-Star Game in three days. The National League won both games. In the latter game, Whitey Ford was the starting pitcher. Yogi Berra (catcher), Mickey Mantle (outfield), Roger Maris (outfield) and Bill Skowron (first base) were in the starting lineup; Jim Coates (pitcher) and Elston Howard (catcher) were reserves. The National League won the Yankee Stadium game, 6\u20130, tying a record with four home runs, including one by hometown favorite Willie Mays. The 38,000 fans who attended the game also saw the Red Sox' Ted Williams in his final All-Star appearance.\nShowcasing its new renovation, Yankee Stadium hosted the All-Star Game on July 19, 1977. With the Yankees defending their 1976 pennant, Billy Martin managed the American League team on his home field. The National League won its sixth consecutive All-Star Game, 7\u20135, in front of more than 56,000 fans; the senior circuit's streak would reach 11. Reggie Jackson (outfield) and Willie Randolph (second base) started for the American League; Sparky Lyle (pitcher), Thurman Munson (catcher) and Graig Nettles (third base) also made the team. Jim Palmer was the game's starting pitcher because Nolan Ryan refused to play when Martin asked him.\nIn honor of its final year of existence, in July 2008, Yankee Stadium hosted 2008 All-Star Game festivities. The Yankees were represented by Derek Jeter, Alex Rodriguez and Mariano Rivera. In the Home Run Derby, Josh Hamilton set a single-round record with 28 home runs in the first round. At one point, he hit 13 straight home runs, many of which landed in the stadium's upper deck and deep into the right field bleachers, spurring the crowd to chant his name. Minnesota Twins first baseman Justin Morneau won the competition defeating Hamilton in the final round. The following evening, the American League won the 2008 All-Star Game 4\u20133 in 15 innings. Michael Young hit the game winning sacrifice fly in the 15th inning off Brad Lidge. The game was the longest in All-Star Game history by time, lasting 4 hours and 50 minutes and tied for the longest in history by innings, tied with the 1967 All-Star Game and was played in front of 55,632 people. J. D. Drew was named game MVP going 2 for 4 with a home run and two RBIs.\nFinal game, 2008.\nYankee Stadium hosted its final baseball game on September 21, 2008. The ceremonies for the final game at Yankee Stadium began with the opening of Monument Park, as well as allowing Yankee fans to walk on the warning track around the field. Many former Yankee greats, including Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, Reggie Jackson, Bernie Williams, Paul O'Neill, Willie Randolph, Roy White and Chris Chambliss took their positions in the playing field as their names were announced by the legendary Bob Sheppard. Julia Ruth Stevens, daughter of Babe Ruth, threw out the ceremonial first pitch in the final game in \"The House That Ruth Built\".\nWith Andy Pettitte as the starting pitcher, the Yankees played their final game at Yankee Stadium against the Baltimore Orioles, recording the final out at 11:43\u00a0pm EDT in a 7\u20133 Yankee victory. Among many lasts to be recorded, a long-time standing question was answered. It was first wondered by Babe Ruth after he hit the first home run in Yankee Stadium on its opening day of April 18, 1923:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was glad to have hit the first home run in this park. God only knows who will hit the last.\nThat player turned out to be Yankees backup catcher Jos\u00e9 Molina, as he hit a go-ahead and eventual game-winning two-run home run in the fourth inning.\nOther lasts were Jason Giambi recording the last hit in Yankee Stadium, driving in Brett Gardner, who scored the last run in Yankee Stadium. Mariano Rivera made the final pitch in the stadium with Cody Ransom recording the final out at first base. In the eighth inning, Derek Jeter became the final Yankee to bat in Yankee Stadium.\nAfter the game was over, captain Derek Jeter delivered a speech on the field surrounded by his teammates. In the unplanned speech, Jeter thanked and saluted the fans:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For all of us up here, it's a huge honor to put this uniform on every day and come out here and play. And every member of this organization, past and present, has been calling this place home for eighty-five years. There's a lot of tradition, a lot of history, and a lot of memories.\nNow the great thing about memories is you're able to pass it along from generation to generation. And although things are going to change next year, we're going to move across the street, there are a few things with the New York Yankees that never change\u2014 its pride, its tradition, and most of all, we have the greatest fans in the world.\nAnd we are relying on you to take the memories from this stadium, add them to the new memories that come at the new Yankee Stadium, and continue to pass them on from generation to generation. So on behalf of the entire organization, we just want to take this moment to salute you, the greatest fans in the world.\nAfterwards, the team circled the stadium on the warning track waving to fans and wishing the stadium goodbye.\nCollegiate baseball.\nFrom 1970 to 1987, the Cape Cod Baseball League (CCBL) played its annual all-star game at various major league stadiums. The games were interleague contests between the CCBL and the Atlantic Collegiate Baseball League (ACBL). The 1970, 1973, 1976 and 1980 games were played at Yankee Stadium. The star of the 1973 contest was game MVP and future major league manager Jim Riggleman. The 1980 game starred future New York Mets all-star pitcher Ron Darling of Yale University. In the game, Darling singled, doubled and homered as the CCBL left fielder, then came on in the final inning to pitch in relief, preserving the CCBL's one-run victory.\nBoxing.\nWhen Yankee Stadium opened in 1923, the Polo Grounds continued to host boxing matches; however, Yankee Stadium was home to prizefighting beginning in its first few months. Benny Leonard retained the lightweight championship in a 15-round decision over Lew Tendler on July 24, 1923, in front of more than 58,000 fans. It was the first of 30 championship bouts to be held at the Stadium. (This excludes dozens of non-title fights.) The boxing ring was placed over second base; a vault contained electrical, telegraph and telephone connections. In July 1927, the aging former heavyweight champion Jack Dempsey came from behind to defeat heavily favored Jack Sharkey by delivering several questionable punches that were deemed illegal. Sharkey had similarly bad luck in a July 1930 heavyweight championship bout at Yankee Stadium, when his knockout punch to Max Schmeling was ruled illegal; Schmeling won by default. In July 1928, Gene Tunney upheld the heavyweight title against Tom Heeney at Yankee Stadium, and then retired as champion.\nPerhaps the most famous boxing match ever held at Yankee Stadium was on June 22, 1938, when Joe Louis, an African-American, squared off against Schmeling, a German. Adolf Hitler followed the rematch carefully, imploring Schmeling to defeat Louis, whom Hitler publicly berated. This left some with what they perceived as a moral predicament: root for the black fighter, or for the Nazi. Schmeling had defeated Louis in 1936, but in defense of his title, Louis knocked out Schmeling in the first round. This was one of eight championship fights the \"Brown Bomber\" fought at Yankee Stadium.\nOn July 1, 1939, Max Baer defeated Lou Nova at Yankee Stadium, in the first televised boxing match in the United States. The event was broadcast by television station W2XBS, forerunner of WNBC-TV. (The World Series was not televised until 1947.) On September 27, 1946, Tony Zale knocked out New York native Rocky Graziano for the middleweight crown; it was the first of three bouts between Zale and Graziano.\nOn June 25, 1952, middleweight champion Sugar Ray Robinson sought his third title against light-heavyweight champ Joey Maxim at Yankee Stadium. More than 47,000 saw Robinson outfight Maxim but lose due to heat exhaustion in round 14 (due to the weather that topped ). The referee who declared Maxim the winner was the second that night; the first had left the fight due to heat exhaustion.\nOn June 26, 1959, 5-1 Swedish underdog Ingemar Johansson defeated Floyd Patterson at the stadium by stoppage in the third round to become world heavyweight champion.\nAfter its 1970s renovation, Yankee Stadium hosted only one championship fight, primarily as Atlantic City (Philadelphia market) and Las Vegas had taken over as the sites for championship boxing matches. On September 28, 1976, a declining Muhammad Ali defended his heavyweight crown against Ken Norton. To that point, Norton was one of only two boxers who had beaten Ali (in 1973); this was their third and final meeting. Norton led for most of the fight, but Ali improved in the later rounds to win by unanimous decision.\nCollege football.\nThe first college football game played in Yankee Stadium was a 3-0 Syracuse victory over Pittsburgh on October 20, 1923. When an ill Ruth could not lead the Yankees to the World Series in 1925, college football took center stage at Yankee Stadium that fall. The fiercely competitive Notre Dame\u2013Army game moved to Yankee Stadium, where it remained until 1947. In the 1928 game, with the score 0\u20130 at halftime, legendary Notre Dame coach Knute Rockne gave his \"win one for the Gipper\" speech (with reference to All-American halfback George Gipp, who died in 1920); Notre Dame went on to defeat Army, 12\u20136. The 1929 game between the two teams had the highest attendance in the series at 79,408. The 1946 Army vs. Notre Dame football game at Yankee Stadium is regarded as one of the 20th century college football Games of the Century.\nNotre Dame played 24 games at Yankee Stadium, going 15\u20136\u20133. Army played 38, compiling a 17\u201317\u20134 record (including the best-attended game, on December 1, 1928, when Army lost to Stanford 26\u20130 before 86,000 fans). New York University played more games there than any other school, 96, using it as a secondary home field from 1923 to 1948, with a record of 52\u201340\u20134. Nearby Fordham University played 19 games there, going 13\u20135\u20131 while Manhattan University played 5 games there going 3\u20131\u20131.\nEight college football games were played at Yankee Stadium on Thanksgiving Day, the first seven by New York University. Perhaps, the most famous Thanksgiving Day game was the first. Oregon State Agricultural College (now Oregon State) was the first West Coast team to travel across the country and play an East Coast team. 8\u20131 NYU was a 3\u20131 favorite to beat 5\u20133 OSAC, but Oregon State upset the hometown favorites 25\u201313. Will Rogers lamented what the \"Oregon apple knockers\" had done to his \"city slickers\" in a column after the game. After the 1928 game, NYU beat Carnegie Tech (now Carnegie Mellon University) in 1931 and 1932, defeated Fordham in 1936, lost to Carnegie Tech in 1929 and lost to Fordham in 1934 and 1935. In the eighth game, in 1963, Syracuse beat Notre Dame, 14\u20137. This was a rematch following the teams' controversial 1961 game won by Notre Dame, 17\u201315.\nThe Gotham Bowl was scheduled to premiere at Yankee Stadium in 1960, but was canceled when no opponent could be found for Oregon State University. The 1961 game was moved to the Polo Grounds, and when just 6,166 people came to Yankee Stadium for the 1962 game, in which Nebraska defeated Miami (FL) 36\u201334, the Gotham Bowl was never played again. The Miami\u2013Nebraska game was the only college bowl played at the stadium.\nIn 1969, Notre Dame and Army reprised their long series at the Stadium (1925\u20131946 except 1930) with one final game, which the Fighting Irish won, 45\u20130. It was the final game at the stadium for either team.\nStarting in 1971, the Stadium hosted the Whitney M. Young Urban League Classic, a game between historically black colleges, often featuring Grambling State University of Louisiana, coached by Eddie Robinson, the first college coach to win 400 games. The Classic helped to spread the fame of Grambling and other similar schools. Yankee Stadium hosted its final Classic during the 1987 season, also the last time a football game was played there. Grambling lost to Central State University of Ohio, 37\u201321.\nThe Classic has been held at Giants Stadium and MetLife Stadium in New Jersey's Meadowlands Sports Complex ever since, though the Yankees remain a supporter of the event.\nProfessional football.\nIn 1926, after negotiations failed with the fledgling NFL and the Chicago Bears, Red Grange and his agent C.C. Pyle formed the first American Football League and fielded a team called the New York Yankees based in Yankee Stadium. The league failed after only one year, but the team continued as a member of the NFL for two seasons before ceasing operations. A second New York Yankees football team, not related to the first, split its home games between Yankee Stadium and Downing Stadium as it competed in the second AFL in 1936 and 1937. A third AFL New York Yankees took the field in 1940 and became the New York Americans in 1941.\nThe New York Yankees of the All-America Football Conference (AAFC) played their home games at Yankee Stadium from 1946 to 1949. The 1947 AAFC championship game was held at Yankee Stadium. Following the 1949 season, the NFL New York Bulldogs acquired many of the players from the 1949 Yankees. Using the name the New York Yanks they played two seasons at Yankee Stadium, 1950 and 1951.\nThe New York Giants of the NFL played their home games at Yankee Stadium from 1956 to 1973. On December 28, 1958, Yankee Stadium hosted the 1958 NFL championship game, frequently called \"The Greatest Game Ever Played\". The Baltimore Colts tied the Giants, 17\u201317, on a field goal with seven seconds left. Led by quarterback Johnny Unitas, the Colts won in overtime, 23\u201317. The game's dramatic ending is often cited as elevating professional football to one of the United States' major sports. The game was one of three NFL championships games that were played at Yankee Stadium; the 1956 and 1962 championship games were also played there.\nA play known simply as The Hit occurred at Yankee Stadium on November 20, 1960. The Philadelphia Eagles' Chuck Bednarik tackled the Giants' Frank Gifford in the last minute of a close game, forcing a fumble recovered by the Eagles that clinched the victory for Philadelphia and ultimately helped the Eagles dethrone the two-time defending champion Giants as NFL Eastern Conference champions. The hit left Gifford with a concussion and forced his temporary retirement from football for the remainder of the 1960 season and all of the 1961 season.\nThe Giants played their first two home games at Yankee Stadium in 1973, concluding their tenancy on September 23 with a 23\u201323 tie against the Philadelphia Eagles. In October, they moved to the Yale Bowl in New Haven, Connecticut, for the rest of the season.\nIn 1976, after the renovations, the New York Jets hosted 3 preseason games (Giants, Raiders, and Redskins) at Yankee Stadium. https://\nSoccer.\nCeltic F.C. defeated New York Yankees in the first major soccer game to be played at the Stadium on June 28, 1931. In the coming three decades, a number of games between the Maccabbees - Jewish All-stars from Palestine and American all-stars were played. European club exhibitions first came in 1952, when on June 14, Liverpool drew 1\u20131 with Grasshopper Club Z\u00fcrich. The next day, Tottenham Hotspur thrashed Manchester United 7\u20131, just a year after United had taken over for Spurs as champions of England. The following year, on June 8, the English national team defeated the U.S. national team 6\u20133, in a rematch of the Miracle on Grass match at the 1950 World Cup.\nMajor international clubs returned to the Stadium in 1966, with Pele's Santos of Brazil beating Inter Milan 4\u20131 on June 5. In 1967, C.A. Cerro of Uruguay played in the United Soccer Association during the summer months under the title \"New York Skyliners\". They played major games against Hibernian F.C. of Scotland, renamed \"Toronto City\", Cagliari F.C. of Italy, renamed \"Chicago Mustangs\" and Bangu Atl\u00e9tico Clube of Brazil, renamed \"Houston Stars\". During the same year, the stadium also became home to the New York Generals of the National Professional Soccer League. Upon the 1968 merger of the United Soccer Association and the National Professional Soccer League, a new league was created known as the North American Soccer League, where the Generals remained as the New York team. In 1968, in addition to league competition, the Generals took on Santos, winning 5\u20133 and Real Madrid, losing 4\u20131. That year, Santos also played and beat S.S.C. Napoli of Italy 4\u20132 at the Stadium, along with S.L. Benfica of Portugal, with whom they drew 3\u20133. The next year, four major international club games were played at the Stadium: Barcelona beat Juventus 3\u20132 on May 30, Inter Milan beat Sparta Prague 4\u20130 on June 27 and A.C. Milan defeated Panathinaikos 4\u20130 also on June 27. Finally, on June 29, Yankee Stadium hosted its own version of the Derby della Madonnina, with A.C. Milan defeating Inter 6\u20134. The latter three games that year were all part of a three-day \"United States Cup of Champions\".\nOn September 15, 1968, the U.S. national soccer team played an international friendly against the Israel national team at the Stadium. It was the first game for the U.S. in 15 months and 10,118 saw Israel and the U.S. draw 3-3.\nIn 1971 and 1976, the New York Cosmos of the NASL played their home games at Yankee Stadium. During the 1971 season, they also hosted Hearts from Scotland, and Apollon Kalamarias of Greece. In 1976 the team's star attraction was Pel\u00e9. The Brazil native, known as \"The King of Football\", was considered the best player in the world. Also that year, in Yankee Stadium's final international match on May 28, England defeated Italy 3\u20132 as part of the Bicentennial Cup Tournament. Finally, on August 10, 1976, the last soccer game was played at Yankee Stadium, with the Cosmos thrashing the Miami Toros 8\u20132. The Cosmos moved to Giants Stadium for the 1977 season.\nIce hockey.\nNational Hockey League (NHL) executives inquired about the possibility of using Yankee Stadium for an outdoor ice hockey match featuring the New York Rangers in the 2008\u201309 season after the successful reception of both the 2003 Heritage Classic and the 2008 NHL Winter Classic outdoor games. If approved, it would have been the final sporting event at the current stadium. The NHL, however, decided to hold the second Winter Classic in Chicago, at Wrigley Field. The new Yankee Stadium would end up hosting two outdoor NHL games in 2014.\nConcerts.\nThe first concert ever held there was an ensemble R&amp;B show on June 21, 1969, put together by the Isley Brothers; the first rock concert held at the stadium was on June 22, 1990, by Billy Joel. It was also the site of two dates of U2's Zoo TV Tour in 1992. During one song, Bono paid tribute to the show's setting with the line \"I dreamed I saw Joe DiMaggio/Dancing with Marilyn Monroe\". Pink Floyd also performed two sold-out shows at this venue on their final North American tour in 1994 in support of their album \"The Division Bell\".\nOther events.\nBeginning in 1950, the stadium began holding religious conventions of Jehovah's Witnesses. The 1958 New York International Convention of Jehovah's Witnesses attracted 253,922 people from all over the world, although many were at the nearby Polo Grounds, the Yankee Stadium total of 123,707 in a single day remains the biggest attendance ever for any event at Yankee Stadium and is commemorated by a historical marker in the sidewalk nearby. These conventions would continue on until the late 1980s. When room ran out in the stands, the ladies were asked to remove their heels, and people were brought in to sit in the outfield. There was also a makeshift camp nearby where the program was broadcast for hundreds others to listen to.\nOn July 20, 1957, evangelist Billy Graham attracted a crowd of 100,000 to a televised \"crusade\" at Yankee Stadium. A \"New York Times\" article of the following day described the turnout as \"the largest crowd in stadium history\" to that time.\nCardinal Francis Spellman (1957), Pope Paul VI (1965), Pope John Paul II (1969 as a cardinal, 1979 as pope) and Pope Benedict XVI (2008) all celebrated Mass at the ballpark, along with numerous clergy. On June 21, 1990, a rally was held at Yankee Stadium for Nelson Mandela upon his release from prison. On September 23, 2001, Yankee Stadium hosted a memorial service for victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York City.\nOn March 10, 2006, Yankee Stadium saw its only wedding at home plate. Blind sportswriter Ed Lucas, who has been a member of the Yankee family for over 40 years, got special permission from the Yankees, the City of New York and Major League Baseball to exchange vows with his fianc\u00e9e, Allison Pfieffle, on the same spot where Lou Gehrig made his famous farewell speech, among the many notable events. Over 400 people, including present and former members of the Yankee family were in attendance to see the happy couple united, and the ceremony was broadcast on ESPN, the YES Network, NBC's \"Today Show\" and other national media outlets.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nclass=\"wikitable succession-box mw-collapsible autocollapse\" style=\"margin: 0 auto 0 auto; font-size:95%;clear:both;\"\nEvents and tenants"}
{"id": "40020", "revid": "596947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40020", "title": "Cathedral of St. John the Divine", "text": "Cathedral of the Episcopal Diocese of New York\nThe Cathedral of St. John the Divine (sometimes referred to as St. John's and also nicknamed St. John the Unfinished) is the cathedral of the Episcopal Diocese of New York. It is at 1047 Amsterdam Avenue in the Morningside Heights neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City, between West 110th Street (also known as Cathedral Parkway) and West 113th Street.\nThe cathedral is an unfinished building, with only two-thirds of the proposed building completed, due to several major stylistic changes, work interruptions, and unstable ground on the site. The original design, in the Byzantine Revival and Romanesque Revival styles, began construction in 1892. After the opening of the crossing in 1909, the overall plan was changed to a Gothic Revival design. The completion of the nave was delayed until 1941 due to various funding shortfalls, and little progress has occurred since then, except for an addition to the tower at the nave's southwest corner. After a large fire damaged part of the cathedral in 2001, it was renovated and rededicated in 2008. The towers above the western elevation of the facade, as well as the southern transept and a proposed steeple above the crossing, have not been completed.\nDespite being incomplete, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine is the world's fourth-largest church by area and either the largest or second-largest Anglican cathedral. The floor area of St. John's is , spanning a length of , while the roof height of the nave is . Since the cathedral's interior is so large, it has been used for hundreds of events and art exhibitions. In addition, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine has been involved in various advocacy initiatives throughout its history.\nThe cathedral close includes numerous buildings: the Leake &amp; Watts Orphan Asylum Building, the cathedral proper, the St. Faith's House, the Choir School, the Deanery, and the Bishop's House. The buildings are designed in several different styles and were built over prolonged periods of construction, with the Leake &amp; Watts Orphan Asylum predating the cathedral itself. The cathedral close was collectively designated an official city landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in 2017.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nContext.\nSite.\nThe neighborhood of Morningside Heights was thinly settled in the 17th century by the Dutch, then by the English. It remained rural through the mid-19th century, with two exceptions. The first was the Bloomingdale Insane Asylum, no longer extant, which opened in 1821 on what later became the site of Columbia University's main campus. The other was Leake and Watts Orphan Asylum, bounded by 110th Street to the south and 113th Street to the north, which later became the current cathedral site. The Leake and Watts asylum was incorporated in 1831 under act of the New York State Legislature, and three years later, of land at the corner of Bloomingdale Road (now Broadway) and 110th Street was purchased from the Bloomingdale Asylum. The initial plans for the asylum were drawn up by Ithiel Town, but were revised several times to keep the costs within the asylum's budget. The cornerstone of the asylum was laid in 1838, and it was completed in 1843.\nNeed for a cathedral.\nMeanwhile, the Episcopal Diocese of New York started to grow in the early 19th century: there were 26 Episcopal parishes in the city by 1800, and a decade later, that number had nearly doubled to 50. In 1828, the first proposal for a grand cathedral for the diocese was made by Bishop John Henry Hobart, who proposed a site near Washington Square Park. The church would be called the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, or St. John's Cathedral for short, after the Revelation by John of Patmos (also called \"John the Divine\"). The plans were canceled because of objections over erecting such a large building for the diocese, a derivative of the Church of England, even as many New Yorkers still harbored resentment over the American Revolutionary War.\nIn 1873, a cathedral board of trustees was established under Bishop Horatio Potter. The board decided on property just south of Central Park, bounded by 59th Street to the north and 57th Street to the south. However, the purchase was canceled after the would-be donors lost their savings in the Panic of 1873. Yet another plot of land, at Eighth Avenue and 74th Street, was offered to the church in 1882, but rejected due to the high cost of acquisition. By 1890, there were 40,000 Episcopalians in Manhattan, and Episcopalians made up the largest bloc of Protestants in the borough. Furthermore, many imposing institutions were being built in New York City, such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Carnegie Hall, Metropolitan Opera House, and the American Museum of Natural History.\nPlanning.\nSite selection.\nWhen Henry C. Potter, Horatio Potter's nephew, became the Diocese of New York's assistant bishop in 1883, he convened the trustees to look for an alternative site. On June 1, 1887, Henry Potter publicly announced his intention to build St. John's, though the exact location was still to be determined. Potter described the planned cathedral as an \"American Westminster Abbey\" that would rival the Catholic St. Patrick's Cathedral in Midtown Manhattan. In his announcement, Potter called on New Yorkers to give funds toward the new cathedral, which was expected to cost $10\u00a0million. The plans for the cathedral were well received by both Protestants and non-Protestants, as well as the media and other denominational leaders. The donors included the wealthy Astor, Vanderbilt, and Belmont families. Additionally, the Barberini family's tapestries were gifted to the cathedral in 1891.\nNumerous sites in Manhattan were examined for the new cathedral's location, and by 1889, the Leake and Watts Asylum between 110th and 113th Streets had been chosen as the site for the future site of St. John's. News media such as \"The New York Times\" and \"Uptown Visitor\" praised the decision, as the site was located on a high point overlooking Central and Morningside parks. The committee had wanted to build slightly further north, on a more elevated plot between 116th Street to the south and 119th Street to the north. However, that plot would be too difficult to acquire, as ownership of that tract was divided among several entities; by contrast, the Leake and Watts Asylum had full control over their entire city block. The asylum site was deeded to the cathedral in October 1891, and the asylum moved to Westchester County, New York. The asylum site was then acquired for $850,000. At the time, Morningside Heights was quickly being developed as a residential neighborhood surrounded by numerous higher-education institutions. The proposed cathedral's elevated location would have been visible from New Jersey, across the Hudson River to the west, as well as from the New York Bay to the south.\nArchitecture competition.\nSimultaneously, there was also debate over the new cathedral's style; because of the larger plot and more remote location from Midtown Manhattan it was expected to be more elaborate than St. Patrick's. The trustees had formed a Committee on Architecture in conjunction with William Robert Ware, a Columbia architecture professor, which held a design competition for St. John that involved several prominent architectural firms. Though everyone was free to enter the competition, fourteen firms and architects were paid $500 each to create designs for the cathedral. The deadline for each plan was January 1889.\nThat May, the board of trustees formed a committee to review the more than 60 designs that had been submitted. Many of the competitors were American, though only four were experienced in cathedral construction. The board members then discussed the designs privately; some architects expressed concerns about the secret consultations, since the trustees generally did not have knowledge of architectural design. The competition was narrowed down to four finalists. Namely, these were \"Gerona\" by William A. Potter and R. H. Robertson; \"Three Arabesque Scrolls within a Circle\" by George L. Heins and Christopher Grant LaFarge with William Winthrop Kent (1860\u20131955), brother of Edward Austin Kent; \"AMDG\" by George M. Huss and J. H. Buck; and \"Jerusalem the Golden\" by William Halsey Wood. \"Gerona\" used the Gothic style based on Spanish cathedrals; \"AMDG\" and \"Jerusalem the Golden\" were in a regular Gothic style, and \"Three Arabesque Scrolls\" was mainly Byzantine.\nPotter and Robertson were the only one of the four finalists who had significant experience at the time, and the trustees had agreed not to release any designs without the consent of all competitors, although some contestants broke the agreement anyway by revealing their designs to the media. The finalists were given more than a year to refine the details of their plans: the original deadline was set for February 1890, but was later extended to November after a failed proposal to host the World's Columbian Exposition in Morningside Park. The submissions were placed in public view in April 1891. By then, the public was losing interest in the competition, and the finalist designs mainly received negative criticism.\nPlan selected.\nIn July 1891, the plan-selection committee chose Heins &amp; LaFarge's plan as the winning proposal. The design had been the trustees' second choice; although the trustees liked Potter and Robertson's plan more, W. A. Potter was the bishop's half-brother and the trustees did not want to be accused of nepotism. To Kent's consternation, he was initially not recognized as a co-collaborator, and would not be acknowledged as such until the following year. The group's blueprints called for chapels and end sections with apses; a crossing containing four round arches as well as a dome topped by a massive tower; and transepts with round edges. The interior was based upon Boston's Trinity Church, and the crossing was based upon Istanbul's Hagia Sophia, Venice's St. Mark's Basilica, and the P\u00e9rigueux Cathedral. The \"exotic\" design was seen as an example of the unusual architecture that was prevalent at that time. It was also Heins &amp; LaFarge's first major commission: the firm later designed structures such as the Astor Court buildings at the Bronx Zoo, as well as the early stations of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company, the first operator of the present-day New York City Subway.\nThat October, the trustees directed the firm to revise their design further. The following month, it was announced that work would begin in early 1892, provided that Heins &amp; LaFarge submitted their revised plans that April. The original plans were then substantially revised because the board of trustees wanted a Gothic-style appearance. The western towers were modified to remove the spires and enlarge the windows, and various Gothic details were placed on the facade. The nave was realigned from north\u2013south to east\u2013west so that the apse would face east, in the direction of the sunrise, to represent the resurrection of Jesus as per Episcopal tradition. Heins &amp; LaFarge objected to the realignment because it would result in the cathedral being hidden behind other buildings. In the final plan, \"Three Arabesque Scrolls\" incorporated both Byzantine and Romanesque influences, with Gothic detailing on the exterior. Outwardly, the design resembled the AMDG plan from Huss &amp; Buck. By April 1892, the trustees had raised much of the $850,000 required for land acquisition, though there still remained a deficit of $175,000.\nConstruction and early years.\nConstruction on the Cathedral of St. John the Divine was begun with the cornerstone-laying ceremony on December 27, 1892, St. John's Day. One thousand tickets for seats at the ceremony were distributed, though the actual attendance was 1,100. The cornerstone contained various objects such as a Bible and church papers. Potter hit the stone three times with a mallet and said \"Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid which is Jesus Christ.\" The following month, the remaining $175,000 for land acquisition had been secured, and the trustees moved to take title to the land, including the cathedral close around the cathedral's main building, in April. Unlike the main building, the cathedral close was not designed under a single master plan, and during the 1890s and 1900s, several proposals would be made for the site.\nInitial construction.\nActual work on St. John's began in early 1893. The trustees initially expected that work would proceed quickly because much of the Morningside Heights plateau was made of shallow bedrock. However, in September 1893, builders unexpectedly hit pockets of soft shale and an underground spring at several locations about below ground. One of these pockets was located directly below the site for one of the four piers that were to support the cathedral's massive stone tower. The trustees briefly considered moving the entire cathedral slightly southward. They ultimately decided against moving the cathedral, believing it to be inauspicious if the cornerstone were to be moved. Instead, builders drilled several deep shafts until they hit the bedrock, then poured concrete pits within each shaft. The pits would then accommodate the construction of the tower's piers. The layer of bedrock was, in some cases, beneath ground level. The pits were completed in late 1895 at a significantly higher cost than originally estimated.\nBy 1898, St. John's had cost an estimated $750,000, and as per an 1896 estimate, the cathedral was projected to cost at least $5\u00a0million when complete. As a temporary measure, the Tiffany Chapel was purchased in mid-1898 so that services could be held there. The chapel was placed in the crypt, within the basement. The first services were held in January 1899 within the Tiffany Chapel. The crossing arches, located in the cathedral plot's eastern portion, were completed the following year, though three of the arches were temporarily sealed off until the transepts and nave could be completed. By then, some $2\u00a0million had already been spent, even though little appeared to have been completed. Despite large donations from prominent figures such as financiers John Jacob Astor IV and William Waldorf Astor, governor Levi P. Morton, banker J. P. Morgan, and businessman Cornelius Vanderbilt, the trustees continued to raise funds.\nIn March 1903, the trustees announced that the next stage of St. John's construction would require $500,000 for building the choir and $200,000 for completing the loft, and that eight massive granite columns would need to be procured to support the roof over the choir. Furthermore, the trustees would build three arches to support the rest of the roof. Quarried in Vinalhaven, Maine, each column was tall with a diameter\u2014at the time, the world's second-largest stone columns. Because of their size, three of the columns were cracked while being turned. The columns were then transported using a specially constructed barge towed by the large steam tug \"Clara Clarita\". When the columns arrived at Manhattan in July and August 1903, they were rolled onto flatbed trucks and brought to the cathedral's site. The builders lacked a derrick strong enough to lift the column pieces, so they ordered wood to build one. The columns were finally lifted in July 1904, more than a year after the initial announcement. The walls could not be placed until after the columns had been installed. Work also began in 1903 on the crossing ceiling, which was to contain \"Guastavino tiles\" designed by Spanish architect Rafael Guastavino.\nThe board of trustees implemented a new charter in early 1904, which provided for greater representation of laypeople on the board. By 1905, with $800,000 available for construction, the trustees anticipated that the cathedral would be completed within a decade. The church's great organ was ordered from Skinner the following year at a cost of $50,000 (), following a gift by the Morton family. It was almost completed by 1911 with nearly 7,000 pipes; the cost of the organ had risen to $70,000. Work also continued on the exterior walls of the choir and the seven surrounding chapels in the apse, which required of granite. Builders estimated that of stone would have been used for the walls once work was completed. Gutzon Borglum was commissioned for some of the initial sculptural elements on St. John's, though his relation with the trustees was strained: he destroyed two angels after criticism of his work and threatened to quit in 1906. Because of the delays in construction, members of the public began to question the necessity of constructing such a large cathedral. With little progress to show for, public sentiment began to turn against the cathedral. Even the trustees started to have doubts about certain aspects of the plan, criticizing Heins &amp; LaFarge's small staff, their simultaneous involvement in many other projects, slow construction, and cost overruns.\nCrossing opening and change in design.\nAlthough Heins died in 1907, LaFarge continued to design the crossing, choir, and apse of St. John's. By then, the architectural preferences of the public were shifting away from the original design. Additionally, communication between LaFarge and the trustees were deteriorating, with several trustees calling for LaFarge's removal. The choir was covered in 1908, and the crossing was installed the next year. The choir was nearly complete by October 1909, but there were insufficient funds to complete its construction, delaying its opening by at least six months. At that time, St. John's was earning about $24,000 per year and had a $500,000 endowment, while at least $1\u00a0million was needed to complete construction. In March 1911, trustees finally confirmed an opening date of April 19, 1911. The first service in the choir and crossing, the consecration of the choir, occurred as scheduled on that day. The completed portions of the cathedral were widely praised, though few newspapers devoted extensive coverage to the event, except the \"New York Herald\".\nA month after the choir's consecration, the trustees suddenly fired LaFarge, commissioning Ralph Adams Cram to take LaFarge's place as lead architect of St. John's. The trustees had exercised a clause in their contract with Heins &amp; LaFarge, enabling them to hire another architect if either partner were to die. LaFarge was not made aware of the matter beforehand, and was only notified via a cable sent by his partner Benjamin Wistar Morris. The original Byzantine-Romanesque design was changed to a Gothic design, and Cram was asked to convert many existing features to Gothic style. The move was criticized in the local media, who claimed that the trustees and Cram had been conspiring to eject LaFarge from the lead architect position. However, \"The New York Sun\" reported that Cram had only reluctantly accepted the commission because the trustees had threatened to hire a foreign architect otherwise.\nCram presented a master plan for the cathedral close's buildings in October 1911, and his revised designs for the main structure were completed in 1913. Regardless, there was still not enough money to complete the cathedral's construction, as the New York Episcopal Diocese Cathedral League had mentioned in 1912 that $5.5\u00a0million was still needed. The diocese was able to construct several structures to the south of the main building (see ), as part of a plan that had been approved by the trustees in late 1911. These structures included the St. Faith's House (1909), Synod House (1911\u20131913), Cathedral School (1912\u20131913), and Cathedral House (1912\u20131914). \nNave and north transept.\nBy January 1916, Bishop David H. Greer announced that the diocese would construct St. John's nave and narthex, along with a pair of towers on the western elevation of the facade above the narthex. The project would cost $1.5\u00a0million, even though St, John's only had about $200,000 on hand as of June 1915. A groundbreaking ceremony for the nave was held on May 8, 1916. That November, construction stopped due to material and funding shortages during World War I, and the trustees had decided against raising funds until after the war. Cram edited his plans in the interim. In February 1919, the trustees approved Cram's revised plan to incorporate a memorial for soldiers. The new plans required $5\u20136\u00a0million, but would make St. John's the third- or fourth-largest worldwide. The cathedral did not yet have the money to build the nave, and furthermore, in 1920 the trustees decided not to hold fundraising drives for said purpose. Because of an unstable economy, work did not resume for another four years, though both Greer and Bishop Charles Sumner Burch supported the project.\nIn 1923, Burch's successor William T. Manning announced a $15\u00a0million capital campaign to raise money for this project. The New York campaign committee, headed by Franklin D. Roosevelt, campaigned from 1923 to 1925 to raise $6\u00a0million (). By May 1924, Manning announced that $2.5\u00a0million had been donated within the previous three months, and that work on the nave would soon begin if that rate of donation were to continue. St. John's was seeking price estimates for the nave's construction by that November, and the baptistery was donated the same year. Some $7.7\u00a0million had been raised by February 1925, and the laying of the nave's cornerstone occurred on November 9, 1925. Manning wanted the cathedral to be an interdenominational place of worship, but was still reluctant to add other denominations' members to the board of trustees. Notably, Manning rejected a request from John D. Rockefeller Jr., a Baptist, despite the latter's $500,000 donation toward the cathedral's building fund.\nIn January 1927, Manning announced that the trustees had approved Cram's proposal for a square tower above the crossing; the tower would replace the dome, which did not conform to the Gothic style. With sides of , the tower would be half as wide as the arches below it. Cram's blueprint revisions, published in 1929, entailed building the square tower over the crossing, and adding two portals to the western elevation. Additionally, St. John's northern transept began construction in December 1927. Since the funds for that transept were donated solely by women, it was called the Women's Transept. Work on the Women's Transept was halted in October 1930 due to a lack of funds. Construction at St. John's was otherwise unaffected by the Great Depression. During this duration, work was concentrated mainly on the western elevation.\nWhen construction of the Women's Transept resumed in 1934, the nave and the western elevation were nearly complete except for the two towers above the western facade, but work on the crossing tower and south transept had yet to commence. By 1938, the nave was completed, but the temporary construction wall between the nave and crossing was still in place because the Byzantine-Romanesque crossing's design had yet to be harmonized with the Gothic nave. As such, Cram subsequently replaced the portions of the ceiling above the choir and the apse's eastern section. Additionally, the nave started to be used for services, even though it had not yet been dedicated. The 1939 \"WPA Guide to New York City\" stated that $20\u00a0million had been spent on the cathedral by then.\nFull-length opening and expansion.\nThe full length of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine was opened for the first time on November 30, 1941. At that time, St. John's was only three-fifths completed, yet it was the second-largest Christian church in the world by area, behind only St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City. The event was commemorated with a week-long celebration. The last day of the celebrations, Sunday December 7, 1941, coincided with Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor. With the consequent entry of the United States into World War II, work on the cathedral stopped. The southern transept and tower had yet to start, while the northern transept remained one-third complete. The western towers, planned to be , reached only to the roof of the nave. Cram revised his plans yet again just before his 1942 death, this time with shorter western towers and a slim spire in place of the square tower over the crossing.\nHalt in construction.\nFollowing the end of World War II, St. John's did not experience any more new construction for three decades. In 1945, Manning had attempted to start a fundraising drive for $10\u00a0million so that the remaining funds could be raised for the cathedral's completion. However, during the late 1940s, his successor Bishop Charles Kendall Gilbert turned efforts toward alleviating social issues in the vicinity of the cathedral. Rather than being focused on expansion, the cathedral became more involved in the surrounding community. By that time, a total of $19\u00a0million had been spent on construction (equivalent to $ million in 2024). By the 1950s, there was debate over whether to complete St. John's in the Gothic fashion of the nave; a more contemporary style; or the original Byzantine/Romanesque style. Several plans were proposed through the early 1960s, but none were examined in depth.\nIn 1966, it was announced that work at St. John's would resume. The trustees had approved a smaller version of the western towers and the crossing, with a modern multicolored dome to be built atop the crossing. The project did not proceed, as Bishop Horace W. B. Donegan said that such work would not occur during his administration; rather, he wanted the construction money to instead go toward helping the poor. In the 1970s, the cathedral's activities turned toward improving quality of life in Morningside Heights; helping the elderly, young, and the environment; and participating in the civil rights movement and the opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War. However, when the Very Reverend James Parks Morton was installed as St. John's dean in 1973, he said that construction at St. John's would start again. Morton said he wanted St. John's to become \"a holy place for the whole city\". St. John's had become overcrowded because of its increasing focus on community activities, and even though the cathedral was losing $500,000 each year, Morton believed that an expansion would help make space for these extra activities.\nResumption of work.\nMorton announced in December 1978 that construction would soon begin on constructing the two western towers, extending their height by and bringing their total height to . The job was expected to cost $20\u00a0million and take five years. However, by then, there was a shortage of qualified stone carvers in the area. James R. Bambridge, who was hired as the stonemason, planned to employ unskilled younger workers from the surrounding community. Bambridge hired Nicholas G. Fairplay, an English stonemason, as master carver. The architect was Hoyle, Doran and Berry, the successor to Cram's architecture firm. The expansions would be based primarily on Cram's revised designs, published before his death. The north transept would be completed, but would remain separate from the main building.\nWork on the western facade's towers was restarted with the opening of St. John's stone yard, the Cathedral Stoneworks, which received its first several Indiana limestone blocks in June 1979. Construction started first on the south tower, named for Saint Paul, which began to rise in 1982. However, the project continued to be delayed due to a shortage of funds, and due to slow development of the towers' designs. Work also progressed slowly because the stonemasons were carving a myriad of minute details on the south tower. By 1984, St. John's was projected to be complete in 2000. Under the leadership of master stone carvers Nicholas Fairplay, Simon Verity, and Jean Claude Marchionni, work on the statuary of the central portal of the cathedral's western elevation was started in 1988 and completed in 1997. During this era, the cathedral expanded its cultural programming, hosting some 140 shows and performances in the 1987\u20131988 season, some of which drew up to 3,000 observers.\nBy 1992, the construction budget had been depleted; work was halted, and the stone yard was closed. By then, another of height had been added to the south tower. While some of the scaffolding was removed, other portions remained, rusting away for fifteen years. The Very Reverend Harry H. Pritchett Jr., who succeeded Morton in 1997, decided against further expansion of St. John's, especially since the existing facilities needed $20\u201340\u00a0million in repairs.\n21st century.\nOn December 18, 2001, a fire swept through the unfinished north transept, destroying the gift shop and damaging tapestries. Despite the damage sustained, St. John's reopened two weeks later. Though the pipe organ was not damaged, all its pipes and other component parts were removed and restored. Valuable tapestries and other items in the cathedral were damaged by the smoke. In January 2005, the cathedral began a major restoration to not only remove smoke damage resulting from the 2001 fire, but also clean the 80 years of dirt accumulation in the nave. The renovations temporarily depleted St. John's funds: the unaffected portions of the cathedral started to deteriorate, staff salary raises were deferred, and several staff positions were eliminated. The scaffolding around the south tower was removed in 2007, and the cathedral was rededicated on November 30, 2008.\nThe cathedral's main building was made a city landmark in June 2003, but the designation was overturned that October, since it did not cover the entire cathedral close. At the same time, St. John's officials wanted to lease out the lots at the northern and southern borders of the cathedral close for further development, a move that preservationists unsuccessfully attempted to prevent. Ultimately, two residential buildings were erected on these lots: Avalon Morningside Park on the southern lot and the Enclave on the northern lot. In 2017, the cathedral close was re-designated a city landmark, except for the two new residential buildings. The next year, the first phase of the north transept's renovation was finally completed, and work began on a renovation of the crypt.\nOn April 14, 2019, a small fire occurred in the crypt; except for smoke damage, the cathedral building was mostly unaffected. Many artworks stored in the crypt were reportedly damaged or destroyed in the fire. An initial cleaning removed smoke damage from the bottom 10 feet of the interior of the cathedral. A cleaning of the rest of the interior was also ongoing. Ennead Architects proposed erecting a copper dome above the crossing so that the crossing's tiles could be rehabilitated. The restoration of the dome was completed in 2022. The New York City government gave the cathedral a $1.5 million grant in August 2024 to convert Synod Hall into a community center. A restoration of the organ, which had been damaged in the 2019 fire, was completed in December 2024.\nMain structure.\nThe Cathedral of St. John the Divine is located at 1047 Amsterdam Avenue in Morningside Heights, Manhattan, between West 110th Street (also known as Cathedral Parkway) to the south and 113th Street to the north. The cathedral's main entrance on the west is along the same axis as 112th Street. Adjacent sites include Mount Sinai Morningside (formerly St. Luke's Hospital) to the north, Columbia University's Morningside Heights campus to the north and west, and Morningside Park to the east. One of the key reasons for St. John's location is that the land under it was described as the \"highest point in Manhattan\". One author wrote that \"the view from outside tells much about St. John's inner spirit\", saying that the southeastern elevation of the facade gives an impression of incompleteness, while the great western elevation was \"vitalized by its incipience\".\nSt. John's is oriented west\u2013east relative to the street grid and was originally supposed to have a cruciform plan, with transepts extending to the north and south of the crossing near the eastern end of the cathedral. The entire structure measures long. From west to east, the cathedral contains a narthex measuring long by wide; a nave of ; a crossing of ; a choir of ; and the Chapel of St. Savior in the apse, measuring with an ambulatory wide. The cathedral's western elevation is wide; if the transepts had been completed, they would have measured from end to end. The cathedral has an interior floor area of and can host 8,600 people. As of 2024[ [update]], these dimensions make St. John's the fourth-largest Christian cathedral in the world and puts it in competition with Liverpool Cathedral as being the world's largest Anglican cathedral.\nThe original design for the cathedral was created by Heins &amp; LaFarge. Despite being primarily Byzantine and Romanesque in influence, the last version of Heins &amp; LaFarge's design contained a significantly Gothic-style appearance. The original plan at St. John's called for tiled-arch domes and barrel vaults. The crossing was to be held up by four round arches under a dome, with a tower on top. The completed cathedral was supposed to have been long and wide between transepts, while the tower would have been tall.\nThe modern plan for the building, as it appeared upon its official opening in 1941, conforms primarily to the second design campaign from the prolific Gothic Revival architect Ralph Adams Cram. The plans are based on the French Gothic style, with English Gothic accents. Cram had initially wanted to use English Gothic models, which typically placed less emphasis on vertical elements and height, and which contrasted with the extant parts of the cathedral. Cram's plan originally called for three main entrances; two spires set back from the western facade; two smaller spires on the western facade. Inside were ten full-height aisles, with a triforium and clerestory rising to the ceiling, as well as large chapels along each side of the nave. The design provides a transition between the nave and the crossing, because the nave was to be wide, about half the width of the crossing. Cram, described as a \"brilliant perfectionist\", frequently revised his proposal and later spoke of Heins &amp; LaFarge's plans as better than his own. One major change, published in 1926, called for a , square tower above the crossing and five portals on the western elevation. Another revision was published just before he died in 1942, and called for a spire above the crossing. Cram's designs were not fully built, either. The Cathedral of St. John the Divine remains only two-thirds complete and is often nicknamed \"St. John the Unfinished\". As of 2025[ [update]], no major construction work was ongoing; according to the cathedral's website, its funds were being used mainly \"to prioritize serving the community through our programming and social initiatives, and to maintaining the architectural integrity of the Cathedral\".\nNarthex and western facade.\nNarthex.\nThe narthex, in the westernmost portion of the cathedral facing Amsterdam Avenue, was designed by Cram. His original plans did not include a narthex, instead showing the nave continuing as far as the western facade. Inside the narthex is a large vestibule, which serves as an entrance to the nave on the east. The vestibule measures along the north\u2013south axis and along the west\u2013east axis. The southern part of the narthex contains the cathedral's gift shop.\nAbove the narthex are two towers: one named for Saint Peter to the north and the other named for Saint Paul to the south. The north tower reaches to the roof of the nave, which is above ground level; the south tower is about taller, with the additional height having been built between 1982 and 1992. If the towers had been completed, they would have been about tall. The towers protrude slightly from the northern and southern elevations of the facade but are flush with the western elevation. On the northern and southern facades of the narthex, at the base of the towers, are stained glass windows, one on each side.\nWestern facade.\nThe narthex abuts the unfinished western elevation of the facade facing Amsterdam Avenue; this facade is wide and consists of five architectural bays. The bays are separated by large arched buttresses with finials at their tops, and they contain niches for the possible future installation of statues. The western elevation is divided into four vertical tiers. From bottom to top, they are the ground-level portals, on the first tier; the gallery level, on the second tier; the large rose window and several smaller grisaille and lancet windows, on the third tier; and the top of the south tower and the gable above the center bay, on the fourth tier.\nAt ground level, there are five portals under arched openings. The largest of those is the center portal, called the Portal of Paradise, which contains carvings of the transfiguration of Jesus as well as St. John and 32 biblical characters; these were carved in 1988 under Simon Verity's leadership. St. John is depicted on the trumeau, or vertical pier, between the two pairs of doors within the center portal. The center portal also contains depictions of New York City skyscrapers being destroyed in an apocalypse. The center, northernmost, and southernmost portals are set within large, gabled structures with several archivolts, or arched moldings, surrounding each portal under the gables; porches overhang the portals above the gables. The other two portals are located under simple rectangular canopy structures, located underneath grisaille windows looking into the nave. Lights salvaged from the former Pennsylvania Station illuminate the steps in front of the portals.\nAbove the center portal, between the towers, is a rose window installed by stained glass artist Charles Connick and constructed out of 10,000 pieces of glass. With a diameter of , the rose window is the largest rose window in the U.S. Flanking the rose window on either side are two grisaille windows, each with two lancet windows under a smaller rose. The seven archangels are depicted in the north grisaille, while the seven churches of Asia are depicted in the south grisaille. Connick had designed the grisailles as well. On the gable above the large rose window, there are lancets as well as a medallion in the middle.\nThe two pairs of great west doors on the western elevation, set beneath the elaborate center portal, were designed between 1927 and 1931 by the designer Henry Wilson. The bronze doors include a sequence of 60 relief panels, which presents scenes from the Old and New Testaments and the Apocalypse. The doors open three times per year: Easter; St. Francis's feast day in October; and the \"blessing of the bicycles\" in the spring. They comprise one of four bronze-door commissions designed by Wilson before his death. St. John's great west doors were the last of the four commissions, each pair measuring some . The remaining doors on the western elevation are composed of Burmese teak with wrought iron decoration.\nNave.\nThe nave was designed by Cram, though the final plan is slightly modified from the original. It is oriented from west to east, measuring long by wide. The ceiling is above ground level, but the ridge of the roof is high. These dimensions are about the same as in the original plans, which called for floor dimensions of . a roof, and a ceiling.\nOn the northern and southern elevations, there are four vertical \"double bays\", each with two columns of windows. Large arched buttresses, with two piers each, separate the different double bays; smaller buttresses, containing a single pier, divide each double bay into smaller \"sub-bays\". This alternation of large and small buttresses gives the appearance of four double bays with two sub-bays each, rather than eight singular rectangular bays. At the arcade level, each of the sub-bays contains an arrangement of stained glass with two lancet windows under a rose window. The sub-bays also contain another stained-glass arrangement at clerestory level, each with two lancet windows and one rose window. The clerestory arrangements each measure long by wide. Carved parapets, as well as gables with dormers, run along the copper roof.\nInside, there are six north\u2013south rows of piers, three to either side of the nave. These piers divide the nave into five aisles running west to east, with the center aisle located on the same axis as 112th Street. There are four smaller aisles, two to either side of the center aisle. Additionally, the interior contains several flying buttresses, concealed by \"bridges\" that carry them over the outermost aisles.\nThere are sixteen sub-bays in the nave, eight on each side; the easternmost sub-bays on either side contain doorways. Each of the bays are named after some aspect of humanity. From west to east, the sub-bays along the northern side of the nave are named the Sports, Arts, Crusaders, Education, Lawyers, Ecclesiastical Origins (Anglican), and Historical and Patriotic Societies' (American), and Fatherhood bays. The sub-bays on the southern side are named the All Souls', Missionary, Labor, Press (Communication), Medical, Religious Life (Earth), Armed Forces (Military), and Motherhood bays. Each of the sub-bays contain carved parapets atop their mono-pitched roofs. The sub-bays are used for various exhibits. The iconography of the stained-glass windows in the arcade and clerestory is related to the theme of each respective sub-bay. In each sub-bay, between the lower windows and the clerestory windows, is the triforium level, which contains two west\u2013east corridors with numerous windowless rooms and office spaces.\nApse.\nThe apse, located at St. John's eastern end, is made up of numerous components. The center of the apse contains the choir, located below the great organ. Two ambulatory passages run adjacent to the choir, one to the north and the other to the south. Seven chapels, a baptistery, and a columbarium are also located in the northwestern part of the apse. The apse contains two sets of clerestory windows: the large ambulatory clerestories with multiple panels, as well as a smaller sanctuary clerestory window above each of the ambulatory clerestories. The apse's walls are supported by gabled buttresses, which are taller than the height of the walls, and contain niches with statues.\nChoir.\nThe choir was consecrated in 1911. It consists of two sets of wooden stalls facing each other, with three rows in each stall. The stalls were made by the Philadelphia-based John Barber Company. The westernmost unit in the southern row of choir stalls is called the \"Dean's Stall\". The roof above the choir is supported by eight columns, each tall with a diameter and a weight of . The columns' foundations descend as much as into the bedrock below them.\nThe parapets behind the two sections of the choir were originally installed in 1922 with twenty niches for statues of the spiritual heroes of the twenty centuries since the birth of Christ. For example, the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries are respectively represented by statues of William Shakespeare, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln. The niche for the 20th century was left blank through the end of that century. In 2001 the choir parapet was completed with carvings of Martin Luther King Jr., Albert Einstein, Susan B. Anthony, and Mohandas Gandhi by stonecarver Christopher Pellettieri. In addition, the finials on both rows of stalls were carved by Otto Jahnsen and depict church-music composers and performers.\nOn the floor are tiles designed by the Grueby Faience Company, with geometric patterns and imagery reminiscent of the iconography in other cathedrals. A compass rose, the official icon of the Anglican Communion (in which the Episcopal Church participates), is located on the floor between the two stalls, in the center of the choir.\nGreat Organ.\nThe Great Organ was built by Ernest M. Skinner in 1906\u20131910. It is located above the choir on the north and south sides, and consists of four manual keyboards with several pedals. The opening recital was given in 1911 by Clarence Dickinson. In 1954, it was enlarged by the Aeolian-Skinner Organ Company, Opus 150-A, under the tonal direction of G. Donald Harrison. The organ contains 8,514 pipes, though it previously included 8,035. While most of the pipes are located above the choir stalls, the Great Organ also controls the State Trumpet, located beneath the rose window about to the west.\nThe 2001 fire in the north transept resulted in heavy smoke damage to the organ, and it was subsequently restored by Quimby Pipe Organs, Inc., of Warrensburg, Missouri. After two years of extensive and detailed refurbishment work, including a reorganization of many pipes and a rebuilding of the console, the organ finally returned to service in 2008 as part of an overall $41-million cleaning and repair to the cathedral. The Great Organ was damaged again in the April 2019 crypt fire, and was indefinitely placed out of service pending a thorough cleaning. While the Great Organ was being restored, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine used an electric organ.\nThe organists have included:\nSanctuary.\nBehind the choir, to its east, is the sanctuary (or chancel), a raised platform. The chancel includes the high altar, which is made of white Vermont marble. The Magna Carta Pedestal\u2014named as such because it is located atop three stones from the Bury St Edmunds Abbey in England\u2014is located to the right, while the sedilia for the bishop and other clergy is to the left. The sanctuary also contains the cathedra (or bishop's seat), donated by Olivia Egleston Phelps Stokes in memory of her sister Caroline Phelps Stokes. The bishop's pulpit is made of Tennessee marble, with five niches, each of which contain reliefs that depict scenes from the life of Christ. A presbytery, which houses the officiating clergy of St. John's, is located between the chancel and the choir. The reredos behind the sanctuary depicts four scenes from the Old Testament on the left (north), and four from the New Testament on the right (south).\nBehind the altar is a wrought iron enclosure. The space contains the English Gothic style tomb of the man who originally conceived and founded the cathedral, the Right Reverend Horatio Potter, which was dedicated in 1921.\nAmbulatory and chapels.\nAn ambulatory, measuring long and wide, surrounds the choir to the north, east, and south, making a rough \"U\" shape with the two ends of the \"U\" facing west. The floor is covered with red clay-colored tiles that contain green-serpentine borders. There are wrought-steel gates at either end of the ambulatory. Numerous plaques are present in the ambulatory, paying homage to large donors and other notable individuals in St. John's history. A \"poetry wall\" and several Madonna paintings are also located in the ambulatory, particularly in the southern part of the ambulatory.\nExtending outward from the ambulatory are seven chapels. These chapels are known as the \"Chapels of the Tongues\", and all were donated by prominent individuals and families. The chapels were designed by four different architects and firms: Heins &amp; LaFarge designed two of the chapels, while Cram designed a third. The Chapels of the Tongues were devoted to seven of the city's largest immigrant groups when the apse was completed: the southernmost three chapels represent \"Latin races\" and the northernmost three chapels represent \"Germanic races\". All of the chapels, except for St. Ansgar's, were donated by individuals or families. Clockwise from north, they are devoted to:\nThe northwest corner of the apse, adjacent to the St. Ansgar Chapel, includes the octagonal baptistery. The baptistery was donated by three Stuyvesant family siblings in 1924. The space measures in diameter with a ceiling tall. The baptistery's iconography depicts the Stuyvesant family history; icons of New Amsterdam, New York, and Dutch history; and the 12 apostles.\nThe columbarium, established in the 1970s, is in a room directly west of the baptistery. It contains marble vaults, which store the remains of people from all religions.\nCrossing.\nBetween the nave to the west and the apse to the east is the crossing, designed by Rafael Guastavino. The interior of the crossing includes four massive granite arches, which in the original Heins &amp; LaFarge design were originally intended to support the massive tower above it. When completed in 1900, the arches were described as the \"crowning glory\" of Morningside Heights. During the time that the nave remained incomplete, temporary walls were placed within the arches so that services could be held in the crossing.\nAbove the crossing is a domed roof, which was meant as a temporary covering until the tower above the crossing was built. It was completed within fifteen weeks between May and August 1909. The dome is shaped like a saucer, and consists of several overlapping layers of Guastavino tile, which support themselves around the dome's center upon their own weight. The pendentives, or triangular areas between the circular dome and the corners of the arches, are thick; the thickness of the dome itself ranges from on top to at the bottom. Compared to conventional ceilings, the tiles saved money because they did not require temporary supports when they were installed. For added strength, metal rods were included in the dome's shell.\nThe dome was originally intended to be temporary. Cram had proposed three plans for the structure above the crossing: a steeple, a square tower rising above the crossing floor, and then a slim spire. None of these plans were realized. A three-year renovation project from 2019 to 2022 repaired cracks in tiles, patched concrete, added new protective materials, and built a new copper dome over the crossing.\nBasements.\nDirectly below the crossing is the basement, which contains the crypt, now used as a storage area. The items stored in the crypt include artifacts such as pieces of the destroyed Pennsylvania Station and World Trade Center, as well as wooden angels, plaster gargoyles, leadlights, antique furniture, and a single-file line of saints. The crypt also includes objects such as a large fossil and a massive crystal of quartz, both of which were relocated to the crypt after the 2001 fire. Along either side the basement are rooms, each named after the chapels that they are located under. In the 1980s, the crypt was also home to the Cathedral Works Company, which sold textiles.\nThe crypt also formerly contained the Tiffany Chapel, created by jewelry designer Louis Comfort Tiffany. Originally exhibited at the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893, it was then acquired by Celia Whipple Wallace and moved to the cathedral in 1898. Services at the cathedral were hosted at the Tiffany Chapel from 1899 to 1911, and the chapel was reacquired by Tiffany in 1916. The chapel has been in the Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art in Winter Park, Florida, since 1999.\nA subbasement below the crypt is often flooded by groundwater, potentially from springs in the area. The Leake and Watts Asylum had a well on the site of the present-day baptistery, and there was a spring near the intersection of 110th Street and Morningside Drive. As early as 1893, workers discovered that the ground under the cathedral was soft and prone to flooding. As a result, the cathedral has a concrete foundation. Sump pumps keep the area dry, and construction of the neighboring Enclave has reduced flooding. However, the spring still exists underneath the cathedral, and water from the spring may have contributed to the partial collapse of a retaining wall in 2006.\nCathedral close.\nThe cathedral close, surrounding the main cathedral, consists of several buildings on a site, including the former Leake &amp; Watts asylum building, which predates the land's acquisition by the Episcopal Diocese of New York. The other structures were built later.\nThe former asylum is located immediately south of the crossing. The Cathedral School of St. John the Divine is located on the eastern boundary of the site, just south of the apse. A Biblical garden is located between the school and the asylum building. To the southwest is a pulpit green, situated between the nave to the north and the Synod Hall and Diocesan House to the south. The Cathedral House is located south of the Biblical garden and east of the pulpit green. The Synod Hall and Diocesan House are located on the southern boundary. Various paths, gardens, play areas, and furniture are located on the cathedral close, as are numerous artworks and several commemorative or religious objects.\nThe initial plans for the cathedral close, put forth in the 1890s, varied widely. The included a 1892 plan for buildings on Morningside Drive and Cathedral Parkway; various proposals for an Episcopal residence somewhere along the close; and an 1898\u20131899 plan for a deaconesses' training school. Two other plans were proposed in 1902 and 1903, but after objections to the 1903 plan from St. Luke's Hospital, a new plan was presented in 1906. The Training School for Deaconesses was completed in 1909, independently of the plan. Cram presented to the trustees an extensive plan for all the structures on the grounds in October 1911, and the trustees approved the choir school the same month. The following month, the trustees certified plans for the Synod Hall, bishop's house, and deanery, as well as the never-built diocesan offices and canons' residences. A heating plant at the southwestern corner of the cathedral close (added to the plan in 1913), and two structures planned for the western boundary and approved in 1920, were not built. A shelter was built in 2015 for the cathedral's three peacocks, Jim, Phil, and Harry, who lived on the cathedral close from the early 2000s to 2023.\nIthiel Town Building.\nThe former Leake and Watts Asylum building, designed by Ithiel Town and completed in 1843, is located south of the crossing, where the south transept would have been located. The building, designed in the Greek Revival style, was originally composed of five parts. There was a central pavilion with Ionic-style porticos to the south and north. The front entrance, located within the south portico, was approached by a wide granite staircase. The only decorative element was at the south portico's pediment, which was supported by six stucco-covered brick columns, topped by capitals made of wood. Brick wings flanked the central pavilion to each side, and originally contained wooden porches along their facades, replaced with iron balconies in 1888.\nOriginally, there were common areas and staff rooms within the central pavilion, and dormitories for 300 children in the wings. When the Episcopal Diocese of New York acquired the site, the former asylum building served several functions for the cathedral. Between 1892 and 1899, it was used as an employee dormitory and construction offices, while the parlor hosted worship services. Afterward, the former asylum's west wing was used by the day school for the cathedral's choirboys between 1901 and 1913. Cathedral leaders had proposed demolishing parts of the asylum building, since it was in the way of the proposed southern transept, though these demolitions did not happen. Subsequently, the west wing was used by the Diocese offices, and the east wing by Cathedral offices until 1949. The building then became the \"Exhibit Hall\" and the top stories were removed sometime afterward. The structure was renovated in 2004\u20132012, becoming the \"Ithiel Town Building\".\nThe Ithiel Town Building houses a textile laboratory that conserves the cathedral's textiles, including the Barberini tapestries to cartoons by Raphael. The laboratory also conserves tapestries, needlepoint, upholstery, costumes, and other textiles for its clients. The building has also housed the Museum of Religious Art, as well as offices, shops, choir rehearsal quarters, sacristies, and the Cathedral Community Cares program.\nDiocesan House.\nThe Diocesan House, also known as St. Faith's House, is the only building on the cathedral close to be designed by Heins &amp; LaFarge before they were fired. The structure, designed in the Tudor Gothic style, is located on the southern side of the cathedral close, close to Cathedral Parkway (110th Street). It is a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442-story H-shaped building with a brick facade, a base of Indiana limestone, and gable roofs above the pavilions on the western end. The southern elevation also contains an additional basement story. Its main entrance, on the eastern portion of the northern elevation, is a recessed-arched portal with an oriel window on the third story. As of 2017[ [update]], the Diocesan House is used by the diocese's offices and archives; the cathedral's library; and apartments.\nThe Diocesan House was originally built for the New York Training School for Deaconesses, which was established in 1890 and had been searching for new locations since 1898 or 1899. Funds to build the structure were finally received in 1907 after Archdeacon Charles Comfort Tiffany included $125,000 for the deaconesses' school in his will. The building was originally supposed to be on the northern side of the cathedral close, but was moved due to objections from St. Luke's Hospital. Construction started in May 1910 and the school opened by that October. All work was finished in February 1911, and the building was used as a deaconesses' school until May 1948, and it was converted to office use the following year.\nSynod Hall.\nThe Synod Hall (also known as the Synod House) houses the cathedral's synod or council, but is also used for various events and other functions. It was completed in 1913 and was the first of four structures on the cathedral close to be designed by Cram, and was designed to be \"the most beautiful thing in New York\". It is located at the southwestern corner of the cathedral close. The main entrance, an arched portal facing Amsterdam Avenue, contains carvings of Christian figures, which flank oak double-doors. A carving of George Washington is located between the doors, and six smaller figures are located on the tympanum above the doors. The exterior is made of pink Kingwood sandstone. Inside is a hall that can seat over a thousand people, with gallery seating above the main level. There are grisaille windows to the north and south, and wooden trusses on the ceiling, supporting the gable roof. The Synod Hall also contains a three-manual Skinner pipe organ.\nPlans for a diocesan building were considered as early as 1903. The current Synod Hall was announced in 1911, in preparation for the 1913 General Convention of the Episcopal Church. Cram's firm submitted plans for Synod Hall in March 1912, and it opened in October 1913 with the start of the convention. However, the hall was not completed until early 1914. After Bayard Cutting and J. P. Morgan made large donations toward the Synod Hall, the cathedral had to return some of the previous donations, as the two men had given more than enough funds to pay for the building.\nSchool.\nThe choir school building, now the Cathedral School of St. John the Divine, is located on the cathedral close's eastern border. The building is in the Collegiate Gothic style and is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 stories tall. The exterior contains gray schist cladding and limestone trim, with architectural features such as a gabled roof, dormers protruding from the roof, and Tudor-style arched openings. Inside, the building contained classrooms; gathering space for reception, dining; music rooms; a library; a gymnasium; a dormitory; and masters' and service rooms.\nThe choir school was created in 1901 within the Town Building. A separate structure was first proposed in Walter Cook &amp; Winthrop A. Welch's 1906 plan for the campus. In January 1910, Mary Eliza Blodgett (alternatively Mrs. J. Jarrett Blodgett) donated $25,000 toward the new school building's projected $150,000 cost, as a gift to honor her father John H. Sherwood. Blodgett later covered the rest of the choir school building's cost after no one else donated, while former choirboy Frederick G. Bourne provided a $500,000 endowment in 1914. Cram approved Cook &amp; Welch's plan in January 1912 and filed construction plans that July, with work beginning that October. The school building was finished in September 1913. The choir school consisted of day school for 20 adult men and a boarding school for 40 choirboys who paid no tuition. It was turned into a boys' day school in 1964 and a coeducational day school for grades K-8 in 1972.\nBishop's house and deanery.\nThe Episcopal Residence, consisting of the bishop's house (also Cathedral House) and deanery (also Ogilvie House), were the final buildings that Cram designed within the cathedral close. The structures were intentionally built close together to evoke a feeling of coziness. According to Cram, the Chateauesque-style buildings were inspired by \"later domestic\" buildings in the French Gothic style. The bishop's house is west of the deanery, on slightly higher ground; the deanery is thus hidden behind the bishop's house. A small garden is located at the northeast corner of the buildings.\nAs built, the two structures contained a myriad of living space inside. The bishop's house contained eight rooms with seven bathrooms, while the deanery contained 20 rooms with five bathrooms. The deanery is three stories tall; like the choir school, it has gray schist cladding and limestone trim. It contains several pavilions with dormers and gabled roofs, as well as a loggia and an oriel window on the southern elevation. The bishop's house is four stories tall and is largely in the same design, but part of the northern elevation is made of exposed brick, marking the location where it would have connected to the unbuilt southern transept. The ornamentation of the bishop's house contains symbols of the diocesan offices, such as bishops; by contrast, the deanery has simpler decorations, such as depictions of flowers and cats. A private chapel between the two buildings was not built.\nAn episcopal residence had been announced in 1897 and Heins &amp; LaFarge drew up plans for such a structure in 1902. The Deanery was donated by Helen Slade Ogilvie in 1911 in memory of her late husband Clinton, while the bishop's house was funded partly by the sale of a previous bishop's house at Gramercy Park. Initially, the site of the two structures was contested because the buildings would have blocked views of the main cathedral from the south. Before the structures' construction started in 1912, the sites for the bishop's house and deanery were relocated eastward. The two buildings' sites were given preliminary approval in May 1912 and were officially approved that October. The bishop's house started in November 1912 and was finished in April 1914. while the deanery was started in February 1913 and completed by that November. Both structures were erected by Leonard Jacob and Frederick T. Youngs. After the 1947 Diocesan Convention, the bishop moved into the upper two floors of the deanery, and the old bishop's house was turned into administration offices.\nResidential buildings.\nIn 2008, the cathedral leased the southeast corner of its property, which contained the cathedral's playground and Rose Garden, to the AvalonBay Communities, which built a luxury apartment building called the Avalon Morningside Park. The project includes 295 apartments, of which 20% are affordable housing units, as well as replacement rose garden. The cathedral leased the northeastern edge of its property, formerly a parking lot, in 2012. The lessee was the Brodsky Organization, which built a residential building called the Enclave between 2014 and 2015. The Enclave consists of 428 rental apartments in two 15-story buildings, separated by the passageway leading to the northern transept; an underground gallery connects the two buildings.\nBoth developments leased the land from the cathedral for 99-year terms. The lease on the land under the Enclave pays the Cathedral about $3\u00a0million a year; the lease on the Avalon, about $2.5\u00a0million.\nArt, activities, and exhibitions.\nConcerts and special events.\nThe cathedral's interior is frequently used for concerts, performances, and other special events.\nRecurring events.\nThe cathedral has an annual New Year's Eve Concert for Peace. The Postlude to Act I of Leonard Bernstein's opera \"Quiet Place\" received its New York premiere at the 1985 concert. The 1990 concert was a tribute to Bernstein himself, who helped found the event and had died two months earlier on October 14.\nPaul Winter has given many concerts at the cathedral, and the Paul Winter Consort are the artists in residence. Among the major musical events that takes place every year is a celebration of the feast day of St. Francis, when the Paul Winter Consort participates in a liturgical performance of Winter's \"Missa Gaia\" (Earth Mass). The musical group also performs at the annual Winter Solstice program.\nOne-time events.\nThe cathedral has also been used for several individual events:\nThe Cathedral of St. John the Divine has also hosted events with spiritual leaders. Among them are Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, who first visited the cathedral in 1979. In addition, Bishop Desmond Tutu led a service in the cathedral in 1986.\nTemporary art exhibitions.\nThe Cathedral of St. John the Divine is also used as an art exhibition space:\nPoets' Corner.\nThe Poets' Corner, inspired by a similar corner at Westminster Abbey, is located in the Arts Bay, on the nave's northern side. It was dedicated in 1985, with Emily Dickinson, Washington Irving, and Walt Whitman being the first poets to be inducted as part of the tradition. The Poets' Corner consists of a poet-in-residence, hired for a five-year term, who in turn appoints electors on staggered terms. The poets-in-residence and electors have included 17 United States Poet Laureates. The electors then vote on choices for honorees, whose names are carved into blocks in the Poets' Corner; subsequent honorees have included Edgar Allan Poe, T. S. Eliot, William Faulkner, and William Carlos Williams. The electors' choices can be overturned, as occurred in 1999, when the Very Reverend Harry Pritchett vetoed Ezra Pound's inclusion because of Pound's anti-Semitic statements during World War II.\nPermanent works.\nThe pulpit green contains the \"Peace Fountain\", a large bronze work of public art by the cathedral's sculptor-in-residence, Greg Wyatt. It was commissioned in 1985 and depicts the struggle of good and evil; a battle between the Archangel Michael and Satan; and images of the Sun, the Moon, and several animals.\nAdvocacy.\nThroughout the years, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine has been involved in various initiatives and projects. These programs included youth initiatives, a soup kitchen, a homeless shelter, and AIDS outreach. During the Vietnam War, the cathedral was also part of the opposition to United States involvement in the war. The Temple of Understanding, an interfaith organization, was housed at the cathedral for several decades in the late 20th century, moving to Midtown Manhattan in the 1990s.\nSeveral programs have been directed toward helping members of the surrounding community. In 1971, the cathedral founded ACT (Athletics, Creativity, and Trips), a program that provided after-school activities and summer camp to children in the neighborhood. The program still runs as of 2018[ [update]] under the name \"Advancing the Community of Tomorrow\". In 1974, in response to a need for housing in New York City, St. John's created a program that became the Urban Homesteading Assistance Board (UHAB); by 1987, the program had helped residential tenants in over 500 buildings to renovate and take ownership of their houses. Additionally, a homeless shelter, crisis center, clothes closet, and kitchen are run by in-house volunteers.\nDeans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable funerals and memorials.\nThe following people are listed with the year of their funeral or memorial service in parentheses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVisitor access.\nIn addition to worship services, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine offers both self-guided and guided tours of the interior exhibits, the cathedral close, and the gardens. These tours require paid tickets; there are discounts for seniors and students, as well as for those in tour groups. Admission is also included within several New York City tourist passes.\nLandmark status.\nThe Cathedral of St. John the Divine complex had been considered for designation as an official landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1966. At the time, St. John's trustees had opposed the move because the structure was incomplete, and a landmark designation would have required the commission to review every proposed major expansion thereafter. The church's trustees were able to prevent designation by claiming the church was not completed, using a stipulation in the landmark's law that stated that potential landmarks had to have been completed for at least 30 years. A subsequent landmark designation was precluded in 1979 for a similar reason.\nIn 2003, the exterior of the cathedral was again considered for landmark status; the interior was ineligible because the commission was legally unable to recognize religious buildings' interiors as landmarks. However, shortly after the commission conferred landmark status on the structure, the designation was unanimously overturned by the New York City Council, some of whose members favored landmark status for the entire cathedral close instead of just the main building. Councilman Bill Perkins proposed that the protective status should also be extended to the cathedral's grounds in order to control development there. The lack of an official city landmark designation meant that the cathedral site could potentially be redeveloped, and as such, two residential buildings were built on the same block as the cathedral. In 2017, the cathedral and six other buildings on the grounds were re-designated a New York City Landmark; the designation excludes the two new structures.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40021", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40021", "title": "990", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 990 (CMXC) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40022", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40022", "title": "993", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 993 (CMXCIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nAstronomy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40023", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40023", "title": "994", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 994 (CMXCIV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nAstronomy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40025", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40025", "title": "996", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 996 (CMXCVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\nJapan\nChina\nVietnam\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40026", "revid": "38020738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40026", "title": "997", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 997 (CMXCVII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "40027", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40027", "title": "998", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 998 (CMXCVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40028", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40028", "title": "List of governors of Montana", "text": "The governor of Montana is the head of government of Montana and the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws, the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Montana State Legislature, to convene the legislature at any time, and to grant pardons and reprieves.\nMontana has had 24\u00a0governors, consisting of 9\u00a0Republicans and 15\u00a0Democrats. The longest-serving governor was Joseph Toole, who served from 1889 to 1893 and again from 1901 until his resignation in 1908 with 11 years in office. He is the only governor to serve nonconsecutive terms. The shortest-serving governor was Elmer Holt, who served less than 13\u00a0months when the previous governor died. The current governor is Republican Greg Gianforte, who took office on January 4, 2021.\nList of governors.\nTerritory of Montana.\nMontana Territory was organized from Idaho Territory on May 26, 1864. During its 35-year history, it had nine governors appointed by the president of the United States, and three acting governors, all of whom had been appointed territorial secretary before becoming acting governor. The first, Thomas Francis Meagher, served as acting governor from 1865 until 1867. The second, James Tufts, served in for one month in 1869, and was succeeded by Wiley Scribner, who served 1869\u20131870.\nState of Montana.\nMontana was admitted to the Union on November 8, 1889.\nThe current Montana Constitution, ratified in 1972, calls for a 4-year term for the governor, commencing on the first Monday in January following an election. A 1992 amendment limits the governor to 8 years in any 16-year period. The constitution provides for the election of a lieutenant governor for the same term as the governor. The two offices are elected on the same ticket; a provision which did not appear in the state's first constitution, ratified in 1889. In the event of a vacancy in the office of governor due to resignation, disqualification, or death, the lieutenant governor becomes governor for the remainder of the term. If the governor is unable to perform his duties for any other reason, the lieutenant governor may become acting governor at the discretion of the state legislature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40029", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40029", "title": "Postmark", "text": "Mark of the date/time that mail enters postal service custody\nA postmark is a postal marking made on an envelope, parcel, postcard or the like, indicating the place, date and time that the item was delivered into the care of a postal service, or sometimes indicating where and when received or in transit. Modern postmarks are often applied simultaneously with the cancellation or killer that marks postage stamps as having been used. Sometimes a postmark alone is used to cancel stamps, and the two terms are often used interchangeably. Postmarks may be applied by handstamp or machine, using methods such as rollers or inkjets, while digital postmarks are a recent innovation.\nHistory.\nThe first postmark, called the \"Bishop mark\", was introduced by English Postmaster General Henry Bishop in 1661 and showed only the day and month of mailing to prevent the delay of the mail by carriers.\nIn England during the latter part of the 17th century, several postmarks were devised for use with the London Penny Post, a postal system that delivered mailed items within the city of London. The postmarks bore the initial of the particular post office or handling house it was sent from along with a separate time stamp. Postage was prepaid and the postmark was applied to the mailed item by means of an inked hand-stamp. Some historians also consider these postmarks to be the world's first postage \"stamps\".\nIn the 19th century and early 1900s, it was common for letters to receive multiple postmarks, or backstamps, indicating the time, date, and location of each post office transporting or delivering the letter, and this is still occasionally true. While almost every contemporary postmark includes a location as well as a date, in 2004, New Zealand Post announced plans to eliminate the location on their postmarks and include only the date; however, information about this can be determined by a three-number code on the postmarks.\nIn Great Britain, the first postmark employed for the cancellation of the then new adhesive postage stamps was the Maltese Cross, so named because of its shape and appearance. This was used in conjunction with a date stamp which was applied, usually to the rear of the letter, which denoted the date of posting.\nDifferent types of postmarks include railway post offices (RPOs) and maritime (on-board ship) postmarks. Postmarks on naval vessels during sensitive operations in wartime are sometimes \"clean\", showing less information than usual to prevent route of travel or other details from falling into enemy hands. Similar to this is the \"censored postmark\", overprinted with a black obliteration of the time and place of mailing, for similar reasons.\nThe Pony Express used a variety of different postmarks on the mail it carried across the Western United States. There are only 250 known examples of surviving Pony Express mail/postmarks in various collections today bearing one of more than a dozen different types of postmarks.\nHawai'i Post, a discontinued personal delivery service, once had a surfboard mail postmark, for covers that traveled by surfboard.\nA colour postmark is on the United States Postal Service-issued collectible envelope commemorating the 2004 inauguration of George W. Bush.\nWhile postmarks are applied almost universally by or under the authority of the official postal department, service, or authority in the United States it is possible to receive \"a permit to apply your own postmark\", called a Mailer's Postmark Permit, and under certain conditions specified by the private express statutes in the United States, a privately carried letter may be cancelled with a private postmark. Unofficial entities that issue artistamps may use postmark-like markings as well.\nMarcophily is the study of postmarks and there are many published work on postmarks covering the topic from before 1900, such as the fancy cancels, until the present day. These include the so-called fancy cancels of the United States to modern machine postmarks.\nFewer postmarks are used now than previously, with the advent of meter labels, some types of computer vended postage, and computerized postage that people can print from their own personal computers (called \"PC postage\" in the United States, these services have been offered by such companies as Stamps.com and Neopost). These indicia are not always postmarked by the post office but if put into the mailstream later than the date listed on them, they are postmarked about 50% of the time. Because of this, it is a bad idea to try to use the date on one's postage as a postmark.\nAn official example relating a numismatic item to postmarks occurred on April 13, 1976, when the U.S. issued a new two-dollar bill. People could buy the bills at face value, add a first class stamp (at the time 13 cents), and have the combination postmarked to show they were the first day of issue. Large numbers of these were produced and they remain common.\nInk colour.\nWhen the first universal postal system was started in the United Kingdom with its Penny Black, the postmark used red ink for contrast. This was not successful, and the stamp was changed to non-black colours so that the postmark could use black ink.\nThe majority of postmarks today are in black, with red (particularly in the United States with local post offices' handstamps) following, though sometimes they are in other colours. This is particularly true in the case of pictorial postmarks if the colour in question has some connection to the commemoration.\nDigital postmarks.\nIn 2004 the United States Postal Service announced plans to introduce first day digital colour postmarks to be used to cancel some first day covers for commemorative stamps in 2005 and this practice continued and was ongoing as of 2015.\nPostmark advertisement.\nSingapore Post offers a \"postmark advertising\" service which, strictly speaking, applies to the \"killer\" rather than the postmark. Hungarian Post Co., Ltd. offers a similar service.\nUnusual postmark techniques.\nThere have apparently been some postmarks producing a stereoscopic or \"3D\" effect where a special viewer is required. They are considered more as a novelty than as a practical postmark. The local post Hawai'i Post had a rubber-stamp postmark, parts of which were hand-painted. At Hideaway Island, Vanuatu, the Underwater Post Office has an embossed postmark.\nValuation of cancellations.\nThe study of postmarks is a specialized branch of philately called marcophily. It may bring added value to the stamps by their historical significance. Other parameters are the rarity and the attractiveness. In particular, the stamps issued by the Empire of Austria during the 1850\u20131867 period (the 5 issues before the Austro-Hungarian compromise of 1867), are collected for their variety and beauty. More details can be found in Valuation of cancellations of the Austrian Empire.\nA special or rare postmark can substantially add to the value of a stamp. For example, on a Victorian cover sold at auction for \u00a38,000 in 2019, a Two Penny Blue stamp \"was upstaged by\" a rare 'sun' date stamp. Also, in addition to everyday postmarks there are postmarks indicating the first day of issue of a particular stamp and pictorial cancellations commemorating local events, anniversaries, and the like' and slogan postmarks which advertise an event or pass information to the public (there has been a recent change to the term \"pictorial postmarks\" rather than \"pictorial cancellations\" by the USPS).\nThere are some examples of \"faked covers\" produced by philatelic forgers, most usually to increase their value, in which the postmark has been altered in some way; for example, by changing the date.\nPractical uses.\nThe postmark is often considered as an official confirmation that a cover (letter, packet, etc.) mailed item was mailed at a given location at a specific date. For example, the date of the postmark can be quite important. In the United States, the Internal Revenue Service will still consider income tax returns as filed on time though it receives them late if they are postmarked on time, and this date (with, perhaps, other proof of mailing), may have significance in the context of legal filings and proofs of service or of delivery (though in this case the date may viewed as \"on time\" if the date of the postmark is no more than one day after the date service is supposed to have been made). Postal voting ballots may be accepted in some places if postmarked by the date of the election, though other places require receipt by a certain deadline. Historically, postmarks, known as backstamps were also applied to the reverse side of a cover to confirm arrival at the post office on a specific date.\nDelivery postmarks.\nChina Post distinguishes delivery postmarks from posting postmarks. When a letter or a postcard is accepted into the care of a postal service, a black postmark is applied on the postage stamp, known as the \"posting postmark\" (). When a letter or a postcard is delivered, a red postmark is applied on the back side of the envelope or a blank region of the postcard, known as the \"delivery postmark\" ().\nSimilar marks.\nA postmark should not be confused with the killer which are lines, bars, etc. used to cancel a postage stamp. The killer acts as the cancellation, though the postmark can also serve this purpose. Neither should a postmark be confused with overprints generally, or pre-cancels (stamps that have been cancelled before the envelope or package to which they are affixed is submitted or deposited for acceptance into the mailstream, they most commonly have taken the form of a pre-printed city name on the stamp) specifically, which generally do not indicate a date.\nFlight cachets, more or less elaborate rubber-stamps on an envelope indicating on which flight (typically a first flight), a first flight cover has traveled via airmail, are in addition to the postmark and are not postmarks either.\nClubs.\nThere are many clubs devoted to the hobby of collecting postmarks. One of those clubs is the Post Mark Collector's Club, founded in 1946 and based in the USA. Another is the British Postmark Society, founded in 1958.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40030", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40030", "title": "Killer", "text": "A killer is someone or something that kills, such as a murderer or a serial killer. \nKiller may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "40031", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40031", "title": "1031", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1031 (MXXXI) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMiddle East.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40032", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40032", "title": "1032", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1032 (MXXXII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40033", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40033", "title": "1033", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1033 (MXXXIII) was a common year starting on Monday (the wikilink will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40034", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40034", "title": "1035", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1035 (MXXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40036", "revid": "1297379875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40036", "title": "1037", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1037 (MXXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40037", "revid": "45925219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40037", "title": "1038", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1038 (MXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40038", "revid": "7648670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40038", "title": "MBE", "text": "MBE may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "40039", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40039", "title": "1039", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1039 (MXXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40040", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40040", "title": "1041", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1041 (MXLI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40041", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40041", "title": "1042", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1042 (MXLII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIslamic world.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40042", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40042", "title": "1043", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1043 (MXLIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40043", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40043", "title": "1044", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1044 (MXLIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40044", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40044", "title": "1046", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1046 (MXLVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40045", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40045", "title": "1047", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1047 (MXLVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40046", "revid": "38717964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40046", "title": "1048", "text": "Calendar year\n \n1048 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40047", "revid": "1301857028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40047", "title": "1049", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1049 (MXLIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40048", "revid": "43682176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40048", "title": "Ross Powers", "text": "American snowboarder\nRoss Powers (born February 10, 1979) is an American world champion halfpipe snowboarder and Olympic gold medalist. Hailing from South Londonderry, Vermont, he is currently the director of the snowboarding program at the Stratton Mountain School in Stratton, Vermont.\nCareer.\nThough he originally rode at Stratton Mountain, Vermont, his home mountain is now Okemo, Vermont. Powers helps with the design of the Superpipe and also helped design the RossCross Family Terrain Park. Powers also runs a snowboard camp through Okemo. He led the U.S. sweep in the 2002 Winter Olympics men's halfpipe competition, one day after his 23rd birthday. This is the first time the Americans have swept a Winter Olympic event since the men's figure skaters in 1956. Powers claimed the gold medal with a score of 46.1.\nDuring his final run, Powers dropped in and aired out with an 18-foot method grab (a world record at that time), and followed up with two McTwists, a cab 720 indy grab, a frontside 720 indy grab and a switch frontside air.\nHe regularly competes in such events as the US and European Opens of Snowboarding, the Vans Triple Crown (now known simply as the Vans Cup), and the X-Games. During the 2004/2005 season, Ross won the Mt. Bachelor Grand Prix event and went on to be the overall champion for the series.\nIn 2007 Powers shifted gears and returned to racing in snowboard cross. He had his first world cup podium in that discipline in February 2009 at Sunday River, Maine, and again in December 2009 at Telluride, Colorado.\nIn 2010 Powers narrowly missed earning a spot on the US Olympic Team for snowboard cross. He finished the season with his SBX World Cup rank at 11th.\nIn April 2010 Powers was named director of the snowboarding program at The Stratton Mountain School (SMS), in Vermont. Powers is a 1997 graduate of SMS. His current snowboard sponsor is RAMP Sports.\nPowers resides in Stratton, Vermont, with his wife Marisa and daughters, Victoria and Meredith.\nVideo game appearances.\nPowers is a playable character in the video game \"Shaun Palmer's Pro Snowboarder\". and the video game Cool Boarders 4.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 2001 Powers founded the non-profit Ross Powers Foundation, a philanthropic organization that is dedicated to providing financial aid to promising athletes from all economic backgrounds. In 2010, the Foundation provided assistance to a number of up-and-coming snowboarders.\nIn 2010 The Ross Powers Foundation teamed up with Olympic gold medalist Michael Phelps and formed the Level Field Fund, a non-profit organization with the mission statement: \"The Level Field Fund strives to bridge gaps in funding for uniquely talented athletes, following the belief that opportunities to pursue excellence in sport should not be limited by an athlete's financial situation.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40049", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40049", "title": "1051", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1051 (MLI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40050", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40050", "title": "1052", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1052 (MLII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40052", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40052", "title": "1056", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1056 (MLVI) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40054", "revid": "30700052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40054", "title": "1059", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1059 (MLIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40055", "revid": "37297614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40055", "title": "Nordic combined", "text": "Winter sport combining the events of cross-country skiing and ski jumping\nNordic combined is a winter sport in which athletes compete in cross-country skiing and ski jumping. The Nordic combined at the Winter Olympics has been held since the first Winter Olympics in 1924, while the FIS Nordic Combined World Cup has been held since 1983. Many Nordic combined competitions use the Gundersen method, where placement in the ski jumping segment results in time (dis)advantages added to the contestant's total in the cross-country skiing segment (e.g. the ski jumping winner starts the cross-country skiing race at 00:00:00 while the one with the lowest jumping score starts with the longest time penalty).\nHistory.\nThe first major competition was held in 1892 in Oslo at the first Holmenkollen ski jump. King Olav V of Norway was an able jumper and competed in the Holmenkollen Ski Festival in the 1920s. Nordic combined was in the 1924 Winter Olympics and has been on the program ever since. Until the 1950s, the cross-country race was held first, followed by the ski jumping. This was reversed as the difference in the cross-country race tended to be too big to overcome in ski jumping. The sport has been dominated by the Norwegians, supported by the Finns. It was not until 1960 that the Nordic grip on this discipline was broken when West German Georg Thoma won the gold medal at the 1960 Winter Olympics.\nIt was decided in early-November 2016 that women's competitions were to be established on FIS-level starting during the second half of the 2010s with inclusion at world championships starting in 2021 and at the Olympic Winter Games in 2022. But Olympic debut for women in 2022 was cancelled in July 2018 by IOC who was asking for more development time for this discipline; they likely will be added in 2026. In May 2018 the FIS Congress made several decisions regarding the inclusion of women in the sport of Nordic Combined. At the 2022 Winter Olympics, Nordic combined is the only sport with exclusively men's events. As of 2019, women will be officially included in FIS Junior World Championships. It was confirmed that 2021 will mark the start of the FIS World Championship program for women (senior level). 2018 marks the second year of the Continental Cup program for women, which will include a total of 12 events.\nCompetition.\nFormats and variations currently used in the World Cup are:\nIncluded in the rules but currently not used in World Cup:\nEvents in the Olympics are: the sprint K120 individual, ski jumping K90 (70m), and Team/4x5km.\nHealth risks.\nBecause its a combination of cross country and ski jumping, the health risks in nordic combined, including injuries and the risk of eating disorders, are similar to them. The Swiss athlete Matthias L\u00f6tscher for example suffered serious spinal injuries and a paralysis of the legs after an accident at the hill of Kandersteg. His countryman Pascal M\u00fcller had eating disorders for a while.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40056", "revid": "50931343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40056", "title": "Ski jumping", "text": "Skiing winter sport\nSki jumping is a winter sport in which competitors aim to achieve the farthest jump after sliding down on their skis from a specially designed curved ramp. Along with jump length, competitor's aerial style and other factors also affect the final score. Ski jumping was first contested in Norway in the late 19th century, and later spread through Europe and North America in the early 20th century. Along with cross-country skiing, it constitutes the traditional group of Nordic skiing disciplines.\nThe ski jumping venue, commonly referred to as a \"hill\", consists of the jumping ramp (\"in-run\"), take-off table, and a landing hill. Each jump is evaluated according to the distance covered and the style performed. The distance score is related to the construction point (also known as the \"K-point\"), which is a line drawn in the landing area and serves as a \"target\" for the competitors to reach.\nThe score of each judge evaluating the style can reach a maximum of 20 points. The jumping technique has evolved over the years, from jumps with the skis parallel and both arms extended forward, to the \"V-style\", which is widely used today.\nSki jumping has been included at the Winter Olympics since 1924 and at the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships since 1925. Women's participation in the sport began in the 1990s, while the first women's event at the Olympics has been held in 2014. All major ski jumping competitions are organised by the International Ski Federation.\nSki jumping is not limited to winter conditions and can also be practiced during the summer months, thanks to specially designed facilities that simulate the snowy environment. In summer ski jumping, the in-run \u2014 which is the part of the hill where the jumper gains speed before takeoff \u2014 is constructed with tracks made from smooth porcelain materials.. The highest level summer competition is the FIS Ski Jumping Grand Prix, contested since 1994.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nLike most of the Nordic skiing disciplines, the first ski jumping competitions were held in Norway in the 19th century, although there is evidence of ski jumping in the late 18th century. The recorded origins of the first ski jump trace back to 1808, when Olaf Rye reached . Sondre Norheim, who is regarded as the \"father\" of the modern ski jumping, won the first-ever ski jumping competition with prizes, which was held in H\u00f8ydalsmo in 1866.\nThe first larger ski jumping competition was held on Husebyrennet hill in Oslo, Norway, in 1875. Due to its poor infrastructure and the weather conditions, in 1892 the event was moved to Holmenkollen, which is today still one of the main ski jumping events in the season.\nIn the late 19th century, Sondre Norheim and Nordic skier Karl Hovelsen immigrated to the United States and started developing the sport in that country. In 1924, ski jumping was featured at the 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix, France. The sport has been featured at every Olympics since.\nSki jumping was brought to Canada by Norwegian immigrant Nels Nelsen. Starting with his example in 1915 until late 1959, annual ski jumping competitions were held on Mount Revelstoke \u2014 the ski hill Nelsen designed \u2014 the longest period of any Canadian ski jumping venue. Revelstoke's was the biggest natural ski jump hill in Canada and internationally recognized as one of the best in North America. The length and natural grade of its hill made possible jumps of over \u2014the longest in Canada. It was also the only hill in Canada where world ski jumping records were set, in 1916, 1921, 1925, 1932, and 1933.\nIn 1935, the origins of ski flying began in Planica, Slovenia, where Josef Bradl became the first competitor in history to jump over . At the same venue, the first official jump over was achieved in 1994, when Toni Nieminen landed at 203 meters.\nIn 1962 in Zakopane, Poland, the normal hill event was introduced at the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships. Two years later, the normal hill event was included on the Olympic programme at the 1964 Winter Olympics. The team event was added later, at the 1988 Winter Olympics.\nRules.\nHills.\nA ski jumping hill is typically built on a steep natural slope. It consists of the jumping ramp (\"in-run\"), take-off table, and a landing hill. Competitors glide down from a common point at the top of the in-run, achieving considerable speeds at the take-off table, where they take off, carried by their own momentum. While airborne, they maintain an aerodynamic position with their bodies and skis, which allows them to maximise the length of their jump. The landing slope is constructed so that the jumper's trajectory is near-parallel with it, and the athlete's relative height to the ground is gradually lost, allowing for a gentle and safe landing. The landing space is followed by an \"out-run\", a substantial flat or counter-inclined area that permits the skier to safely slow down. The out-run area is fenced and surrounded by a public auditorium.\nThe slopes are classified according to the distance that the competitors travel in the air, between the end of the table and the landing. Each hill has a construction point (\"K-point\"), which serves as a \"target\" that the competitors should reach. The classification of the hills are as follows:\nScoring system.\nCompetitors are ranked according to a numerical score obtained by adding up components based on distance, style, inrun length (gate factor) and wind conditions. In the individual event, the scores from each skier's two competition jumps are combined to determine the winner.\nDistance score depends on the hill's K-point. For K-90 and K-120 competitions, the K-point is set at 90 meters and 120 meters, respectively. Competitors are awarded 60 points (normal and large hills) and 120 points (flying hills) if they land on the K-point. For every meter beyond or below the K-point, extra points are awarded or deducted; the typical value is 2 points per meter in small hills, 1.8 points in large hills and 1.2 points in ski flying hills. A competitor's distance is measured between the takeoff and the point where the feet came in full contact with the landing slope (for abnormal landings, touchpoint of one foot, or another body part is considered). Jumps are measured with accuracy of 0.5 meters for all competitions.\nDuring the competition, five judges are based in a tower to the side of the expected landing point. They can award up to 20 points each for jumping style, based on keeping the skis steady during flight, balance, optimal body position, and landing. The highest and lowest style scores are disregarded, with the remaining three scores added to the distance score.\nGate and wind factors were introduced by the 2009 rules, to allow fairer comparison of results for a scoring compensation for variable outdoor conditions. Aerodynamics and take-off speed are important variables that affect the jump length, and if weather conditions change during a competition, the conditions will not be the same for all competitors. Gate factor is an adjustment made when the inrun (or start gate) length is adjusted from the initial position in order to provide optimal take-off speed. Since higher gates result in higher take-off speeds, and therefore present an advantage to competitors, points are subtracted when the starting gate is moved up, and added when the gate is lowered. An advanced calculation also determines compensation points for the actual unequal wind conditions at the time of the jump; when there is back wind, points are added, and when there is front wind, points are subtracted. Wind speed and direction are measured at five different points based on average value, which is determined before every competition.\nIf two or more competitors finish the competition with the same number of points, they are given the same placing and receive same prizes.\nSki jumpers below the minimum safe body mass index are penalised with a shorter maximum ski length, reducing the aerodynamic lift they can achieve. These rules have been credited with stopping the most severe cases of underweight athletes, but some competitors still lose weight to maximise the distance they can achieve. In order to prevent an unfair advantage due to a \"sailing\" effect of the ski jumping suit, material, thickness and relative size of the suit are regulated.\nTechniques.\nEach jump is divided into four parts: in-run, take-off (jump), flight, and landing.\nBy using the V-style, firstly pioneered by Swedish ski jumper Jan Bokl\u00f6v in the mid-1980s, modern skiers are able to exceed the distance of the take-off hill by about 10% compared to the previous technique with parallel skis. Previous techniques included the Kongsberger technique, the Windisch technique, and the D\u00e4scher technique. Until the mid-1960s, the ski jumper came down the in-run of the hill with both arms pointing forwards. This changed when the Windisch technique was pioneered by Erich Windisch in the 1949 as a modification of the Kongsberger technique, further modified in the 1950s by the D\u00e4scher technique (parallel style), pioneered by Andreas D\u00e4scher. A lesser-used technique as of 2017 is the H-style which is essentially a combination of the parallel and V-styles, in which the skis are spread very wide apart and held parallel in an \"H\" shape. It is prominently used by Domen Prevc.\nSkiers are required to touch the ground in the Telemark landing style (), named after the Norwegian county of Telemark. This involves the landing with one foot in front of the other with knees slightly bent, mimicking the style of Telemark skiing. Failure to execute a Telemark landing leads to the deduction of style points, issued by the judges.\nMajor competitions.\nAll major ski jumping competitions are organised by the International Ski Federation.\nThe large hill ski jumping event was included at the Winter Olympic Games for the first time in 1924, and has been contested at every Winter Olympics since then. The normal hill event was added in 1964. Since 1992, the normal hill event is contested at the K-90 size hill; previously, it was contested at the K-60 hill. Women's debuted at the Winter Olympics in 2014.\nThe FIS Ski Jumping World Cup has been contested since the 1979\u201380 season. It runs between November and March every season, and consists of 25\u201330 competitions at most prestigious hills across Europe, United States and Japan. Competitors are awarded a fixed number of points in each event according to their ranking, and the overall winner is the one with most accumulated points. FIS Ski Flying World Cup is contested as a sub-event of the World Cup, and competitors collect only the points scored at ski flying hills from the calendar.\nThe ski jumping at the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships was first contested in 1925. The team event was introduced in 1982, while the women's event was first held in 2009.\nThe FIS Ski Flying World Championships was first contested in 1972 in Planica.\nThe Four Hills Tournament has been contested since the 1952\u201353 season. It is contested around the New Year's Day at four venues \u2013 two in Germany (Oberstdorf and Garmisch-Partenkirchen) and two in Austria (Innsbruck and Bischofshofen), which are also scored for the World Cup. Those events are traditionally held in a slightly different format than other World Cup events (first round is held as a knockout event between 25 pairs of jumpers), and the overall winner is determined by adding up individual scores from every jump.\nOther competitions organised by the International Ski Federation include the FIS Ski Jumping Grand Prix (held in summer), Continental Cup, FIS Cup, FIS Race, and Alpen Cup.\nWomen's participation.\nIn January 1863 in Trysil Municipality, Norway, at that time 16 years old Norwegian Ingrid Olsdatter Vestby, became the first-ever known female ski jumper, who participated in the competition. Her distance is not recorded.\nWomen began competing at the high level since the 2004\u201305 Continental Cup season. International Ski Federation organised three women's team events in this competition.\nWomen's made a premiere FIS Nordic World Ski Championships performance in 2009 in Liberec. American ski jumper Lindsey Van became the first world champion.\nIn the 2011\u201312 season, women competed for the first time in the World Cup. The first event was held on 3 December 2011 at Lysg\u00e5rdsbakken at normal hill in \nLillehammer, Norway. The first-ever female World Cup winner was Sarah Hendrickson, who also became the inaugural women's World Cup overall champion. Previously, women had only competed in Continental Cup seasons.\nIn the 2022\u201323 season, women competed for the first time ever in ski flying. The historic event was held in Vikersundbakken in Vikersund on 19 March 2023. It was won by Slovenian jumper Ema Klinec.\nOlympic Games.\nIn 2006, the International Ski Federation proposed that women could compete at the 2010 Winter Olympics, but the proposal was rejected by the IOC because of the low number of athletes and participating countries at the time.\nA group of fifteen competitive female ski jumpers later filed a suit against the Vancouver Organizing Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games on the grounds that it violated the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms since men were competing. The suit failed, with the judge ruling that the situation was not governed by the charter.\nA further milestone was reached when women's ski jumping was included as part of the 2014 Winter Olympics at normal hill event. The first Olympic champion was Carina Vogt.\nRecord jumps.\nSince 1936, when the first jump beyond was made, all world records in the sport have been made in the discipline of ski flying. On 30 March 2025 the official world record for the longest ski jump was set at , by Domen Prevc at Letalnica bratov Gori\u0161ek in Planica, Slovenia, and is the longest jump ever measured in an official competition. In a non-official event near Akureyri on Iceland, in April 2024 Ry\u014dy\u016b Kobayashi achieved a distance of after 10 seconds in the air and landing smoothly. It was an unofficial world record which is not being counted as a ski flying world record by the FIS.\nNika Prevc holds the women's world record at 236 metres (774 feet) which was set on 14 March 2025 in Vikersundbakken.\nThe lists below show the progression of world records through history at 50-meter milestones. Only official results are listed, invalid jumps are not included.\nPerfect-score jumps.\nThose who have managed to show a perfect jump, which means that all five judges attributed the maximum style score of 20 points for their jumps. Kazuyoshi Funaki, Sven Hannawald and Wolfgang Loitzl were attributed 4x20 (plus another 19.5) style score points for their second jump, thus receiving nine times the maximum score of 20 points within one competition. Kazuyoshi Funaki is the only one in history who achieved this more than once. So far only eight jumpers are recorded to have achieved this score in total of eleven times:\nHealth risks.\nSki jumping includes the risk of crashes, who can end up with serious injuries like bone fractures (Steinar Br\u00e5ten, Masahiro Akimoto, John Lockyer, Ulrike Gr\u00e4\u00dfler) or concussions (Simon Ammann, Thomas Morgenstern, Eva Pinkelnig, Sondre Ringen). Paul Ausserleitner was one athlete among others, who died after an accident on the hill. Pekka Salo from Finland, Nicholas Fairall, Lukas M\u00fcller and the Swiss Nordic combined skier Matthias L\u00f6tscher suffered paralyses after crashes. Other jumpers with chronic disabilities after failed jumps are Rolf \u00c5ge Berg and Thomas Diethart.\nAfter the V-style was established, the period of flying became more relevant in relation to the take-off. Therefore, its very useful for nowadays ski jumpers to have a very low body weight. The problem was firstly published by Stephan Z\u00fcnd, who suffered from anorexia nervosa. Other cases were Christian Moser and Norwegian Henriette Smeby. Sven Hannawald was suspected to have the same disorder. Janne Ahonen also reported in his autobiografie about the strict diet program. In the mid-1990s the Austrian Ski Federation doctor Peter Baumgartl talked about having heard of cases in the German and Norwegian team. In late 1996 Dieter Thoma talked in an interview about trainers putting athletes under pressure, to gain a low body weight. In 2004 the FIS announced the rule, that the ski has to be cutted, when an athlete has a BMI under 20 (today under 21). Originally its was just obligate for men, but is nowadays used for both genders. The rule's efficience is often doubted, because the cutted ski can be compensated with a low body weight and the modern ski bindings. Actual and former ski jumpers, who talked critically about the topic, are for example Andreas Felder, \u00d8yvind Berg, Reinhard He\u00df, Frank L\u00f6ffler, Michael M\u00f6llinger, Janne Ahonen, Michael Neumayer, Martin Schmitt, Anton Innauer, Alexander Pointner, Andreas Bauer, Maren Lundby, Lindsey Van, Christoph Eugen, Andreas Goldberger, Jens Wei\u00dfflog, Simon Ammann, Gregor Deschwanden, Bor Pavlov\u010di\u010d, Anders Jacobsen, Christian Meyer, Thomas Thurnbichler, Alexander St\u00f6ckl, Sven Hannawald, Dominik Peter, Silje Opseth and Katharina Schmid. Gregor Deschwanden and Maren Lundby suggested a fixed lower bound for the BMI, in 2025 Silje Opseth also proposed a change of the current rule. After his retirement in 2006, Daniel Forfang had stood in the focus of a discussion about the low body weight in ski jumping and the unsatisfying influence of the BMI-rule. In 2012 the then ski flying world record holder Johan Remen Evensen ended up his career because of weight problems. In the year of 2022 the ski federation of Poland was criticized for stopping the financial support of female jumpers with an BMI above 21. In this context the Polish jumper Anna Twardosz talked openly about suffering from depressions and bulimia nervosa, Kamila Karpiel took a brake of almost two years because of the rule. Too small amount of food can cause the relative energy deficiency in sport (for example Maren Lundby) and, in the cases of female jumpers, dysmenorrhea. A critical observer from science is Jorunn Sundgot-Borgen.\nModern ski jumping is notourious for an increasing number of knee injuries, especially of the cruciate ligament. The ski bindings and the tabs under the jumping shoes (respectively the tabs' size) are often named as the reason, for example by Mario Stecher, Lukas M\u00fcller, former equipment controller Sepp Gratzer, Werner Schuster, Johan Remen Evensen, Eirin Maria Kvandal and Stefan Hula Jr.. The time before, crashes were usually considered as the reason for injuries. A popular athlete of the parallel-style-era, who had to end his career due to knee problems, was Walter Steiner.\nAthletes like Sven Hannawald and Thomas Morgenstern also talked openly about the mental pressure of the sport. Hannawald retired because of occupational burnout.\nSee also List of ski flying accidents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40057", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40057", "title": "Freestyle skiing", "text": "Competitive sport\nFreestyle skiing is a skiing discipline comprising aerials, moguls, cross, half-pipe, slopestyle and big air as part of the Winter Olympics. It can consist of a skier performing aerial flips and spins and can include skiers sliding rails and boxes on their skis. Known as \"hot-dogging\" in the early 1970s, it is also commonly referred to as freeskiing, jibbing, as well as many other names, around the world.\nHistory.\nSki acrobatics have been exhibited since 1906. Aerial skiing was popularized by Jackson Fitzgerald at the 1908 National Championship Ski Jumping Tournament in Duluth, Minnesota, in the 1930s by Olle Rimfors, and again in the 1950s by Olympic gold medalist Stein Eriksen. Early US competitions were held in the mid-1960s.\nIn 1969, Waterville Valley Ski Area in New Hampshire, formed the first freestyle instruction program, making the resort the birthplace of freestyle skiing. The following year, Corcoran and Doug Pfeiffer, organized the first National Open Championships of Freestyle Skiing on the Sunnyside trails. In 1971, Waterville Valley Hosted the first Professional Freestyle Skiing Competition, which attracted freestyle skiing legends to Waterville Valley. Some of these competitors, such as Wayne Wong, Floyd Wilkie, and George Askevold, stayed at Waterville Valley as coaches of the first Freestyle Ski Team. \nInternational Ski Federation (FIS) recognized freestyle skiing as a sport in 1979 and brought in new regulations regarding certification of athletes and jump techniques in an effort to curb the dangerous elements of the competitions. The first FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup was staged in 1980 and the first FIS Freestyle World Ski Championships took place in 1986 in Tignes, France. Freestyle skiing was a demonstration event at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary. Mogul skiing was added as an official medal event at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, and the aerials event was added for the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer. In 2011, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) approved both halfpipe and slopestyle freeskiing events to be added to the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.\nForms of freestyle skiing.\nAerial skiing.\nAerialists ski off 2-4 meter jumps, that propel them up to 6 meters in the air (which can be up to 20 meters above the landing height, given the landing slope). Once in the air, aerialists perform multiple flips and twists before landing on a 34 to 39-degree inclined landing hill about 30 meters in length. The top male aerialists can currently perform triple back flips with up to four or five twists.\nAerial skiing is a judged sport, and competitors receive a score based on jump takeoff (20%), jump form (50%) and landing (30%). A degree of difficulty (DOD) is then factored in for a total score. Skiers are judged on a cumulative score of LIMA two jumps. These scores do not generally carry over to the next round.\nAerialists train for their jumping maneuvers during the summer months by skiing on specially constructed water ramps and landing in a large swimming pool. An example of this is the Utah Olympic Park training facility. A water ramp consists of a wooden ramp covered with a special plastic mat that when lubricated with sprinklers allows an athlete to ski down the ramp towards a jump. The skier then skis off the wooden jump and lands safely in a large swimming pool. A burst of air is sent up from the bottom of the pool just before landing to break up the surface tension of the water, thus softening the impact of the landing. Skiers sometimes reinforce the skis that they use for water-ramping with 6mm of fiberglass or cut holes in the front and back in order to soften the impact when landing properly on their skis.\nSummer training also includes training on trampolines, diving boards, and other acrobatic or gymnastic training apparatus.\nMogul skiing.\nMoguls are a series of bumps on a trail formed when skiers push the snow into mounds or piles as they execute short-radius turns. Moguls can also be formed deliberately, by piling mounds of snow.\nIn competitions, athletes are judged on their technique as well as on their speed by mastering the bumps in a calm yet aggressive way. Usually there are two jumps. In the early days the location was chosen by the competitors. Since the mid-1980s those jumps have become part of the official slope. While at the beginning only upright jumps were allowed, from the mid-1990s onward flips were added as an option. \nMoguls has become part of the Olympics since 1992. Canadian athlete Alexandre Bilodeau has won the Gold Medal twice: 2010 and 2014.\nSki ballet (Acroski).\nSki ballet, later renamed acroski (or \"acro\"), was a competitive discipline in the formative years of freestyle skiing. Competitors devised routines lasting 3 to 5 minutes and executed to music. The routines consisted of spins, jumps, and flips on a prepared flat course. For a short period of time (in the 1980s) there was also pair ballet competitions, a variation of ballet, where two people performed tricks that not only included spins, jumps and leg crossing but also lifts and sychronic movements and was similar to ice dancing. The routines were scored by judges who assessed the choreography, technical difficulty, and mastery of skills demonstrated by the competitors. Early innovators in the sport were American Jan Bucher, Park Smalley, Swiss Conny Kissling and German Hermann Reitberger. The first skier who performed a one handed pole flip in a world cup competition was German Richard Schabl in the early 1980s. Acro ski was part of the demonstration at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary. The International Ski Federation ceased all formal competition of this event after 2000 because they focused on both aerials (1990) and moguls (1992) for making it an Olympic discipline.\nSki cross.\nSki cross is based on the snowboarding boardercross. Despite it being a timed racing event, it is often considered part of freestyle skiing because it incorporates terrain features traditionally found in freestyle.\nHalfpipe skiing.\nHalfpipe skiing is the sport of riding snow skis on a half-pipe. Competitors gradually ski to the end of the pipe by doing flips and tricks. It became an Olympic event for the first time at the 2014 Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia.\nSlopestyle.\nIn slopestyle, athletes ski or snowboard down a course including a variety of obstacles including rails, jumps, and other terrain park features. Points are scored for amplitude, originality and quality of tricks. Twin-tip skis are used and are particularly useful if the skier lands backwards. Slopestyle tricks fall mainly into four categories: spins, grinds, grabs and flips. Slopestyle became an Olympic event, in both skiing and snowboarding forms, at the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.\nEquipment.\nTwin-tip skis are used in events such as slopestyle and halfpipe. Mogul skis are used in moguls and sometimes in aerials. Specially designed racing skis are used in ski cross. Ski bindings took a major design change to include plate bindings mounted to the bottom of the skiers boot to allow for multi-directional release. Ski poles are a staple in the all aspects of freestyle skiing, however, slopestyle athletes have more recently opted to ski without them in order to free their hands for grabs and other personal preferences in their riding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40058", "revid": "47673109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40058", "title": "Short-track speed skating", "text": "Competitive skating on an ice hockey rink\nShort-track speed skating is a form of competitive ice speed skating. In competitions, multiple skaters (typically between four and six) skate on an oval ice track with a length of . The rink itself is long by wide, which is the same size as an Olympic-sized figure skating rink and an international-sized ice hockey rink. Related sports include long-track speed skating and inline speed skating.\nHistory.\nShort-track skating developed from speed skating events that were held with mass starts. This form of speed skating was mainly practised in the United States and Canada, as opposed to the international form (derived from Europe), where athletes skated in pairs. At the 1932 Winter Olympics, speed skating events were conducted in the mass start form. Competitions in North America tended to be held indoors, for example in Madison Square Garden, New York, and therefore on shorter tracks than was usual for outdoor skating.\nIn 1967, the International Skating Union (ISU) adopted short-track speed skating, although it did not organize international competitions until 1976. World Championships in short-track speed skating have been officially held since 1981, although events held in 1976\u20131980 under different names have since received the status of World Championships retrospectively. The name of the competition was changed several times before it was eventually titled the \"World Short Track Speed Skating Championships\" in 1989; the championships are now held annually.\nShort-track speed skating was introduced as a demonstration sport at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Canada. It was upgraded to a full Olympic sport in 1992 and has been part of the Winter Olympics ever since. There were only four short-track events in the 1992 Winter Games, but the program was expanded to include six events in 1994 and 1998, and finally eight events in the 2002 Winter Games. The events are the same for both men and women: 500 meters, 1000 meters, 1500 meters, plus the relay event (5000 meters for men, 3000 meters for women). Since the 2018\u201319 World Cup season, a 2000-meter mixed-team relay was added, and debuted in the 2022 Winter Olympics. A 3,000-meter super-final event is included in the European Championships, but this is not currently part of the Olympic short-track program.\nRules.\nSkaters who commit one of the following offenses risk immediate disqualification from a race and having their times rendered invalid and being suspended from playing for a short time.\nIn relay races, each team has four skaters, who can take turns freely by tagging or pushing. A skater may be relayed at any time except during the last two laps. Usually, the outgoing skater pushes the incoming skater to help the teammate to gain speed. If a team member falls, the next person needs to be tagged. A relay team would be penalized if they committed the following:\nNotable skaters.\nThe following is the list of athletes who are Individual gold medalist at the Olympic Winter Games or Overall World Champion and have won Olympic Winter Games or Overall World Championships at least three times.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40059", "revid": "49194911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40059", "title": "Centre", "text": ""}
{"id": "40060", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40060", "title": "1197", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1197 (MCXCVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40061", "revid": "3965251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40061", "title": "1198", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1198 (MCXCVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40062", "revid": "48497246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40062", "title": "1199", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1199 (MCXCIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40063", "revid": "39952955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40063", "title": "1231", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1231 (MCCXXXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40064", "revid": "1315295394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40064", "title": "1230", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1230 (MCCXXX) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.]\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBirths.\n\"Approximate date\"\nDeaths.\n\"Approximate date\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40065", "revid": "48497246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40065", "title": "1233", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1233 (MCCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40066", "revid": "18828855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40066", "title": "1235", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1235 (MCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40067", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40067", "title": "1236", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1236 (MCCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40068", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40068", "title": "1237", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1237 (MCCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nCities and Towns.\nIn England the central tower of Lincoln Cathedral collapses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40069", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40069", "title": "1239", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1239 (MCCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40071", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40071", "title": "1131", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1131 (MCXXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40072", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40072", "title": "1132", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1132 (MCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40073", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40073", "title": "1133", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1133 (MCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40074", "revid": "43056943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40074", "title": "1134", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1134 (MCXXXIV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40075", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40075", "title": "1136", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1136 (MCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40076", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40076", "title": "1137", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1137 (MCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40077", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40077", "title": "1138", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1138 (MCXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40078", "revid": "88149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40078", "title": "1140", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1140 (MCXL) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40079", "revid": "5831124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40079", "title": "1145", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1145 (MCXLV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40080", "revid": "50664898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40080", "title": "1148", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1148 (MCXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40081", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40081", "title": "1149", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1149 (MCXLIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40082", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40082", "title": "1151", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1151 (MCLI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40083", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40083", "title": "1150", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1150 (MCL) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40084", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40084", "title": "1159", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1159 (MCLIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40085", "revid": "1303766288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40085", "title": "1171", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1171 (MCLXXI) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40086", "revid": "47965501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40086", "title": "1174", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1174 (MCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar, the 1174th year of the Common Era (CE) and \"Anno Domini\" (AD) designations, the 174th year of the 2nd millennium, the 74th year of the 12th century, and the 5th year of the 1170s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40087", "revid": "32206216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40087", "title": "1175", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1175 (MCLXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40088", "revid": "45191934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40088", "title": "1177", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1177 (MCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40089", "revid": "38741888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40089", "title": "1178", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1178 (MCLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar, the 1178th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 178th year of the 2nd millennium, the 78th year of the 12th century, and the 9th year of the 1170s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40091", "revid": "8019410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40091", "title": "1182", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1182 (MCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40092", "revid": "50778560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40092", "title": "1183", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1183 (MCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40093", "revid": "32247312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40093", "title": "1184", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1184 (MCLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40094", "revid": "8019410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40094", "title": "1185", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1185 (MCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40095", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40095", "title": "1186", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1186 (MCLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40096", "revid": "48526891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40096", "title": "History of Bangladesh", "text": "The history of Bangladesh dates back over four millennia to the Chalcolithic period. The region's early history was characterized by a succession of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms and empires that fought for control over the Bengal region. Islam arrived in the 8th century and gradually became dominant from the early 13th century with conquests led by Bakhtiyar Khalji and the activities of Sunni missionaries like Shah Jalal. Muslim rulers promoted the spread of Islam by building mosques across the region. From the 14th century onward, Bengal was ruled by the Bengal Sultanate, founded by Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, who established an individual currency. The Bengal Sultanate expanded under rulers like Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah, leading to economic prosperity and military dominance, with Bengal being referred to by Europeans as the richest country to trade with. The region later became a part of the Mughal Empire, and according to historian C. A. Bayly, it was probably the empire's wealthiest province.\nFollowing the decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 1700s, Bengal became a semi-independent state under the Nawabs of Bengal, ultimately led by Siraj ud-Daulah. It was later conquered by the British East India Company after the Battle of Plassey in 1757. Bengal played a crucial role in the Industrial Revolution in Britain, but also faced significant deindustrialization. The Bengal Presidency was established during British rule.\nThe borders of modern Bangladesh were established with the partition of Bengal between India and Pakistan during the Partition of India in August 1947, when the region became East Pakistan as part of the newly formed State of Pakistan following the end of the British rule in the region. The Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence in March 1971 led to the nine-month-long Bangladesh Liberation War, which culminated in the emergence of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. Independence was declared in 1971.\nSince gaining independence, Bangladesh has faced political instability, economic reconstruction, and social transformation. The country experienced military coups and authoritarian rule, notably under General Ziaur Rahman and General Hussain Muhammad Ershad. The restoration of parliamentary democracy in the 1990s saw power alternate between the Awami League, and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. In recent decades, Bangladesh has achieved significant economic growth, emerging as one of the world's fastest-growing economies, driven by its garment industry, remittances, and infrastructure development. However, it continues to grapple with political instability, human rights issues, and the impact of climate change. The return of the Awami League to power in 2009 under Sheikh Hasina's leadership saw economic progress but criticisms of authoritarianism. Bangladesh has played a critical role in addressing regional issues, including the Rohingya refugee crisis, which has strained its resources and highlighted its humanitarian commitments.\nAncient period.\nPrehistoric Bengal.\nIt is believed that there were movements of Indo-Aryans, Dravidians and Mongoloids, including a people called Vanga, into Bengal. There is weak evidence for a prehistoric human presence in the region. There is scant evidence of a human presence during the Neolithic and Chalcolithic eras. This could be because of the shifts in the rivers' courses. The Bengali climate and geography is not suitable for tangible archaeological remains. Due to lack of stones the early humans in Bengal probably used materials such as wood and bamboo that could not survive in the environment. South Asian archaeologists have tended to focus on other parts of the subcontinent. Archaeologists interested in Bengal have focused on more recent history.\nWest Bengal holds the earliest evidence of settled agrarian societies.\nAgricultural success gave ground in the fifth century BCE for a stationary culture and the emergence of towns, cross-sea trade and the earliest polities. Archaeologists have uncovered a port at Wari-Bateshwar which traded with Ancient Rome and Southeast Asia. The archaeologists have discovered coinage, pottery, iron artifacts, bricked road and a fort in Wari-Bateshwar. The findings suggest that the area was an important administrative hub, which had industries such as iron smelting and valuable stone beads. The site shows widespread use of clay. The clay, and bricks, were used to build walls. The most famous terracotta plaques, made by clay, are from Chandraketurgah and depicts deities and scenes of nature and ordinary life. The early coinage discovered in War-Bateshwar and Chandraketugarh (West Bengal, India) depict boats.\nArchaeological excavations in Bangladesh revealed evidences of the Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW or NBP) culture of the Indian subcontinent (c. 700\u2013200\u00a0BC), which was an Iron Age culture developed beginning around 700\u00a0BC and peaked from c. 500\u2013300\u00a0BC, coinciding with the emergence of 16 great states or mahajanapadas in Northern India, and the subsequent rise of the Mauryan Empire.\nWell developed towns had emerged by 300 BCE such as Tamralipti (present-day Tamluk, West Bengal, India), Mahasthan and Mainamati. Instead of the seaside, main towns sprang up by the riversides. Mahasthan contains the earliest piece of writing in Bangladesh, a stone inscription. It indicates that the site was an important town in the Maurya empire. Mahasthan is believed to have then been a provincial centre. The inscription, in Prakrit, apparently contains a command to stock up supplies in case of an emergency. The inscription is called the Mahasthan Brahmi Inscription. Bengal was the eastern frontier of the Mauryan empire. Western Bengal with its port of Tamralipti achieved importance under the Mauryas.\nA prominent view in scholarship is that the Mauryan and Gupta empires exercised authority over most parts of the Bengal delta. The incomplete evidence which exists suggests that Bengal's western rather than eastern regions were parts of larger empires. The ancient zones in Bengal were the Bhagirathi-Hooghly basin, Harikela, Samatata, Vanga and Varendra. Vanga is believed to be central Bengal, Harikela and Samitata were apparently Bengal's eastern zones and Varendra was northern Bengal. The names of sites indicate that Tibeto-Burman, Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian languages were spoken by the majority of people. Indo-European languages became prominent from 400 BCE.\nThe Vanga Kingdom was a powerful seafaring nation of Ancient Bengal. They had overseas trade relations with Java, Sumatra and Siam (modern day Thailand). According to Mahavamsa, the Vanga prince Vijaya Singha conquered Lanka (modern day Sri Lanka) in 544\u00a0BC and gave the name \"Sinhala\" to the country. Bengali people migrated to the Maritime Southeast Asia and Siam (in modern Thailand), establishing their own settlement there.\nGangaridai/Nanda Empire.\nThough north and west Bengal were part of the empire, southern Bengal thrived and became powerful with her overseas trades. In 326\u00a0BCE, with the invasion of Alexander the Great the region again came to prominence. The Greek and Latin historians suggested that Alexander the Great withdrew from India anticipating the valiant counter-attack of the Gangaridai empire that was located in the Bengal region. Alexander, after the meeting with his officer, Coenus, was convinced that it was better to return. Diodorus Siculus mentions Gangaridai to be the most powerful empire in India. The allied forces of the Nanda Empire/Gangaridai empire and Prasioi(region inside Nanda empire)were preparing a massive counter-attack against the forces of Alexander on the banks of the Ganges. Gangaridai, according to the Greek accounts, kept on flourishing at least up to the 1st century CE.\nThe Greeco-Roman sources description of Gangaridai matches with Nanda empire. \nOne account of the origins of the Nanda's, are them being represented as the lord of both \"Prasioi and the Gangaridai\" or of Gangaridai alone. The description of Prasioi was a general name for the people of Eastern India, so the specific mention of Gangaridai attaches significance. The importance of Gangaridai or the Vanga people (Lower Bengal) may be explained by the suggestion of the Nanda dynasty belonging to them.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nBengal was left on its own after Mauryan power declined. Little is known of the period after that although parts of Bengal were probably under the Pataliputra-based Sunga dynasty. During this time Pundra was still a significant Buddhist location. Local rulers retained power while paying tribute to the Gupta Empire in the 300s and 400s. The Bengal delta became the kingdom of Samatata; its hub near the contemporary Chandpur. A Gupta inscription indicates that the Gupta empire possessed influence in Samatata without ruling it directly. Bengal remained a frontier despite its rare associations with the Indian heartland. Several dynasties changed during the next few centuries. While not much information is available about them, plates and other forms of evidence obtained from the Comilla district indicate that Gopachandra ruled the area in the early 500s. The Khargas became rulers in the next century. They were followed by the Deva dynasty, Harikela kingdom, Chandras and the Varmans. They were based in different sites of the Comilla district and Dhaka district's Vikrampur. Around that time, Bengalis first ruled in Varendra. Gaur was ruled by Sasanka in the early 600s. He was based in Karnasuvarna in modern-day Murshidabad district. Contemporary Chinese reports and coinage suggest that he was a firm Shaivite who was vehemently opposed to Buddhism. Opposition to Buddhism and a commitment to Brahminism apparently continued under the Sura dynasty, founded by Adisura around 700 CE. Around the middle of the eighth century a firm Buddhist, Gopala, assumed power in Bengal, possibly supported by Buddhist chiefs who were opposed to the effects of the Suras and Sasanka's faithful Brahmanism. During this time, the kingdoms of the Bay of Bengal were trading with the nations of nearby South Asia and Southeast Asia, thereby exporting Buddhism into Sri Lanka to the south and both Hinduism and Buddhism into Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines to the east.\nGauda Kingdom.\nBy the 6th century, the Gupta Empire, which ruled over the northern Indian subcontinent had largely broken up. Eastern Bengal splintered into the kingdoms of Vanga, Samatata and Harikela while the Gauda kings rose in the west with their capital at Karnasuvarna (near modern Murshidabad). Shashanka, a vassal of the last Gupta Emperor proclaimed independence and unified the smaller principalities of Bengal (Gaur, Vanga, Samatata). He vied for regional power with Harshavardhana in northern India after treacherously murdering Harsha's elder brother Rajyavardhana. Harsha's continuous pressure led to the gradual weakening of the Gauda kingdom founded by Shashanka and finally ended with his death. With the overthrow of Manava (his son), Bengal descended into a period marked by disunity and intrude once more.\nPala Empire.\nThe Pala Empire ruled Bengal until the middle of the twelfth century, expanded Bengali power to its farthest extent and supported Buddhism. It was the first independent Buddhist dynasty of Bengal. The name \"Pala\" ( \"pal\") means \"protector\" and was used as an ending to the names of all Pala monarchs. The Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism. Gopala was the first ruler from the dynasty. He came to power in 750 in Gaur, after being elected by a group of feudal chiefs. He reigned from 750 to 770 and consolidated his position by extending his control over all of Bengal. He was succeeded by Dharmapala. The Palas promoted Buddhism and opposed Brahmanism. They provided support to Buddhist universities in Vikramashila and Nalanda. During the Pala dynasty the Vajrayana was developed in Bengal and introduced to Tibet. The Palas patronised the arts.\nThe empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala. Dharmapala extended the empire into the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once more for the control of the subcontinent. Devapala, successor of Dharmapala, expanded the empire considerably. The Pala inscriptions credit him with extensive conquests in hyperbolic language. The Badal pillar inscription of his successor Narayana Pala states that he became the suzerain monarch or Chakravarti of the whole tract of Northern India bounded by the Vindhyas and the Himalayas. It also states that his empire extended up to the two oceans (presumably the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal). It also claims that Devpala defeated Utkala (present-day Orissa), the Hunas, the Dravidas, the Kamarupa (present-day Assam), the Kambojas and the Gurjaras. Historian B. P. Sinha wrote that these claims about Devapala's victories are exaggerated, but cannot be dismissed entirely. Besides, the neighbouring kingdoms of Rashtrakutas and the Gurjara-Pratiharas were weak at the time, which might have helped him extend his empire. Devapala is also believed to have led an army up to the Indus river in Punjab. Devapala shifted the capital from Monghyr to Pataliputra. Although they were Bengali the dynasty considered the Ganges valley as the centre of its power.\nThe dynasty's power declined after Devapala's death. During the rule of Mahipala I the South Indian Chola dynasty challenged the Palas.\nDuring the later part of Pala rule, Rajendra Chola I of the Chola Empire frequently invaded Bengal from 1021 to 1023 to get Ganges water and in the process, succeeded in humbling the rulers and acquiring considerable booty. The rulers of Bengal who were defeated by Rajendra Chola were Dharmapal, Ranasur and Govindachandra of the Candra Dynasty who might have been feudatories under Mahipala of the Pala Dynasty. The invasion by the south Indian ruler Vikramaditya VI of the Western Chalukya Empire brought his countrymen from Karnataka into Bengal which explains the southern origin of the Sena Dynasty. Around the 1150s the Palas lost power to the Senas.\nChandra dynasty.\nThe Chandra dynasty were a family who ruled over the kingdom of Harikela in eastern Bengal (comprising the ancient lands of Harikela, Vanga and Samatata) for roughly a century and a half from the beginning of the 10th century CE. Their empire also encompassed Vanga and Samatata, with Srichandra expanding his domain to include parts of Kamarupa. Their empire was ruled from their capital, Vikrampur (modern Munshiganj) and was powerful enough to militarily withstand the Pala Empire to the north-west. The last ruler of the Chandra Dynasty, Govindachandra, was defeated by the south Indian Emperor Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty in the 11th century.\nSena dynasty.\nThe Sena dynasty started around 1095 but only finally defeated the Palas around 1150. They apparently originated in Karnataka. Vijayasena took control of northern and western Bengal, removed the Palas from the former regions and based his rule in Nadia. The greatest ruler from the dynasty was Lakshmanasena. He established the dynasty's writ in Orissa and Benares. In 1202, Ikhtiyarrudin Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khalji took Nadia from the Senas, already having taken Bihar. Lakshmanasena left for Vikrampur in southeastern Bengal. His sons inherited the dynasty, which came to an end around 1245 because of feudal revolts and Muslim pressure.\nThe dynasty has been staunchly Brahminist and had attempted to restore Brahminism to Bengal. They also established the system of \"kulin\"ism in Bengal; through which higher caste males could take lower caste brides and enhance the status of these women's children. Some postulate that the dynasty's suppression of Buddhism became a cause for the conversions to Islam, especially in eastern Bengal.\nDeva Kingdom.\nThe Deva Kingdom was a Hindu dynasty of medieval Bengal that ruled over eastern Bengal after the collapse Sena Empire. The capital of this dynasty was Bikrampur in present-day Munshiganj District of Bangladesh. The inscriptional evidences show that his kingdom was extended up to the present-day Comilla-Noakhali-Chittagong region. A later ruler of the dynasty \"Ariraja-Danuja-Madhava\" Dasharathadeva extended his kingdom to cover much of East Bengal.\nLate Middle Ages.\nMuslim rule in the region was inaugurated with the taking of Nadia in 1202 (Ghurid invasion of Bengal). Initially, Bengal was administered by the Delhi Sultanate's governors, then by independent sultanates and then was under the rule of the Mughal empire. While Muslims had advanced into Sindh in the 700s, it was in Afghanistan that the ultimate Muslim conquest of South Asia originated from, starting with the raids by Mahmud of Ghazni in the early 11th century. The Afghanistan-based Ghurids replaced the Ghaznavids and they started expanded into the Ganges region. As part of this eastward expansion Ikhtiyaruddin Muhammad Bakhtiar Khalji defeated the Palas in Bihar and in 1202 was victorious over the Senas in Nadia. In 1206, the Delhi Sultanate was created. It was not a true dynasty but the rulers was known as Mamluk. The Sultanate continued till 1290. The conquest of Nadia did not entail swift conversions to Islam. The authority of the Senas persisted in Vikrampur till 1245 and a large part of eastern Bangladesh had neither been conquered nor converted.\nFour dynasties based in Delhi succeeded the Slave dynasty. The Khaljis ruled from 1290 to 1320. The Tughluq dynasty's rule lasted until 1413. Sayyid rule ran from 1414 to 1451. The Lodhi dynasty ruled in the 1451-1526 period. But the writ of the Delhi Sultanate had been weak in its outer regions and Bengal like other similar areas turned into an independent region. Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah became the ruler of independent Bengal in 1342 and his dynasty ruled until 1486, barring a short interlude. He had come to power after a Bengali revolt against the Tughluq dynasty's governor. Shamsuddin drove up the Ganges to contest Tughluq rule. The Tughluqs, in return drove Ilyas Shah out of Pandua into eastern Bengal. Shamsuddin reclaimed Pandua and continued ruling Bengal. Shamsuddin's heir repelled Tughluq incursions and like his predecessor expanded the dynasty's authority into Bihar.\nThe dynasty constructed grand buildings in Pandua. They built India's biggest mosque, the Adina mosque. Richard Eaton cites diplomatic accounts about the grandeur of Pandua's buildings. Eaton observes the influence of both Islamic and pre-Islamic Persian courts. Hindu landlords possessed a large quantity of land even under the Muslim rulers. The Hindu domination was opposed by the Muslim leadership, exemplified by the Faraizi campaign and leaders like Titu Mir in the 1800s.\nWhen the dynasty's third ruler died in 1410 there was a conflict over the throne. Raja Ganesh, who was a Hindu feudal, used the successorship conflict to seize control of Bengal. He repelled an incursion on Bengal by the Jaunpur sultanate in north India. His son, Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah who embraced Islam, and then his grandson ruled after him. In 1433, the latter was assassinated and the Ilyas Shahi dynasty was restored.\nThe dynasty began importing Abyssinian slaves. This population became more significant. They became so important that in 1486 an Abyssinian, Barbak Shahzada, seized power from Jalaluddin Fateh Shah. Barbak Shahzada's dynasty was short, lasting for the next seven years. The last Abyssinian ruler, Shamsuddin Muzaffar Shah, lost power to the Arab principal minister, Alauddin Husain.\nThe initiation in 1493 of the Hussain Shahi dynasty brought a period which has been considered Bengal's golden age. The government was genuinely Bengali and while land ownership remained concentrated in Hindu hands, both religious groups had pivotal roles in the government. The sultanate expanded to acquire Cooch Behar and Kamrup. The Sultanate also dominated Orissa, Tripura and the Arakan region.\nBabur defeated the Lodhis at Panipat in 1526 and the Mughals established India's greatest state since the time of the Mauryas. But during Sheh Shah Suri's rebellion against the second Mughal ruler Humayan, he triumphed over the Hussain Shahi dynasty's Ghiyasuddin Mahmud Shah in 1538, thus bringing an end to the independent status of Bengal. For a short time Humayun ruled Gaur.\nBengal along with other parts of eastern India was ruled by Sheh Shah Suri. He implemented many reforms such as introducing parganas. These were land survey based local tax units. He is most famous for designing the Grand Trunk Road between Chittagong and Punjab. Humayun retook Delhi in 1556. But the Suris continued ruling Bengal until 1564 when they were replaced by the Karrani dynasty. Like the Suris, they were not native to Bengal. They had been raiders whom the Mughal armies had driven eastwards.\nTurko Afghan rule.\nIn 1204\u00a0CE, the first Muslim ruler, Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khilji, a Turko Afghan, captured Nadia and established Muslim rule. The political influence of Islam began to spread across Bengal with the conquest of Nadia, the capital city of the Sen ruler Lakshmana.\nAfter capturing Nadia, Bakhtiyar advanced towards Gauda (Lakhnuti), another major city of the Sena kingdom, conquered it and made it his capital in 1205. In the following year, Bakhtiyar set out on an expedition to capture Tibet, but this attempt failed and he had to return to Bengal in poor health and with a reduced army. Shortly afterwards, he was killed by one of his commanders, Ali Mardan Khilji. In the meantime, Lakshman Sen and his two sons retreated to Vikramapur (in the present-day Munshiganj District in Bangladesh), where their diminished dominion lasted until the late 13th century.\nKhiljis were Turko Afghan. The period after Bakhtiar Khilji's death in 1207 involved infighting among the Khiljis. This was typical of a pattern of succession struggles and intra-sultanate intrigues during later Turko Afghan regimes. In this case, Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khilji prevailed and extended the Sultan's domain south to Jessore and made the eastern Bang province a tributary. The capital was established at Lakhnauti on the Ganges near the older Bengal capital of Gaur. He managed to make Kamarupa and Trihut pay tribute to him. But he was later defeated by Shams-ud-Din Iltutmish.\nSonargaon Sultanate.\nFakhruddin Mubarak Shah ruled an independent kingdom in areas that lie within modern-day eastern and south-eastern Bangladesh from 1338 to 1349. He was the first Muslim ruler to conquer Chittagong, the principal port in the Bengal region, in 1340. Fakhruddin's capital was Sonargaon which emerged as the principal city of the region and as the capital of an independent sultanate during his reign.\nBengal Sultanate.\nIlyas Shahi dynasty.\nShamsuddin Iliyas Shah founded an independent dynasty that lasted from 1342 to 1487. The dynasty successfully repulsed attempts by Delhi to conquer them. They continued to extend their territory across what is modern-day Bengal, reaching to Khulna in the south and Sylhet in the east. The sultans developed civic institutions and became more responsive and \"native\" in their outlook and became increasingly independent from Delhi influence and control. Considerable architectural projects were completed including the massive Adina Mosque and the Darasbari Mosque which still stands in Bangladesh near the border with India. The Sultans of Bengal were patrons of Bengali literature and began a process in which Bengali culture and identity would flourish. During the rule of this dynasty, Bengal, for the first time, achieved a separate identity. Indeed, Ilyas Shah named this province as 'Bangalah' and united different parts into a single, unified territory. The Ilyas Shahi Dynasty was interrupted by an uprising by the Hindus under Raja Ganesha. However, the Ilyas Shahi dynasty was restored by Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah. The Moroccan traveller and scholar, Ibn Battuta, arrived in Bengal during Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah's reign. In his account of Bengal in his Rihla, he depicts a land full of abundance. Bengal was a progressive state with commercial links to China, Java and Ceylon. Merchant ships arrived and departed from various destinations.\nGanesha dynasty.\nThe Ganesha dynasty began with Raja Ganesha in 1414. After Raja Ganesha seized control over Bengal, he faced an imminent threat of invasion. Ganesha appealed to a powerful Muslim holy man named Qutb al Alam to stop the threat. The saint agreed on the condition that Raja Ganesha's son, Jadu, would convert to Islam and rule in his place. Raja Ganesha agreed and Jadu started ruling Bengal as Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah in 1415. Qutb al Alam died in 1416 and Raja Ganesha was emboldened to depose his son and return to the throne as Danujamarddana Deva. Jalaluddin was reconverted to Hinduism by the \"Golden Cow\" ritual. After the death of his father Jalaluddin once again converted to Islam and started ruling again. Jalaluddin's son, Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah ruled for only 3 years due to chaos and anarchy. The dynasty is known for its liberal policies as well as its focus on justice and charity.\nHussain Shahi dynasty.\nThe Habshi rule gave way to the Hussain Shahi dynasty which ruled from 1494 to 1538. Alauddin Hussain Shah is considered one of the greatest sultans of Bengal, for his encouragement of a cultural renaissance. He extended the sultanate to the port of Chittagong, which witnessed the arrival of the first Portuguese merchants. Nasiruddin Nasrat Shah gave refuge to the Afghan lords during the invasion of Babur though he remained neutral. Later, Nasrat Shah made a treaty with Babur which saved Bengal from a Mughal invasion. The last sultan of the dynasty, who continued to rule from Gaur, had to contend with rising Afghan activity on his north-western border. Eventually, the Afghans broke through and sacked the capital in 1538 where they remained for several decades until the arrival of the Mughals.\nMughal period.\nA major Mughal victory in 1576, in which Akbar took Bengal, was followed by four decades of efforts dedicated to vanquishing rebels in the Bhati region. The initial victory was accompanied by destruction and severe violence. The Mughals were opposed by the Bengalis. Akbar appointed a Hindu servant Raja Man Singh as Bengal's governor. Singh based his rule at Rajmahal, Bihar, thinking that he could administer the region beyond.\nThe province of Bengal was especially prosperous from the time of its takeover by the Mughals in 1590 until the British East India Company seized control in 1757. It was the Mughal Empire's wealthiest province. Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles.\nThe Bara Bhuiyan, or twelve landlords, resisted the Mughal attempts to annex Bengal. The landlords were mainly Afghan and Hindu aristocrats. Pratapaditya was one of the Hindu landlords among these leaders. They were led by the landlord Isa Khan, who was based in Sonargaon. Isa Khan is known for his resistance to outside rule, particularly from Delhi and Urdu-speaking soldiers. His actions were to serve as an inspiration in 1971.\nThe landlords spearheaded an extensive revolt. Both the Mughals and rebels committed atrocities such as massacre, rape and looting. They defeated the Mughal navy in 1584. After this, battles continued on land. In 1597, they again defeated the Mughal navy, however, Isa Khan died in the following year. The struggle against Mughal rule weakened. Man Singh, realising the strategic value of controlling Dhaka to administer eastern Bengal, created a military base there. He also realised its utility in controlling Arakanese and Portuguese influence.\nThis base became more important in the late 1500s when the Ganges started to change its course. The change in the river's course allowed the clearing and harvesting of more land. The waterways of Dhaka allowed easy movement of soldiers to various parts of Bengal. In 1610, Dhaka became a provincial capital. By then several of the internationally known muslin looms had shifted to Dhaka from Sonargaon. Dhaka flourished both as an administrative and handloom center.\nThe Bengal region was historically an international hub of various activities. Merchants, pilgrims and voyagers traversed Bengal to travel to Nepal and Tibet. Bengal's waterways were a place where various peoples interacted. In 1346, the Moroccan voyager Ibn Battuta followed the trade route through Sri Lanka when he traveled to Bengal from the Maldives in 1346. In the 1300s Bengal traded its paddy for cowries from the Maldives. Evidence from the 1500s demonstrates that rice grown in Bengal was eaten as far as eastern Indonesia and Goa. Bengal also exported other materials and food products at the same time. Bengali traders dominated trade with southeast Asia. Chinese merchants in the 1400s and 1500s introduced gold, satin, silks, silver and porcelain. A European traveler in 1586 reported that the quality of the cotton textiles produced in Sonargaon was better than in other parts of the subcontinent. These fabrics were sent to international markets.\nAccording to economic historian Indrajit Ray, Bengal was globally prominent in industries such as textile manufacturing and shipbuilding.\nDhaka was renamed to Jahangirnagar by the governor for Jahangir, the emperor. The governor managed to defeat and make the chieftains accept Mughal authority. During Mughal rule, Dhaka's architecture was enriched. In 1678, Aurangzeb's son started the construction of the Lalbagh fort, which encloses the tomb of Nur Jahan's grand niece. Surviving Mughal buildings are the Bara Katra, Chhota Katra and the Husaini Dalan (a Shi'a mosque).\nDuring the Mughal rule many civilian and military administrators entered Bengal. A lot of these officials received land grants and became domiciled. Despite the Hindu domination of the landed class, Muslims formed a crucial section and maintained possession of significant land grants until the land reforms after 1947.\nThe form of Bengal's government had been less rigid than the ones in other parts of the Mughal empire. The Mughals asserted a centralised form of rule on top of the differing local administrative structures. Consequently, local rulers administered control in the rural areas. These \"zamindars\" were autonomous and were a secular elite, differentiated from the general populace by their authority. Surnames in modern Bangladesh such as Chowdhury, Khan, Sarkar and Talukdar originate from the names of ranks in the Mughal elite. This elite functioned alongside the Mughal officials. The latter's duty was to keep charge over tax collection. The diwan was the most important tax officer and was directly selected by the Mughal ruler. Each Mughal conquest in Bengal was accompanied with the establishment of a thana (garrison) for the purpose of maintaining peace. After that the territory would be merged into the empire's administrative system. In the empire's system each province would comprise several regions, called \"sarkar\", which in turn would be made up of subdivisions called parganas. The lowest tier in the system was the mouza (revenue village).\nThe agricultural borderland during Mughal rule in the 1500s started moving towards the eastern portion of Bengal. The region's agricultural productivity increased. To increase their revenues the Mughal administration promoted forest clearing and wet-rice farming. The officials gave land grants to entrepreneurs who were willing to give taxes in exchange for rights over the lands. The colonists required labour and this was advantageous for the religious elite. Most communities in the region were boatmen and fishermen on the margins of society who were nominally Hindu but in reality had very weak ties to Hinduism. These were the labourers who cultivated the rice and would make up the bulk of peasantry in eastern Bengal. Land grants would require the construction of a shrine and the colonists would gather settlers around these shrines. Society was ordered around the shrine. New communities would engage in forest clearing and cultivation. Locals either merged with these communities or moved away while keeping trading contacts with the rice cultivators.\nThe Mughal government had no attitude of encouraging Islam in the region and Hindus made up many of these pioneers who had government backing. But most of the pioneers were Muslim. A large number of them were pirs. Richard Eaton asserts that Islam was understood to be linked with the government-accepted acquisition of land in eastern Bengal which had only weak connections with Hindu civilization. The traditions and rituals of eastern Bengal, mosques and shrines blended together. Islam spread in Bengal because of its localisation. Islamic agencies were inserted into the contemporary cosmology, were then associated with local divinities and eventually the Islamic agencies took over the local culture.\nTwo great Mughal Subahdars.\nIslam Khan.\nIslam Khan was appointed the Subahdar of Bengal in 1608 by Mughal emperor Jahangir. He ruled Bengal from his capital Dhaka which he renamed as Jahangir Nagar. His major task was to subdue the rebellious Rajas, Bara-Bhuiyans, Zamindars and Afghan chiefs. He fought with Musa Khan, the leader of Bara-Bhuiyans, and by the end of 1611 Musa Khan was subdued. Islam Khan also defeated Pratapaditya of Jessore, Ram Chandra of Bakla and Ananta Manikya of Bhulua. He annexed the kingdom of Kamrup and subdued Koch Bihar and Kachhar, thus taking total control over entire Bengal other than Chittagong.\nShaista Khan.\nShaista Khan was appointed the Subahdar (Governor) of Bengal upon the death of Mir Jumla II in 1663. He was the longest-serving governor of Bengal. He ruled the province from his administrative headquarters in Dhaka for almost 24 years from 1664 to 1688.\nShaista Khan's great fame in Bengal chiefly rests on his re-conquest of Chittagong. Though Chittagong came under the control of Bengal during Sultan Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah's reign in the mid-14th century, it subsequently fell into the hands of Arakanese rulers. Shaista Khan gave priority to recapturing Chittagong, and was able to do so in January 1666. The conquest brought a relief and peace to the people of Chittagong as pirates had caused a great distress to the local population.\nNawabs of Bengal.\nMughal appointments of agents in Bengal ceased by 1713 because the empire was weakening. In 1715, the capital was shifted to Murshidabad. This resulted in Dhaka's decline. This transfer happened when the province's main tax officer, Murshid Quli Khan, who had transferred his office to Maksudabad (renamed Murshidabad after him) became governor. Murshidabad was located at a more central position in Bengal, whose administrative limits at the time also included Bihar and Orissa. In addition to changing the capital, Murshid Quli Khan modified the tax collection system.\nMurshid Quli Khan wanted to create a line of governing nawabs like the contemporary governors of Oudh. He was succeeded by family members. However, Alivardi Khan established another nawab family. He collaborated with Jagat Seth to defeat the governor and secured the post of governor from the Mughal ruler through bribery. He also became diwan of Orissa. However, he faced problems from Maratha raiders present in Orissa.\nNawab Alivardi Khan repulsed the first three Maratha invasions of Bengal. But they invaded again, and in 1751, Alivardi Khan signed a peace treaty with the Marathas. He ceded the province of Orissa to the Maratha Empire and agreed to pay twelve lakhs of rupees annually as \"chauth\" (tribute). \nHis maternal grandson Sirajuddaulah succeeded him when he died in 1756. Sirajuddaulah tried to stop uncertified trade in Bengal. Because of this he clashed with British merchants and was eventually defeated by 1757 in Polashi. The British governed Bengal and large areas to its west by 1764.\nColonial era.\nEuropeans in Bengal.\nIn 1517, the Portuguese installed an outpost at Chittagong. A Portuguese settlement was also created at Satgaon. In 1579, with a land grant from Akbar, the Portuguese created another station at Hooghly. The Portuguese traded and proselytised until 1632 when they were expelled by Shah Jahan, who allowed them to re-enter in the next year. The hostility towards them was a consequence of piracy by the Portuguese and Maghs. By 1651 the British obtained control of Hooghly. The Portuguese presence came to an end.\nThe Portuguese had traded through the government but other European powers traded through companies instead. A Dutch station was established at Chinsura but the Dutch directed their interests to Ceylon and Southeast Asia. In 1825, they exchanged Chinsura with the British for posts in Southeast Asia. In 1755, a Danish station was established at Serampore. In 1845, the British bought it. The French Company lasted longer. Their position was second to the British. The latter overtook the French. The first British factory was established in 1608 in western India. Soon afterwards the British entered Bengal.\nThe British founded factories in Balasore, Cossimbazar, Dhaka, Hooghly and Patna. In 1681, a \"presidency\" was established. In 1690, Job Charnock established Calcutta. During this time the British came into conflict with Bengal's Mughal governors. In 1652, the British had been exempted from customs payments in exchange for giving yearly sums to the nawab. But the nawab foisted fees upon them, which the British opposed. The British met the nawab Shaista Khan in Dhaka in 1652 and secured the exemption again.\nBritish trading activities expanded during Shaista Khan's administration. Alivardi Khan disliked the British and French plans to secure their possessions. Alivardi Khan disputed the British application of Emperor Farruukhsiyar's order which had allowed the British unfettered trading privileges in the Mughal empire, as their tax exemptions meant lower revenues for Alivardi Khan.\nAlivardi's successor Siraj-ud-Daulah set about eliminating the foreign presence. In 1756, he seized Calcutta and incarcerated the resident British population. Robert Clive and his troops took Calcutta back in January 1757. Clive compelled Siraj-ud-Daulah to assent to a treaty which would restore Emperor Farrukhsiyar's order allowing the British to trade unrestricted. Clive then conspired with Siraj-ud-Daulah's relative, Mir Jafar, and obtained the support of a major banker, Jagat Seth. Robert Clive and Siraj-ud-Daulah's troops battled each other at Plassey in June 1757. Mir Jafar abandoned the nawab during the battle, who suffered defeat and was killed. Many historians see this battle as the start of British colonialism in the subcontinent which would last until 1947.\nAfter their triumph at Plassey the British transformed Bengal into the center of their growing Indian colony. The British could fully obtain financial authority in Bengal if the diwani was given to the East India Company in place of the Nawab. When Mir Jafar died in 1765 the Emperor Shah Alam implemented that transfer. This guaranteed British authority in the province. while a semi-feudal association was maintained with the Mughal empire. The diwani was used with the approval of the Mughal ruler. While the British East India Company was nominally a diwan, it was practically independent of the Mughals.\nIndian nationalist historiography pinpoints the battle in Plassey as the start of a foreign and exploitative colonialism which ended in 1947. But the Bangladeshi perspective is that the people of Bengal had been used to fleecing administrations run by foreigners before the rise of the British authority. Bangladeshi historians also contend that colonialism persisted during the post-colonial period when the region was included in Pakistan. The Battle of Plassey did not mark an end to native rule in Bengal. It marked an end to the Mughal system.\nBritish rule.\nThe British goal was to increase the productivity of the Bengali economy. They experimented on Bengal's administration and economy. The results of some of the experiments were not always successful. The increased taxation in Bengal's unstable climate was a calamity. The taxation was not eased even during the drought and floods of 1769\u20131770. Along with unmonitored exploitation this caused a severe famine, in which it is believed ten million residents of Bengal died.\nThe Mughal State was disintegrated, causing the principal governor of Bengal to become the \"de facto\" ruler. After a replacement was sought by the British East India Company, in the mid-eighteenth century, the border of Cooch Behar was marked the northernmost limit of British Territory. Cooch Behar survived as a princely state till the end of the colonial rule, this was due to the indirect ruling of the British expedition in 1772, when it invaded and conquered the territory: the Maharaja and his administration were thence retained under the control of a British political agent.\nCapital amassed from Bengal by the East India Company was invested in various industries such as textile manufacturing in Great Britain during the initial stages of the Industrial Revolution. Company policies in Bengal also led to the deindustrialization of the Bengali textile industry during Company rule.\nThe famine disaster made British officials look for viable methods of tapping into the colony's resources. In 1790, the British introduced \"permanent settlement\" and made it law three years later. It was a framework for taxation on land. The system was the core of the colonial form of government. It was an agreement between the British and the zamindars who were effectively given landholdings in exchange for timely payment of taxes. The aim of the permanent settlement was that the zamindars would eventually invest in the development of agriculture and improve the economy of Bengal. The aim did not materialise because the zamindars did not have state backing for agrarian growth and because of newfound ways of generating wealth. A multilayered form of landholdings developed, which benefited from the land's revenue. This structure was most pronounced in the southern areas of modern Bangladesh. The permanent settlement scheme deprived peasants of any proprietary rights over the land.\nWhile Muslims had comprised most of the landlord class during Mughal rule, Hindus became prominent during the colonial rule. While Muslim landlords and Hindu occupants did exist, eastern Bengal witnessed an amalgamation of religion with class, with Hindu landlords presiding over mainly Muslim peasants. Hindu landlords were also prominent in western Bengal, but most peasants there were Hindus. This factor would become politically important by the end of the colonial rule.\nAnother change during British rule was the system of cash cropping. During colonial rule cash cropping was organised and produced for international markets. It was significant because of the links it created between the Bengali countryside's economy with markets in Asia and Europe. Because of cash cropping the eastern region of modern Bangladesh emerged as the centre for jute cultivation. The western portion of modern Bangladesh produced silk and sugar. The northern areas produced tobacco. Crops were associated with specific types of land organisation. Peasantry in the eastern areas were compelled by financial needs towards market production. The countryside's elite in the western and northern areas were protected from the immediate impact of market factors because they provided agrarian credit.\nThe British abandoned the former official language, Persian, in the 1830s and English medium educational institutions prepared a small part of the Bengali elite for jobs in the lower and middle tiers of government. Muslims took up the British improvements more slowly and lagged behind the Hindus educationally and commercially. Hindus comprised most of the college students. There were changes in health. The population growth during colonial rule was because people had more knowledge of hygiene and increased access to hospitals and medication. Transport became less reliant on the rivers with the construction of bridges and railways. Improvements in technology aided communications. Despite the government's authoritarian form, the British tried out limited democratic systems in the later part of their rule due to political constraints.\nA vital development under British rule was the rise of Calcutta to political and cultural prominence. It became colonial India's capital. From 1757 to 1931 the Government of India was located in the city. Aspiring Bengalis migrated to Calcutta and obtained education and government employment. They are known to historians as the \"bhodrolok\" and high caste Hindus comprised most of them. Old centers such as Dhaka and Murshidabad declined while the trading class became concentrated in Calcutta.\nThe authoritarian regime functioning in alliance with the rural elite was susceptible to resistance and revolts happened frequently during the British rule. However, British rule in Bengal faced no threat by the second half of the 1800s. Bengal did not participate in the 1857 revolt which nearly ended British administration over large swathes of India. While there was a revolt by troops in Chittagong it dwindled because the landlords and peasants did not support the rebellion. Instead political grievances nor revolved around peasant rights and the commercialization of agriculture. The struggle was usually characterised by peasants and the middle class in opposition to the landlords, Western businessmen and the British administration. Many campaigns eventually ended the indigo industry. These were led by Wahhabi-influenced Islamic missionaries.\nThere had been prominent Hindu reformist movements in the early 1800s but no equivalent Muslim movement. A departure from this rule was the Faraizi movement which Haji Shariatullah started in 1828. It was a conservative Islamic movement grounded in Wahhabi ideology. It opposed the exaltation of saints and the repression by landlords and indigo traders. Shariatullah regarded India as a dar al-harb and thus believed that festivals and Friday prayers should cease. His heir, Dudu Mia, expanded the movement and claimed that the landlords did not possess permanent land rights. The Faraizi movement eventually ended after his demise.\nTitu Mir led another Wahhabi campaign at the same time as the Faraizi movement. This movement was violent and opposed to the British presence. He died in 1831 during a confrontation with the British. Two years later his followers supported indigo farmers in a clash against the European planters and Hindu landlords. The protest was ultimately muted by 1860 when the peasants were granted more security. But not all rural rebellions were inspired by religion.\nBy the late 1800s parts of the elite and peasants became politically connected. This link was to become a crucial prototype of later campaigns in Bengal. The movement for self determination joined communist and nationalist movements, several of which were associated with all-India organisations.\nBengal renaissance.\nThe Bengal renaissance refers to a social reform movement during the 19th and early 20th centuries in Bengal. Historian Nitish Sengupta describes it as taking place from Raja Ram Mohan Roy (1775\u20131833) through Rabindranath Tagore (1861\u20131941). This flowering in Bengal of religious and social reformers, scholars, and writers is described by historian David Kopf as \"one of the most creative periods in Indian history\". Another notable figure of this era was the national poet Kazi Nazrul Islam, known for poems such as \"Bidrohi\", who actively took a stance against British colonial oppression in the 20th century. The British authorities imprisoned Nazrul Islam several times for his opposition to colonialism.\nPartition of Bengal (1905).\nThe decision to effect the Partition of Bengal was announced in July 1905 by the Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon. The partition took place on 16 October 1905 and separated the largely Muslim eastern areas from the largely Hindu western areas. The former province of Bengal was divided into two new provinces \"Bengal\" (comprising western Bengal as well as the province of Bihar and Orissa) and Eastern Bengal and Assam with Dacca as the capital of the latter. Partition was promoted for administrative reasons: Bengal was geographically as large as France and had a significantly larger population. Curzon stated the eastern region was neglected and under-governed. By splitting the province, an improved administration could be established in the east, where subsequently, the population would benefit from new schools and employment opportunities. The Hindus of West Bengal who dominated Bengal's business and rural life complained that the division would make them a minority in a province that would incorporate the province of Bihar and Orissa. Indians were outraged at what they recognised as a \"divide and rule\" policy.\nThe British regarded politically active Muslims as their supporters and the partition created a Muslim-dominated province. The Muslims universally reacted to the division with approval. Hindus denounced it. The partition highlighted the flaw in the political unity of the members of different religions in Bengal. Hindus and Muslims became distinct political groups. The predominantly Hindu bhodrolok led the anti-partition campaign and connected it with Hindu revivalism. They identified their homeland with Kali and selected Vande Mataram as anthem, which Muslims opposed. \nThe British had promoted religion as a grounds for political identification. This had been difficult because Muslim unity had been hindered by significant internal differences. Most Bengali Muslims had been more a member of a religiously diverse Bengali community than a Muslim one, until the end of the 1800s. The Islam they practised had a significant foundation in the culture of the Bengali countryside. The elite Muslims identified themselves as Ashraf (of foreign descent) and sought to copy North Indian Islamic culture and they saw themselves as the protectors of the true Islam in Bengal. To them, the Islam practised by the local peasants and craftsmen was contaminated by un-Islamic associations. While a large number of well-taught Muslims remained hesitant to accept the peasants who practised Bengali culture, the idea of a single Muslim community had come to exist just before partition. Economic issues increased Hindu-Muslim conflict in Bengal. The Muslim occupants began to demand their rights against the mainly Hindu landed and moneylending class. Middle class Muslims were unable to achieve their political goals because of the Hindu elite's contemptuous attitude. Hindus and Muslims clashed in Comilla and Mymensingh in 1906 and 1907. The violence boosted religious identities and supported stereotyping. The Hindu elite regarded the countryside Muslims as British agents and inferior. To Muslims, the Hindus were cunning exploiters. The British reversed the partition in 1911 and declared they would move India's capital to Delhi. New Delhi was inaugurated after two decades of construction in 1931.\nPartition of Bengal (1947).\nThe Partition of Bengal in 1947, also known as the Second Partition of Bengal, part of the Partition of India, divided the British Indian Bengal Province along the Radcliffe Line between the Dominion of India and the Dominion of Pakistan. The Bengali Hindu-majority West Bengal became a state of India, and the Bengali Muslim-majority East Bengal (now Bangladesh) became a province of Pakistan.\nPakistan period.\nDhaka was the scene of a meeting of Muslim leaders in late 1906. They created a party for Muslims and declared its loyalty to the British, believing that the British could best protect the interests of Muslims. The late 1800s had seen the introduction of a system of elections based on limited franchise. The franchise was broadened later to increase the number of voters. However, universal franchise never materialized but the Muslim leadership did secure a separate voting system for Muslims in 1909. In the Lucknow Pact of 1916 the Muslim League and Indian National Congress accepted both separate electorates and provincial weightage for minorities. This reduced Bengali Muslim seats to forty percent in a Muslim majority province. The Muslim League regretted this decision.\nUntil 1920, the elections happened on a non-party basis. When party candidature was introduced the independent candidates maintained their importance. They won a third of seats in Bengal in the 1937 elections. Congress had been the main contestant for the general seats while the Muslim League vied with Fazlul Huq's Krishak Praja Party (KPP) for the Muslim seats. The 1937 elections showed that no party could establish a ministry on its own. The Krishak Praja Party established a ministry with the Muslim League. The League could not win the three other Muslim provinces. Muslim prime ministers who were not members of the Congress agreed to support the League nationally even as they would keep control of their provincial matters. Fazlul Huq was a member of both the KPP and the Muslim League.\nCongress ministries resigned to protest the declaration of war against Germany by viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, which he had done so without seeking the opinion of the provincial governments. The Muslim governments in Punjab, Bengal and Sindh did not resign. But a rift emerged between Fazlul Huq and the League when the viceroy created an advisory council, thus Huq's ministry fell. According to Fazlul Huq, who resigned from the party, the Muslim League represented the interests of Muslim minority provinces more than the Muslim provinces. Fazlul Huq had advanced the Lahore Resolution in 1940, before resigning. The resolution had used the word \"states\" which indicated that a united Pakistan was not intended by this resolution.\nFazlul Huq recreated his government, this time without the Muslim League, in late 1941. Muslim League members led by Khawaja Nazimuddin and Suhrawardy campaigned against Fazlul Huq. Huq resigned in 1943 under pressure from the governor. On 24 April 1943 Nazimuddin inaugurated his own ministry at the governor's invitation. Nazimuddin's ministry was seen unfavourably by both the viceroy, Lord Wavell, and the governor. In particular, the Viceroy was disturbed by Nazimuddin's response to the famine. Bengal experienced a great famine during the second world war. Approximately 3 and a half million died, mainly in the countryside of east Bengal.\nThe 1945-1946 elections restored a responsible provincial government. In the 1946 elections the politics was dominated by two organisations. They were the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League. The Congress was never able to win Bengal. The 1946 election was mainly contended over the question of creating a Muslim homeland: Pakistan. To many it represented a plebiscite. Bengal's Muslim League ignored local matters in its campaign over partition. The KPP of Fazlul Huq was defeated. The Muslim League captured 110 out of the 117 seats for Muslims. Out of all Muslim provinces, Bengal was the biggest supporter of the Muslim League. The majority of East Bengal's peasantry saw Pakistan as a good way of eliminating the feudal system. More than religious reasons, it had been because of economic factors they supported the Muslim League and Pakistan.\nIn 1946, the British government sent a mission, which ultimately advanced a scheme for a united India. The scheme encapsulated a loose union. A key point for Bengal was the maintenance of its unity under the scheme. The plan was agreed to by Jinnah but Nehru negated it. The Muslim League declared Direct Action Day on 16 August. Rioting followed in Calcutta and many died. The Bhodrolok decided that dividing Bengal would be better than accepting the rule of Muslims. The Muslim League did not want Bengal to be divided, and wanted it fully included in Pakistan. However, the Congress demanded the partition of the province. A few leaders of the Muslim League and Congress started advocating an independent United Bengal. While some politicians like Jinnah and Gandhi supported this idea, the national Congress rejected it in favour of partition. Eastern Bengal was to join Pakistan while Western Bengal would join India. Most of Assam's mainly Muslim Sylhet district opted for Bengal in a plebiscite. The rest joined India with Assam.\nBengali Language Movement.\nA rift developed over the question of the national language. The Bengali Language Movement was a political effort in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan), advocating the recognition of the Bengali language as an official language of Pakistan. Such recognition would allow Bengali to be used in government affairs. It was led by Mufti Nadimul Quamar Ahmed.\nWhen the state of Pakistan was formed in 1947, its two regions, East Pakistan (also called East Bengal) and West Pakistan, were split along cultural, geographical, and linguistic lines. On 23 February 1948, the Government of Pakistan ordained Urdu as the sole national language, sparking extensive protests among the Bengali-speaking majority of East Pakistan. Facing rising sectarian tensions and mass discontent with the new law, the government outlawed public meetings and rallies. The students of the University of Dhaka and other political activists defied the law and organised a protest on 21 February 1952. The movement reached its climax when police opened fire on the students that day. The deaths provoked widespread civil unrest led by the Awami Muslim League, later renamed the Awami League. After years of conflict, the central government relented and granted official status to the Bengali language in 1956. On 17 November 1999, UNESCO declared 21 February International Mother Language Day.\nPolitics: 1954\u20131971.\nThe 1952 events caused the people of East Pakistan to abandon the Muslim League. In East Pakistan's 1954 provincial elections, the League captured only 7 out of the 390 seats. The United Front won the elections. Until 1956, when the state declared that both Bengali and Urdu would be state languages, the language movement continued.\nGreat differences began developing between the two wings of Pakistan. While the west had a minority share of Pakistan's total population, it had the largest share of revenue allocation, industrial development, agricultural reforms and civil development projects. Pakistan's military and civil services were dominated by the Punjabis. Bengalis had been designated as a \"non-martial\" race by the British. Bengali participation in the military was very low. The British preferred to recruit Punjabi Muslims. The Punjabis dominated the army Pakistan inherited from British India's military. Because Bengalis did not have a tradition of military service in their families, it was hard to recruit Bengali officers.\nBy the middle of the 1960s the East Pakistani elite concluded that the protection of their interests lay in autonomy. Abdul Momen Khan, who was governor in the 1962-1968 period, persecuted opposition and censored media. The regime became more unpopular during 1965, in the year of a war between India and Pakistan. Patriotism was high in East Pakistan during the war against India, but this was one of the last cases of national solidarity. East Pakistanis felt they had not been protected by the army from a possible Indian invasion.\nIn 1966, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, proclaimed a 6-point plan titled \"Our Charter of Survival\" at a national conference of opposition political parties at Lahore, in which he demanded self-government and considerable political, economic and defence autonomy for East Pakistan in a Pakistani federation with a weak central government. This led to the historic Six point movement. The six points for a confederation were more extreme than previous calls for autonomy.\nIn early 1968, the Agartala Conspiracy Case was filed against Mujib with the allegation that the accused was conspiring for the secession of East Pakistan with Indian aid. The government expected this to harm Mujib's popularity. But popular demonstrations made the government drop the case.\nA West Pakistani movement aimed at removing Ayub Khan spread to East Pakistan where it adopted Bengali nationalist connotations. Ayub Khan resigned in March 1969 and his position was taken by General Yahya Khan. Yahya tried to reconcile the politicians. He announced that elections would be held in 1970 and political organisation would be permitted. He declared that his own position was temporary and that his job was to run elections for an assembly who would be tasked with creating a new constitution. He ended the One Unit Scheme and permitted popular representation, thereby allowing East Pakistan 162 of the 300 seats. Yahya created a legal framework order (LFO) as a guideline for the assembly. It stipulated principles such as the federalism of the state, paramountcy of Islam, provincial autonomy with sufficient provisions for the federal government to carry out its duties and defend the country's integrity. The latter point clashed with Mujib's points. Yahya highlighted that a constitution would not be accepted if it did not adhere to the LFO. Mujib's party had drafted its own constitution based on six points.\nIndependence movement.\nThe Awami League captured 160 of East Pakistan's 162 seats in the 1970 Pakistani general election. Nurul Amin won one of the remaining seats. The Pakistan Peoples Party, led by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, won a majority of seats in West Pakistan. Yahya organised talks between Bhutto and Mujib to arrive at a consensus on the form of the future constitution. Mujib asserted his majority and intent to base the constitution on his six points. Bhutto's argument was that there were two majorities. The talks failed. Mujib rejected Bhutto's demands for a share in power. Bhutto boycotted the National Assembly session of 3 March and intimidated other West Pakistani politicians from participating. Bhutto requested that Yahya delay the National Assembly session. On 1 March protests and confrontations broke out when Yahya did this.\nLeftists in East Pakistan pressured Mujib to immediately declare independence. The West Pakistani government deployed soldiers to deter such a possibility. Mujib chose a middle-ground option by starting a non-cooperation movement. The movement was successful, freezing the machinery of government and effectively giving Mujib command over East Pakistan. Mujib announced that East Pakistanis would fight for independence but he simultaneously attempted to achieve a solution within a united Pakistan.\nYahya Khan and Bhutto went to Dhaka in March as a last attempt to obtain a resolution. However, the three parties could not arrive at a consensus on the transfer of power. On 23 March the Awami League told Yahya that he was to issue regional autonomy within 2 days or East Pakistan would turn lawless. While the talks were still underway, Yahya opted for a military solution for the problem. On the night of 25 March, Yahya secretly went back to West Pakistan and commanded the military to attack the core members of the autonomy campaign.\nOn 3 March, student leader Shahjahan Siraj read the 'Sadhinotar Ishtehar' (Declaration of Independence) at Paltan Maidan in front of Mujib at a public gathering under the direction of the Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad.\nOn 7 March, there was a public gathering in Suhrawardy Udyan to hear updates on the ongoing movement from Sheikh Mujib, the leader of the movement. Although he avoided directly referring to independence, as the talks were still underway, he warned his listeners to prepare for any imminent war. The speech is considered a key moment in the War of Liberation, and is remembered for the phrase,\n\"Ebarer Shongram Amader Muktir Shongram, Ebarer Shongram Shadhinotar Shongram...\"\n\"Our struggle this time is a struggle for our freedom, our struggle this time is a struggle for our independence...\"\nFormal Declaration of Independence.\nIn the early hours of 26 March 1971, a military crackdown by the Pakistan army began. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was arrested and the political leaders dispersed, mostly fleeing to neighbouring India where they organised a provisional government. Before being arrested by the Pakistani Army, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman passed a hand written note which contained the Bangladesh's Declaration of Independence. This note was widely circulated and transmitted by the then East Pakistan Rifles' wireless transmitter. The world press reports from late March 1971 also made sure that Bangladesh's declaration of independence by Bangabandhu was widely reported throughout the world. Bengali Army officer Major Ziaur Rahman captured the Kalurghat Radio Station in Chittagong and read the declaration of independence of Bangladesh during the evening hours on 27 March.\n\"This is Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. I, Major Ziaur Rahman, at the direction of Bangobondhu Mujibur Rahman, hereby declare that the Independent People's Republic of Bangladesh has been established. At his direction, I have taken command as the temporary Head of the Republic. In the name of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, I call upon all Bengalees to rise against the attack by the West Pakistani Army. We shall fight to the last to free our motherland. Victory is, by the Grace of Allah, ours. Joy Bangla.\"\nThe Provisional Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was formed on 10 April in Meherpur (later renamed as Mujibnagar, a town adjacent to the Indian border). Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was announced to be the Head of the State. Tajuddin Ahmed became the Prime Minister, Syed Nazrul Islam became the acting president and Khondaker Mostaq Ahmed the Foreign Minister. There the war plan was sketched out with Bangladesh armed forces established and named \"Muktifoujo\". Later these forces were named \"Muktibahini\" (freedom fighters). M. A. G. Osmani was appointed as the Chief of the Armed Forces. The training and most of the arms and ammunitions were arranged by the Meherpur government which was supported by India. As fighting grew between the Pakistan Army and the Bengali Mukti Bahini, an estimated ten million Bengalis, mainly Hindus, sought refuge in the Indian states of Assam, Tripura and West Bengal.\nThe freedom fighters were not able to beat the military. The Pakistani military created civilian and paramilitary groups to neutralise the freedom fighters. They recruited Biharis and Bengalis who did not support the separation of East Pakistan.\nWhen it became clear that neither the Pakistani military nor the freedom fighters could win, India gradually started its invasion. It increased its efforts at the international level and increased its military activities in East Pakistan but did not declare war out of fear of the geopolitical aftermath. India had its opportunity to declare war when Pakistan attacked Indian airfields on 3 December. The Indian military and Mukti Bahini had the edge with better weaponry, complete air and naval supremacy and support from most locals. The Pakistani army killed and raped many Bengalis. Pro-Pakistan militias killed Bengali intellectuals near the war's end. Pakistan's administration collapsed and the army surrendered on 16 December.\nPakistani capitulation and aftermath.\nOn 16 December 1971, Lt. Gen A. A. K. Niazi, CO of Pakistan Army forces located in East Pakistan, signed the Instrument of Surrender and the nation of \"Bangla Desh\" (\"Country of Bengal\") was finally established the following day. At the time of surrender only a few countries had provided diplomatic recognition to the new nation. Over 90,000 Pakistani troops surrendered to the Indian forces making it the largest surrender since World War II.\nThe new country changed its name to Bangladesh on 11 January 1972 and became a parliamentary democracy under a constitution. Shortly thereafter on 19 March Bangladesh signed a friendship treaty with India. Bangladesh sought admission in the UN with most voting in its favour, but China vetoed this as Pakistan was its key ally. The United States, also a key ally of Pakistan, was one of the last nations to accord Bangladesh recognition. To ensure a smooth transition, in 1972 the Simla Agreement was signed between India and Pakistan. The treaty ensured that Pakistan recognised the independence of Bangladesh in exchange for the return of the Pakistani PoWs. India treated all the PoWs in strict accordance with the Geneva Convention, rule 1925. It released more than 93,000 Pakistani PoWs in five months.\nFurthermore, as a gesture of goodwill, nearly 200 soldiers who were sought for war crimes by Bengalis were also pardoned by India. The accord also gave back more than of land that Indian troops had seized in West Pakistan during the war, though India retained a few strategic areas; most notably Kargil (which would in turn again be the focal point for a war between the two nations in 1999).\nThe real number of victims during the war is still not certain. and estimates of those killed range from Bangladeshi estimates of 3 million to Pakistani estimates of 26,000. According to one source 1.7 million died. A large number of women had been raped by Pakistani, Bengali and Biharis. The government conferred upon them an honorary title of birangina (\"brave heroines\") but they suffered discrimination afterwards.\nBesides the Pakistani prisoner of wars there were still collaborators in Bangladesh. In 1973, the Bangladeshi government announced an amnesty for them in exchange for Pakistani recognition. Demands that these be collaborators be tried resurfaced in the 1990s. There was also a large population of non-Bengali Muslims who mostly supported Pakistan. Bengali mobs, who identified them as \"Bihari\", had killed them before the war and the Biharis had aided the Pakistani army during it. Thousands suffered a counter genocide and at least a million were made homeless.\nPeople's Republic of Bangladesh.\nConstitution, early democracy and socialism.\nProvisional Government.\nThe Provisional Government of Bangladesh was the country's first government. The Provisional Government was formed in Mujibnagar on 17 April 1971. It issued the proclamation of independence and drafted an interim constitution, declaring \"Equality, Human Dignity and Social Justice\" as its fundamental principles. Its prime minister was Tajuddin Ahmad and military chief of staff was M A G Osmani. Other important cabinet members included Syed Nazrul Islam and Muhammad Mansur Ali. It included the newly formed Bangladesh Civil Service with defecting members of the Civil Service of Pakistan. It also had a prominent diplomatic corps, led by Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, Humayun Rashid Choudhury and Rehman Sobhan among others. The Bangladesh Forces included eleven sector commanders, among whom prominent figures included Ziaur Rahman, Khaled Mosharraf and K M Shafiullah.\nNeighboring India provided diplomatic, economic and military support for the Provisional Government. The government's capital in exile was Calcutta. The Indian military intervened in the final two weeks of the war in December 1971, ensuring the surrender of Pakistan.\nSheikh Mujib administration.\nThe left-wing Awami League, which had won the 1970 election in Pakistan, formed the first post-independence government in Bangladesh. Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman became the 2nd Prime Minister of Bangladesh on 12 January 1972 and is widely regarded as the nation's independence hero and founding father. Nation-building under his regime was based on secular Bengali nationalist principles. The original Constitution of Bangladesh, drafted by Kamal Hossain, laid down the structure of a liberal democratic parliamentary republic with socialist influences in 1972.\nOn the international stage, Rahman and his Indian counterpart Indira Gandhi signed the 25-year Indo-Bangladeshi Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace. Bangladesh joined the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Commonwealth of Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement. Rahman was invited to Washington DC and Moscow for talks with American and Soviet leaders. In the Delhi Agreement of 1974, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan pledged to work for regional stability and peace. The agreement paved the way for the return of interned Bengali officials and their families stranded in Pakistan, as well as the establishing of diplomatic relations between Dhaka and Islamabad. Japan became a major aid provider to the new country. Although Israel was one of early countries to recognise Bangladesh, the government in Dhaka strongly supported Egypt during the Arab-Israeli War of 1973. In return, Egypt gifted Bangladesh's military with 44 tanks. The Soviet Union supplied several squadrons of MiG-21 planes.\nDomestically, Rahman's regime became increasingly authoritarian. There was an insurgency by the radical socialist Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal, as well as agitation by pro-business and conservative forces, who felt the Awami League was unfairly taking exclusive credit for the liberation struggle. Rahman imposed a three-month state of emergency in 1974 to clean up mismanagement and corruption. He formed the para-military Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini, which was accused of human rights abuses. The Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini was also distrusted by many in the Bangladesh Army.\nEconomically, Rahman embarked on a huge nationalisation programme that failed to deliver the benefits intended. Soviet and Indian aid also failed to materialise in the desired quantity. The Bangladesh famine of 1974 was a major economic blow and humanitarian crisis.\nIn January 1975, Sheikh Mujib assumed the presidency with extraordinary powers, dissolved the parliamentary system, and established a one party state. Various political parties were merged into a sole legal national party, the Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League, popularly known by its acronym BAKSAL. Most Bangladeshi newspapers were banned. The failure of Sheikh Mujib's economic policies alienated the population. By 1975 journalist Anthony Mascarenhas described him as \"the most hated man in Bangladesh\". On 15 August 1975, a group of junior army rebels assassinated Sheikh Mujib.\nMilitary coups and presidential regimes.\nFirst martial law and Zia administration.\nThe coup leaders installed Vice-President Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad as Sheikh Mujib's immediate successor. Ahmad promulgated martial law. He reshuffled the leadership of the Bangladesh Armed Forces and jailed some prominent confidantes of Sheikh Mujib, including Bangladesh's first Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad. The jailed leaders were killed on 3 November 1975 to prevent them from siding with a counter-coup that began that day.\nThe counter-coup, led by Brigadier General Khaled Mosharraf, overthrew Ahmad from the presidency. On 6 November 1975, the chief justice, Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem, was installed as president. The next day Mosharraf was killed during a mutiny led by Abu Taher. The army chief, Lieutenant General Ziaur Rahman, emerged as the country's most powerful figure.\nThe dispute over the sharing the water of the Ganges, due to India's construction of the Farakka Barrage, led Bangladesh to seek the intervention of the United Nations in 1976. The dispute was addressed through a bilateral agreement in 1977.\nLt Gen Ziaur Rahman (popularly known as Zia) assumed the presidency from Justice Sayem on 21 April 1977. Zia formed the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). Parliamentary elections were held in 1979, in which the BNP gained a landslide majority and the Awami League became the principal opposition party.\nPresident Zia restored free markets, redefined socialism as \"economic and social justice\" in the constitution and crafted a foreign policy which emphasised solidarity with Muslim majority countries and regional co-operation in South Asia. Bangladesh achieved rapid economic and industrial growth under Zia's presidency. The government built the country's first export processing zones. It operated a popular food-for-work programme, reversed the collectivisation of farms and promoted private sector development.\nZia faced twenty mutinies and attempted coups against his government. The final coup attempt resulted in his assassination in 1981: Zia was killed by troops loyal to Major General Abul Manzoor on 30 May 1981. The mutiny was later suppressed by army chief Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad.\nSattar administration.\nZia was succeeded by Vice-President Abdus Sattar. President Sattar received a popular mandate during the 1981 presidential election. The 1982 Bangladesh coup d'\u00e9tat deposed President Sattar and his civilian government.\nSecond martial law and Ershad administration.\nSattar was replaced by the chief justice A. F. M. Ahsanuddin Chowdhury. Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad proclaimed martial law and became the Chief Martial Law Administrator. He appointed himself as the President of the Council of Ministers and the naval and air force chiefs as deputy martial law administrators. Ershad geared Bangladesh's foreign policy more towards the anti-Soviet bloc.\nIn 1983, Ershad assumed the presidency. Political repression was rife under Ershad's martial law regime. However, the government implemented a series of administrative reforms, particularly in terms of devolution. The eighteen districts of the country were divided into sixty-four districts. The upazila system was also created.\nAmong his major actions were to privatise the largely state-owned economy (up to 70% of industry was in public ownership) and encourage private investment in heavy industries along with light manufacturing, raw materials, and newspapers. Foreign companies were invited to invest in Bangladeshi industry as well, and stiff protectionist measures were put in place to safeguard manufacturing. All political parties and trade unions were banned, with the death penalty to be administered for corruption and political agitation. Ershad's takeover was generally viewed as a positive development, as Bangladesh was in a state of serious economic difficulty. The country was facing significant food shortages. The government also faced a severe budget deficit to the tune of 4\u00a0billion takas, and the IMF declared that it would not provide any more loans until Bangladesh paid down some of its existing debts. During most of 1984, Ershad sought the opposition parties' participation in local elections under martial law. The opposition's refusal to participate, however, forced Ershad to abandon these plans. Ershad sought public support for his regime in a national referendum on his leadership in March 1985. He won overwhelmingly, although turnout was small. Two months later, Ershad held elections for local council chairmen. Pro-government candidates won a majority of the posts, setting in motion the President's ambitious decentralisation programme.\nPolitical life was further liberalised in early 1986, and additional political rights, including the right to hold large public rallies, were restored. At the same time, the Jatiya Party (Ershad), designed as Ershad's political vehicle for the transition from martial law, was established. Despite a boycott by the BNP, led by President Zia's widow, Begum Khaleda Zia, parliamentary elections were held on schedule in 1986 Bangladeshi general election. The Jatiya Party won a modest majority of the 300 elected seats in the National Assembly. The participation of the Awami League\u2014led by the late President Mujib's daughter, Sheikh Hasina Wajed\u2014lent the elections some credibility, despite widespread charges of voting irregularities.\nErshad resigned as Chief of Army Staff and retired from military service in preparation for the 1986 Bangladeshi presidential election, scheduled for October. Protesting that martial law was still in effect, both the BNP and the AL refused to put up opposing candidates. Ershad easily outdistanced the remaining candidates, taking 84% of the vote. Although Ershad's government claimed a turnout of more than 50%, opposition leaders, and much of the foreign press, estimated a far lower percentage and alleged voting irregularities.\nIn November 1986, his government mustered the necessary two-thirds majority in the National Assembly to pass the seventh constitutional amendment bill, protecting Ershad and his regime from prosecution for actions taken under the years of military rule. Martial law was subsequently lifted on 11 November and the opposition parties took their elected seats in the National Assembly.\nIn July 1987, however, after the government hastily pushed through a controversial legislative bill to include military representation on local administrative councils, the opposition walked out of Parliament. Passage of the bill helped spark an opposition movement that quickly gathered momentum, uniting Bangladesh's opposition parties for the first time. The government began to arrest scores of opposition activists under the country's Special Powers Act of 1974. Despite these arrests, opposition parties continued to organise protest marches and nationwide strikes. In order to prevent a 72-hour strike planned for 29 November, Ershad declared a state of emergency on 27 November. Parliament was dissolved on 6 December, and fresh elections scheduled for March 1988.\nAll major opposition parties refused government overtures to participate in these polls, maintaining that the government was incapable of holding free and fair elections. Despite the opposition boycott, the 1988 Bangladeshi general election proceeded. The ruling Jatiya Party (Ershad) won 251 of the 300 seats. The Parliament, while still regarded by the opposition as an illegitimate body, held its sessions as scheduled, and passed numerous bills, including, in June 1988, the controversial eighth amendment to the Constitution, which made Islam the state religion, in contrast to the original secular nature of the Constitution.\nBy 1989, the local council elections were generally considered by international observers to have been less violent and more free and fair than previous elections. However, opposition to Ershad's rule began to regain momentum, escalating by the end of 1990 in frequent general strikes, increased campus protests, public rallies, and a general disintegration of law and order.\nChittagong Hill Tracts conflict.\nThe Chittagong Hill Tracts is the south-eastern mountainous frontier of Bangladesh with Myanmar and Northeast India. The area enjoyed autonomy under British Bengal. Its autonomous status was revoked by Pakistan, which built the controversial Kaptai Dam that displaced the area's indigenous people. When Bangladesh became independent, the government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman adopted a Bengali nationalist constitution, which denied recognition of the country's ethnic minorities. Manabendra Narayan Larma, a member of parliament form the hill tracts, called for constitutional recognition of the indigenous people of the area. He gave a notable speech at the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh demanding the use of \"Bangladeshi\" as the country's nationality definition, instead of Bengali. During the 1970s and '80s, there were attempts by the government to settle with the Bengali people. These attempts were resisted by the hill tribes, who, with the latent support of neighbouring India, formed a guerrilla force called Shanti Bahini. As a result of the tribal resistance movement, successive governments turned the Hill Tracts into a militarised zone.\nFollowing years of unrest, the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord was signed in 1997 between the government of Bangladesh and the tribal leaders which granted a limited level of autonomy to the elected council of the three hill districts.\nReturn of parliamentary republic and Battle of the Begums.\nFirst caretaker government (1990\u20131991).\nErshad resigned under the pressure from the military and international community, as the pro-democracy movement spearheaded by Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina engulfed the entire country and drew the participation of the middle and upper classes.\nThe chief justice, Shahabuddin Ahmed, was sworn in as acting president and formed the first caretaker government of Bangladesh. Ahmed placed Ershad under arrest and organised free and fair elections in 1991.\nKhaleda administration (1991\u20131996).\nThe centre-right BNP won the 1991 Bangladeshi general election with 140 seats, but was short of an overall parliamentary majority. However, they formed a government with support from the Islamic party Jamaat-e-Islami, with Khaleda Zia, widow of Ziaur Rahman, obtaining the post of prime minister. Only four parties had more than 10 members elected to the 1991 Parliament: The BNP, led by Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia; the AL, led by Sheikh Hasina; the Jamaat-I-Islami (JI), led by Ghulam Azam; and the Jatiya Party (JP), led by acting chairman Mizanur Rahman Choudhury while its founder, former President Ershad, served out a prison sentence on corruption charges. Khaleda Zia became the first female prime minister in Bangladeshi history.\nIn September 1991 a constitutional referendum was held, which sought the transfer of executive powers from the President, which had been held by the Office since 1975, to the Prime Minister \u2013 making the President largely a ceremonial role. The vote was overwhelmingly in favour of the constitutional amendment and Bangladesh was restored to a Parliamentary democracy, as per its founding constitution. In October 1991, members of Parliament elected a new head of state, President Abdur Rahman Biswas. Finance Minister Saifur Rahman launched a series of liberal economic reforms, which set a precedent in South Asia and was seen as a model in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.\nIn March 1994, controversy over a parliamentary by-election, which the opposition claimed the government had rigged, led to an indefinite boycott of Parliament by the entire opposition. The opposition also began a programme of repeated general strikes to press its demand that Khaleda Zia's government resign and a caretaker government supervise a general election. Efforts to mediate the dispute, under the auspices of the Commonwealth Secretariat, failed. After another attempt at a negotiated settlement failed narrowly in late December 1994, the opposition resigned en masse from Parliament. The opposition then continued a campaign of marches, demonstrations, and strikes in an effort to force the government to resign. All major opposition parties, including Sheikh Hasina's Awami League, pledged to boycott national elections scheduled for 15 February 1996.\nIn February, Khaleda Zia was re-elected by a landslide in voting boycotted and denounced as unfair by the three main opposition parties. This administration was short-lived however, only lasting 12 days and in March 1996, following escalating political turmoil, the sitting Parliament enacted a constitutional amendment to allow a neutral caretaker government to assume power and conduct new parliamentary elections in June 1996.\nSecond caretaker government (1996).\nThe chief justice Muhammad Habibur Rahman became the 1st Chief Advisor of Bangladesh under the country's constitutional caretaker government system. During this period, President Abdur Rahman Biswas sacked army chief Lieutenant General Abu Saleh Mohammad Nasim for alleged political activities, causing the general to attempt a coup in response. The sacked army chief ordered troops in Bogra, Mymensingh and Jessore to march towards Dhaka. However, the military commander of Savar sided with the president and deployed tanks in the capital and its surrounding highways, and also suspended ferry services, as part of operations to deter the coup forces. Lt Gen Nasim was later arrested in Dhaka Cantonment.\nThe Chief Advisor successfully held free and fair elections on 12 June 1996. The Awami League emerged as the single largest party, with 146 seats in parliament, followed by the BNP with 116 seats and Jatiya Party with 32 seats.\nHasina administration (1996\u20132001).\nSheikh Hasina's Awami League won 146 of 300 seats in the June 1996 elections, just short of a majority. However, with the support of Jatiya party she formed what she called a \"Government of National Consensus\" in June 1996. International and domestic election observers found the June 1996 election free and fair. The BNP soon charged that police and Awami League activists were engaged in large-scale harassment and jailing of opposition activists. At the end of 1996, the BNP staged a parliamentary walkout over this and other grievances but returned in January 1997 under a four-point agreement with the ruling party. The BNP asserted that this agreement was never implemented and later staged another walkout in August 1997. The BNP returned to Parliament under another agreement in March 1998.\nThe first Hasina administration is credited for landmark initiatives in environmental and inter-ethnic peacemaking. It was responsible for signing the Ganges Water Sharing Treaty with India and the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord with ethnic insurgents, for which Hasina won the UNESCO Peace Prize. Hasina was also one of the founding leaders of the Developing 8 Countries. In 1998, Hasina hosted a rare and unprecedented trilateral economic summit in Dhaka with Prime Ministers Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan and I. K. Gujral of India. Her summits with US President Bill Clinton in Dhaka and Washington DC focused on American energy investments for Bangladesh's natural gas reserves and the extradition of her father's killers. However, Hasina was not keen to allow the export of Bangladeshi natural gas, despite demands from multinational firms.\nIn June 1999, the BNP and other opposition parties again began to abstain from attending Parliament. Opposition parties staged an increasing number of nationwide general strikes, rising from six days of general strikes in 1997 to 27 days in 1999. A four-party opposition alliance formed at the beginning of 1999 announced that it would boycott parliamentary by-elections and local government elections unless the government took steps demanded by the opposition to ensure electoral fairness. The government did not take these steps, and the opposition subsequently boycotted all elections.\nIn July 2001, the Awami League government stepped down to allow a caretaker government to preside over parliamentary elections. Political violence that had increased during the Awami League government's tenure continued to increase through the summer in the run up to the election. In August, Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina agreed during a visit of former President Jimmy Carter to respect the results of the election, join Parliament win or lose, forswear the use of hartals (violently enforced strikes) as political tools, and if successful in forming a government allow for a more meaningful role for the opposition in Parliament.\nThird caretaker government (2001).\nThe caretaker government, led by Chief Advisor Latifur Rahman, was successful in containing the violence, which allowed a parliamentary general election to be successfully held on 1 October 2001. The election saw a landslide victory of the BNP-led coalition, which included the far-right Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Oikya Jote. The BNP won 193 seats and the Jamaat won 17 seats.\nKhaleda administration (2001\u20132006).\nFollowing the September 11 attacks, the government of Prime Minister Khaleda Zia allowed the United States to use Bangladeshi airports and airspace for combat operations in Afghanistan. Bangladesh was also quick to respond to relief efforts in Afghanistan after the overthrow of the Taliban, with BRAC becoming the largest development agency in the war-torn country. The United States praised Bangladesh as an \"elegant, compelling and greatly needed voice of moderation\" in the Muslim world. Khaleda Zia also developed a strategic partnership with China and signed a Defense Cooperation Agreement with Beijing.\nDespite her August 2001 pledge and all election monitoring groups declaring the election free and fair, Sheikh Hasina condemned the last election, rejected the results, and boycotted Parliament. In 2002, however, she led her party legislators back to Parliament, but the Awami League again walked out in June 2003 to protest derogatory remarks about Hasina by a State Minister and the allegedly partisan role of the Parliamentary Speaker. In June 2004, the AL returned to Parliament without having any of their demands met. They then attended Parliament irregularly before announcing a boycott of the entire June 2005 budget session.\nKhaleda Zia's administration was marked by improved economic growth, corruption allegations and growing rifts between the country's secular and conservative forces. A series of high-profile assassinations targeted the Awami League-led opposition. Former Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina narrowly escaped an assassination attempt in 2004. The Jamaatul Mujahadeen Bangladesh launched several terrorist attacks in 2005. The League accused the BNP and Jamaat of having complicity in the rise of militancy. Relations with neighbouring India deteriorated over allegations that Bangladeshi territory was allowed to be used by Northeast Indian insurgents.\nFourth caretaker regime (2006\u20132008).\nA major political crisis erupted after the end of the BNP's tenure, as the Awami League-led coalition demanded a neutral candidate for Chief Advisor. Weeks of strikes, protests and blockades paralysed the country. President Iajuddin Ahmed assumed the responsibilities of Chief Advisor but failed to allay the fears of the opposition of an impending rigged election. The Bangladeshi press accused the president of acting under the influence of the BNP. Violent protests continued even as the military was deployed in aid of civil administration.\nOn 11 January 2007, a state of emergency was declared by President Ahmed, who resigned from the office of chief advisor under widely reported pressure from the military, particularly the army chief General Moeen U Ahmed. The former governor of the central bank, Fakhruddin Ahmed, was appointed as the Chief Advisor and the cabinet was reshuffled with many technocrats. The military-backed caretaker government started an anti-corruption drive, which saw the arrest of over 160 politicians, businessmen and bureaucrats, including former prime ministers Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina, as well as Khaleda's two sons. Student protests in Dhaka University demanded the restoration of democracy in August 2007, but were suppressed by a curfew. Khaleda and Hasina were released in 2008.\nThe state of emergency lasted for two years. The 2008 Bangladeshi general election saw a landslide victory for the Awami League-led coalition, which also included the Jatiya Party.\nHasina administration (2009\u20132024).\nWithin two months of assuming office, Sheikh Hasina's second government faced the BDR Mutiny, which provoked tensions with sections of the military. Hasina successfully tackled the threat from mutineers and enraged elements in the military. She formed the international crimes tribunal to prosecute surviving Bengali Islamist collaborators of the 1971 genocide. The tribunal has criticism over its fairness and impartiality.\nAn anti-terror crackdown dramatically improved relations with neighbouring India. Bangladesh and India have increasingly focused on regional connectivity and trade.\nIn 2010, the Supreme Court of Bangladesh reaffirmed secularism as a fundamental principle in the constitution. The war crimes tribunal mobilised public opinion in favour of secularism, which was manifested in the March 2013 Shahbag protests. In response, a huge Islamist mobilisation also took place led by the Hefazat-e-Islam group in May 2013.\nThe intense bickering between the League and BNP, often dubbed the Battle of the Begums, has continued. The Hasina government abolished the provision of caretaker government in the constitution through the controversial Fifteenth Amendment. The move was seen by the BNP as an attempt to corrupt the election process in favour of the League.\nIn 2013, the hard-line, right-wing, Islamic party, Jamaat-e-Islami was banned from registering and therefore contesting in elections by the High Court, citing their charter violates the constitution. Street violence between the League, BNP and the Jamaat intensified in the run up to the general election. In 2014, the general elections were boycotted by the BNP. The elections were criticized by the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and the United Nations. Sheikh Hasina was sworn in for a third tenure as prime minister.\nIn 2015 and 2016, Bangladesh saw increasing assassinations targeting minorities and secularists. The country's worst terrorist attack saw the death of 20 people after an upmarket restaurant was sieged by gunmen in July 2016. The Islamic State of Iraq and Levant has claimed responsibility for many of the attacks, although the Hasina government insists local terror outfits are more likely to be responsible. Since this attack, the Government took stricter measures against extremists as the security forces led a numerous raids on suspected militant hide-outs. The measures led to reduction in extremist attacks and fatalities.\nIn 2017, the country faced fresh challenge from incoming Rohingya refugees. Starting in early August 2017, the Myanmar security forces began \"clearance operations\" against the Rohingya in northern Rakhine state \u2013 killing thousands of Rohingya, brutalizing thousands more, and driving hundreds of thousands out of the country into neighboring Bangladesh. In the first four weeks of the conflict, over 400,000 Rohingya refugees (approximately 40% of the remaining Rohingya in Myanmar) fled the country (chiefly to Bangladesh) creating a major humanitarian crisis. The governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh signed a memorandum of understanding on 23 November 2017 regarding the repatriation of Rohingya refugees to Rakhine State. However, till the end of the decade over 740,000 refugees remained in Bangladesh creating pressure on the country's economy and infrastructure.\nThe 2018 General elections brought another landslide victory for the Awami League led by Sheikh Hasina. While the opposition was already weak due to key leaders being in either jail or exile, the elections were further marred by violence and claims of vote rigging. However, this gave the Awami League Government stability and opportunity to complete key infrastructure projects for the country including the Padma Bridge and the Dhaka Metro Rail.\nAnti-government protests broke out in Bangladesh on 10 December 2022. In December 2022, tens of thousands marched in Dhaka demanding the resignation of Sheikh Hasina. \nIn January 2024, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina secured her fourth straight term in Bangladesh's controversial general election, which was boycotted by the main opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party.\nThe fall of Hasina administration (2024).\nIn June 2024, protests began in response to the Supreme Court of Bangladesh reinstating a 30% quota for government jobs for descendants of freedom fighters, reversing the government decision made in response to the 2018 Bangladesh quota reform movement. Students began to feel like they have a limited opportunity based on merit. The protest, which initially began as a response to the reestablished quota system for government jobs, quickly spread throughout the entire country because of the government's violent response, as well as growing public dissatisfaction against an oppressive government. The situation was further complicated by many other ongoing issues, like the government's inability to manage a prolonged economic downturn, reports of rampant corruption and human rights violations, and the absence of democratic channels for initiating changes.\nOn 3 August 2024, coordinators of the Anti-discrimination Students Movement announced a one-point demand for the resignation and called for \"comprehensive non-cooperation\". The following day, violent clashes broke out, resulting in the deaths of 97 people, including students. The coordinators called for a long march to Dhaka to force Hasina out of power on 5 August. That day, a large crowd of protesters made its way through the capital. At 2:30 p.m. BST, Sheikh Hasina resigned and fled to India.\nOn 5 August, the chief of army staff, Waker-uz-Zaman, convened a meeting with representatives from the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), Jatiya Party (Ershad), and Jamaat-e-Islami and called for the creation of an interim government within 48 hours, excluding the Awami League. Subsequent reports indicated that Muhammad Yunus, a Nobel laureate, had been approached to be the head of the interim government. The nomination of Yunus, who accepted the advisory role in the interim government, has also been supported by prominent figures within the student movement. In addition, Waker-uz-Zaman pledged an investigation by the military into the preceding incidents of violence and issued an order prohibiting security forces from opening fire on crowds.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40097", "revid": "1312976024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40097", "title": "Collecting", "text": "Hobby of locating or acquiring items of interest\nThe hobby of collecting includes seeking, locating, acquiring, organizing, cataloging, displaying, storing, and maintaining items that are of interest to an individual \"collector\". Collections differ in a wide variety of respects, most obviously in the nature and scope of the objects contained, but also in purpose, presentation, and so forth. The range of possible subjects for a collection is practically unlimited, and collectors have realised a vast number of these possibilities in practice, although some are much more popular than others.\nIn collections of manufactured items, the objects may be antique or simply collectable. Antiques are collectable items at least 100 years old, while other collectables are arbitrarily recent. The word \"vintage\" describes relatively old collectables that are not yet antiques.\nCollecting is a childhood hobby for some people, but for others, it is a lifelong pursuit or something started in adulthood. Collectors who begin early in life often modify their goals when they get older. Some novice collectors start by purchasing items that appeal to them and then slowly work at learning how to build a collection, while others prefer to develop some background in the field before starting to buy items. The emergence of the internet as a global forum for different collectors has resulted in many isolated enthusiasts finding each other.\nTypes of collection.\nThe most obvious way to categorize collections is by the type of objects collected. Most collections are of manufactured commercial items, but natural objects such as birds' eggs, butterflies, rocks, and seashells can also be the subject of a collection. For some collectors, the criterion for inclusion might not be the type of object but some incidental property such as the identity of its original owner.\nSome collectors are generalists with very broad criteria for inclusion, while others focus on a subtopic within their area of interest. Some collectors accumulate arbitrarily many objects that meet the thematic and quality requirements of their collection, others\u2014called \"completists\" or \"completionists\"\u2014aim to acquire all items in a well-defined set that can in principle be completed, and others seek a limited number of items per category (e.g. one representative item per year of manufacture or place of purchase). Collecting items by country (e.g. one collectible per country) is very common. The monetary value of objects is important to some collectors but irrelevant to others. Some collectors maintain objects in pristine condition, while others use the items they collect.\nValue of collected items.\nAfter a collectable has been purchased, its retail price no longer applies and its value is linked to what is called the secondary market. There is no secondary market for an item unless someone is willing to buy it, and an object's value is whatever the buyer is willing to pay. Depending on age, condition, supply, demand, and other factors, individuals, auctioneers, and secondary retailers may sell a collectable for either more or less than what they originally paid for it. Special or limited edition collectables are created with the goal of increasing demand and value of an item due to its rarity. A \"price guide\" is a resource such as a book or website that lists typical selling prices.\nProducts often become more valuable with age. The term \"antique\" generally refers to manufactured items made over 100 years ago, although in some fields, such as antique cars, the time frame is less stringent. For antique furniture, the limit has traditionally been set in the 1830s. Collectors and dealers may use the word \"vintage\" to describe older collectables that are too young to be called antiques, including Art Deco and Art Nouveau items, Carnival and Depression glass, etc. Items which were once everyday objects but may now be collectable, as almost all examples produced have been destroyed or discarded, are called \"ephemera\".\nPsychological aspects.\nPsychological factors can play a role in both the motivation for keeping a collection and the impact it has on the collector's life. These factors can be positive or negative.\nThe hobby of collecting often goes hand-in-hand with an interest in the objects collected and what they represent, for example collecting postcards may reflect an interest in different places and cultures. For this reason, collecting can have educational benefits, and some collectors even become experts in their field.\nMaintaining a collection can be a relaxing activity that counteracts the stress of life, while providing a purposeful pursuit which prevents boredom. The hobby can lead to social connections between people with similar interests and the development of new friendships. It has also been shown to be particularly common among academics.\nCollecting for most people is a choice, but for some it can be a compulsion, sharing characteristics with obsessive hoarding. When collecting is passed between generations, it might sometimes be that children have inherited symptoms of obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder. Collecting can sometimes reflect a fear of scarcity, or of discarding something and then later regretting it.\nCarl Jung speculated that the widespread appeal of collecting is connected to the hunting and gathering that was once necessary for human survival. Collecting is also associated with memory by association and the need for the human brain to catalogue and organise information and give meaning to ones actions.\nHistory.\nCollecting is a practice with a very old cultural history. In Mesopotamia, collecting practices have been noted among royalty and elites as far back as the 3rd millennium BCE. The Egyptian Ptolemaic dynasty collected books from all over the known world at the Library of Alexandria. The Medici family, in Renaissance Florence, made the first effort to collect art by private patronage, this way artists could be free for the first time from the money given by the Church and Kings; this citizenship tradition continues today with the work of private art collectors. Many of the world's popular museums\u2014from the Metropolitan in New York City to the Thyssen in Madrid or the Franz Mayer in Mexico City\u2014have collections formed by the collectors that donated them to be seen by the general public.\nThe collecting hobby is a modern descendant of the \"cabinet of curiosities\" which was common among scholars with the means and opportunities to acquire unusual items from the 16th century onwards. Planned collecting of ephemeral publications goes back at least to George Thomason in the reign of Charles I and Samuel Pepys in that of Charles II. Collecting engravings and other prints by those whose means did not allow them to buy original works of art also goes back many centuries. The progress in 18th-century Paris of collecting both works of art and of \"curiosit\u00e9\", dimly echoed in the English \"curios\", and the origins in Paris, Amsterdam and London of the modern art market have been increasingly well documented and studied since the mid-19th century.\nThe involvement of larger numbers of people in collecting activities came with the prosperity and increased leisure for some in the later 19th century in industrial countries. That was when collecting such items as antique china, furniture and decorative items from oriental countries became established. The first price guide was the Stanley Gibbons catalogue issued in November 1865.\nThe history of collecting is chronicled in the book \"Lock, Stock, and Barrel: The story of collecting\". This well-researched book on collecting, written by Elizabeth and Douglas Rigby, was published by J. B. Lippincott &amp; Co., a major publisher in Philadelphia. \"An important book as well as a delightful one. I recommend it urgently as the best all around volume in its field,\" wrote Vincent Starrett of the Chicago Tribune in a review of the book. In addition to being reviewed by newspapers, magazines, and journals -- such as The Chicago Tribune, The New York Times, The Saturday Review, New York History, The Pennsylvania Magazine of History, and The American Scholar -- the book also has been cited in academic studies on collecting.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40112", "revid": "9267683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40112", "title": "Salvador Dal\u00ed", "text": "Spanish surrealist artist (1904\u20131989)\nSalvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dal\u00ed i Dom\u00e8nech, Marquess of Dal\u00ed de P\u00fabol (11 May 1904\u00a0\u2013 23 January 1989), known as Salvador Dal\u00ed ( ; ; ), was a Spanish surrealist artist renowned for his technical skill, precise draftsmanship, and the striking and bizarre images in his work. \nBorn in Figueres in Catalonia, Dal\u00ed received his formal education in fine arts in Madrid. Influenced by Impressionism and the Renaissance masters from a young age, he became increasingly attracted to Cubism and avant-garde movements. He moved closer to Surrealism in the late 1920s and joined the Surrealist group in 1929, soon becoming one of its leading exponents. His best-known work, \"The Persistence of Memory\", was completed in August 1931. Dal\u00ed lived in France throughout the Spanish Civil War (1936 to 1939) before leaving for the United States in 1940 where he achieved commercial success. He returned to Spain in 1948 where he announced his return to the Catholic faith and developed his \"nuclear mysticism\" style, based on his interest in classicism, mysticism, and recent scientific developments.\nDal\u00ed's artistic repertoire included painting, sculpture, film, graphic arts, animation, fashion, and photography, at times in collaboration with other artists. He also wrote fiction, poetry, autobiography, essays, and criticism. Major themes in his work include dreams, the subconscious, sexuality, religion, science and his closest personal relationships. To the dismay of those who held his work in high regard, and to the irritation of his critics, his eccentric and ostentatious public behavior often drew more attention than his artwork. His public support for the Francoist regime, his commercial activities and the quality and authenticity of some of his late works have also been controversial. His life and work were an important influence on other Surrealists, pop art, popular culture, and contemporary artists such as Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst.\nThere are two major museums devoted to Salvador Dal\u00ed's work: the Dal\u00ed Theatre-Museum in Figueres, Spain, and the Salvador Dal\u00ed Museum in St. Petersburg, Florida, U.S.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nSalvador Dal\u00ed was born on 11 May 1904, at 8:45\u00a0am, on the first floor of Carrer Monturiol, 20 in the town of Figueres, in the Empord\u00e0 region, close to the French border in Catalonia, Spain. Dal\u00ed's older brother, who had also been named Salvador (born 12 October 1901), had died of gastroenteritis nine months earlier, on 1 August 1903. His father, Salvador Luca Rafael Aniceto Dal\u00ed Cus\u00ed (1872\u20131950) was a middle-class lawyer and notary, an anti-clerical atheist and Catalan federalist, whose strict disciplinary approach was tempered by his wife, Felipa Dom\u00e8nech Ferr\u00e9s (1874\u20131921), who encouraged her son's artistic endeavors. In the summer of 1912, the family moved to the top floor of Carrer Monturiol 24 (presently 10). Dal\u00ed later attributed his \"love of everything that is gilded and excessive, my passion for luxury and my love of oriental clothes\" to an \"Arab lineage\", claiming that his ancestors were descendants of the Moors.\nDal\u00ed was haunted by the idea of his dead brother throughout his life, mythologizing him in his writings and art. Dal\u00ed said of him, \"[we] resembled each other like two drops of water, but we had different reflections.\" He \"was probably the first version of myself but conceived too much in the absolute\". Images of his brother would reappear in his later works, including \"Portrait of My Dead Brother\" (1963).\nDal\u00ed also had a sister, Anna Maria, who was three years younger, and whom Dal\u00ed painted 12 times between 1923 and 1926.\nHis childhood friends included future FC Barcelona footballers Emili Sagi-Barba and Josep Samitier. During holidays at the Catalan resort town of Cadaqu\u00e9s, the trio played football together.\nDal\u00ed attended the Municipal Drawing School at Figueres in 1916 and also discovered modern painting on a summer vacation trip to Cadaqu\u00e9s with the family of Ramon Pichot, a local artist who made regular trips to Paris. The next year, Dal\u00ed's father organized an exhibition of his charcoal drawings in their family home. He had his first public exhibition at the Municipal Theatre in Figueres in 1918, a site he would return to decades later. In early 1921 the Pichot family introduced Dal\u00ed to Futurism. That same year, Dal\u00ed's uncle Anselm Dom\u00e8nech, who owned a bookshop in Barcelona, supplied him with books and magazines on Cubism and contemporary art.\nOn 6 February 1921, Dal\u00ed's mother died of uterine cancer. Dal\u00ed was 16 years old and later said his mother's death \"was the greatest blow I had experienced in my life. I worshipped her ... I could not resign myself to the loss of a being on whom I counted to make invisible the unavoidable blemishes of my soul.\" After the death of Dal\u00ed's mother, Dal\u00ed's father married her sister. Dal\u00ed did not resent this marriage, because he had great love and respect for his aunt.\nMadrid, Barcelona and Paris.\nIn 1922, Dal\u00ed moved into the Residencia de Estudiantes (Students' Residence) in Madrid and studied at the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando (San Fernando Royal Academy of Fine Arts). A lean tall, Dal\u00ed already drew attention as an eccentric and dandy. He had long hair and sideburns, coat, stockings, and knee-breeches in the style of English aesthetes of the late 19th century.\nAt the Residencia, he became close friends with Pep\u00edn Bello, Luis Bu\u00f1uel, Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca, and others associated with the Madrid avant-garde group Ultra. The friendship with Lorca had a strong element of mutual passion, but Dal\u00ed said he rejected the poet's sexual advances. Dal\u00ed's friendship with Lorca was to remain one of his most emotionally intense relationships until the poet's death at the hands of Nationalist forces in 1936 at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War.\nAlso in 1922, he began what would become a lifelong relationship with the Prado Museum, which he felt was, 'incontestably the best museum of old paintings in the world.' Each Sunday morning, Dal\u00ed went to the Prado to study the works of the great masters. 'This was the start of a monk-like period for me, devoted entirely to solitary work: visits to the Prado, where, pencil in hand, I analyzed all of the great masterpieces, studio work, models, research.'\nThose paintings by Dal\u00ed in which he experimented with Cubism earned him the most attention from his fellow students, since there were no Cubist artists in Madrid at the time. \"Cabaret Scene\" (1922) is a typical example of such work. Through his association with members of the Ultra group, Dal\u00ed became more acquainted with avant-garde movements, including Dada and Futurism. One of his earliest works to show a strong Futurist and Cubist influence was the watercolor \"Night-Walking Dreams\" (1922). At this time, Dal\u00ed also read Freud and Lautr\u00e9amont who were to have a profound influence on his work.\nIn May 1925, Dal\u00ed exhibited eleven works in a group exhibition held by the newly formed \"Sociedad Ib\u00e9rica de Artistas\" in Madrid. Seven of the works were in his Cubist mode and four in a more realist style. Several leading critics praised his work. Dal\u00ed held his first solo exhibition at Galeries Dalmau in Barcelona, from 14 to 27 November 1925. This exhibition, before his exposure to Surrealism, included twenty-two works and was a critical and commercial success.\nIn April 1926, Dal\u00ed made his first trip to Paris, where he met Pablo Picasso, whom he revered. Picasso had already heard favorable reports about Dal\u00ed from Joan Mir\u00f3, a fellow Catalan who later introduced him to many Surrealist friends. As he developed his own style over the next few years, Dal\u00ed made some works strongly influenced by Picasso and Mir\u00f3. Dal\u00ed was also influenced by the work of Yves Tanguy, and he later allegedly told Tanguy's niece, \"I pinched everything from your uncle Yves.\"\nDal\u00ed left the Royal Academy in 1926, shortly before his final exams. His mastery of painting skills at that time was evidenced by his realistic \"The Basket of Bread\", painted in 1926.\nLater that year he exhibited again at Galeries Dalmau, from 31 December 1926 to 14 January 1927, with the support of the art critic Sebasti\u00e0 Gasch. The show included twenty-three paintings and seven drawings, with the \"Cubist\" works displayed in a separate section from the \"objective\" works. The critical response was generally positive with \"Composition with Three Figures (Neo-Cubist Academy)\" singled out for particular attention.\nFrom 1927, Dal\u00ed's work became increasingly influenced by Surrealism. Two of these works, \"Honey is Sweeter than Blood\" (1927) and \"Gadget and Hand\" (1927), were shown at the annual Autumn Salon (Sal\u00f3 de tardor) in Barcelona in October 1927. Dal\u00ed described the earlier of these works, \"Honey is Sweeter than Blood\", as \"equidistant between Cubism and Surrealism\". The works featured many elements that were to become characteristic of his Surrealist period including dreamlike images, precise draftsmanship, idiosyncratic iconography (such as rotting donkeys and dismembered bodies), and lighting and landscapes strongly evocative of his native Catalonia. The works provoked bemusement among the public and debate among critics about whether Dal\u00ed had become a Surrealist.\nInfluenced by his reading of Freud, Dal\u00ed increasingly introduced suggestive sexual imagery and symbolism into his work. He submitted \"Dialogue on the Beach (Unsatisfied Desires)\" (1928) to the Barcelona Autumn Salon for 1928; however, the work was rejected because \"it was not fit to be exhibited in any gallery habitually visited by the numerous public little prepared for certain surprises.\" The resulting scandal was widely covered in the Barcelona press and prompted a popular Madrid illustrated weekly to publish an interview with Dal\u00ed.\nSome trends in Dal\u00ed's work that would continue throughout his life were already evident in the 1920s. Dal\u00ed was influenced by many styles of art, ranging from the most academically classic, to the most cutting-edge avant-garde. His classical influences included Raphael, Bronzino, Francisco de Zurbar\u00e1n, Vermeer and Vel\u00e1zquez. Exhibitions of his works attracted much attention and a mixture of praise and puzzled debate from critics who noted an apparent inconsistency in his work by the use of both traditional and modern techniques and motifs between works and within individual works.\nIn the mid-1920s Dal\u00ed grew a neatly trimmed mustache. In later decades he cultivated a more flamboyant one in the manner of 17th-century Spanish master painter Diego Vel\u00e1zquez, and this mustache became a well known Dal\u00ed icon.\n1929 to World War II.\nIn 1929, Dal\u00ed collaborated with Surrealist film director Luis Bu\u00f1uel on the short film (\"An Andalusian Dog\"). His main contribution was to help Bu\u00f1uel write the script for the film. Dal\u00ed later claimed to have also played a significant role in the filming of the project, but this is not substantiated by contemporary accounts. In August 1929, Dal\u00ed met his lifelong muse and future wife Gala, born Elena Ivanovna Diakonova. She was a Russian immigrant ten years his senior, who at that time was married to Surrealist poet Paul \u00c9luard.\nIn works such as \"The First Days of Spring\", \"The Great Masturbator\" and \"The Lugubrious Game\" Dal\u00ed continued his exploration of the themes of sexual anxiety and unconscious desires. Dal\u00ed's first Paris exhibition was at the recently opened Goemans Gallery in November 1929 and featured eleven works. In his preface to the catalog, Andr\u00e9 Breton described Dal\u00ed's new work as \"the most hallucinatory that has been produced up to now\". The exhibition was a commercial success but the critical response was divided. In the same year, Dal\u00ed officially joined the Surrealist group in the Montparnasse quarter of Paris. The Surrealists hailed what Dal\u00ed was later to call his paranoiac-critical method of accessing the subconscious for greater artistic creativity.\nMeanwhile, Dal\u00ed's relationship with his father was close to rupture. Don Salvador Dal\u00ed y Cusi strongly disapproved of his son's romance with Gala and saw his connection to the Surrealists as a bad influence on his morals. The final straw was when Don Salvador read in a Barcelona newspaper that his son had recently exhibited in Paris a drawing of the \"Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ\", with a provocative inscription: \"Sometimes, I spit for fun on my mother's portrait\". Outraged, Don Salvador demanded that his son recant publicly. Dal\u00ed refused, perhaps out of fear of expulsion from the Surrealist group, and was violently thrown out of his paternal home on 28 December 1929. His father told him that he would be disinherited and that he should never set foot in Cadaqu\u00e9s again. The following summer, Dal\u00ed and Gala rented a small fisherman's cabin in a nearby bay at Port Lligat. He soon bought the cabin, and over the years enlarged it by buying neighboring ones, gradually building his beloved villa by the sea. Dal\u00ed's father would eventually relent and come to accept his son's companion.\nIn 1931, Dal\u00ed painted one of his most famous works, \"The Persistence of Memory\", which developed a surrealistic image of soft, melting pocket watches. The general interpretation of the work is that the soft watches are a rejection of the assumption that time is rigid or deterministic. This idea is supported by other images in the work, such as the wide expanding landscape, and other limp watches shown being devoured by ants.\nDal\u00ed had two important exhibitions at the Pierre Colle Gallery in Paris in June 1931 and May\u2013June 1932. The earlier exhibition included sixteen paintings of which \"The Persistence of Memory\" attracted the most attention. Some of the notable features of the exhibitions were the proliferation of images and references to Dal\u00ed's muse Gala and the inclusion of Surrealist Objects such as \"Hypnagogic Clock\" and \"Clock Based on the Decomposition of Bodies\". Dal\u00ed's last, and largest, the exhibition at the Pierre Colle Gallery was held in June 1933 and included twenty-two paintings, ten drawings, and two objects. One critic noted Dal\u00ed's precise draftsmanship and attention to detail, describing him as a \"paranoiac of geometrical temperament\". Dal\u00ed's first New York exhibition was held at Julien Levy's gallery in November\u2013December 1933. The exhibition featured twenty-six works and was a commercial and critical success. The \"New Yorker\" critic praised the precision and lack of sentimentality in the works, calling them \"frozen nightmares\".\nDal\u00ed and Gala, having lived together since 1929, were civilly married on 30 January 1934 in Paris. They later remarried in a Church ceremony on 8 August 1958 at Sant Mart\u00ed Vell. In addition to inspiring many artworks throughout her life, Gala would act as Dal\u00ed's business manager, supporting their extravagant lifestyle while adeptly steering clear of insolvency. Gala, who herself engaged in extra-marital affairs, seemed to tolerate Dal\u00ed's dalliances with younger muses, secure in her own position as his primary relationship. Dal\u00ed continued to paint her as they both aged, producing sympathetic and adoring images of her. The \"tense, complex and ambiguous relationship\" lasting over 50 years would later become the subject of an opera, \"Jo, Dal\u00ed\" (\"I, Dal\u00ed\") by Catalan composer Xavier Benguerel.\nDal\u00ed's first visit to the United States in November 1934 attracted widespread press coverage. His second New York exhibition was held at the Julien Levy Gallery in November\u2013December 1934 and was again a commercial and critical success. Dal\u00ed delivered three lectures on Surrealism at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) and other venues during which he told his audience for the first time that \"[t]he only difference between me and a madman is that I am not mad.\" The heiress Caresse Crosby, the inventor of the brassiere, organized a farewell fancy dress ball for Dal\u00ed on 18 January 1935. Dal\u00ed wore a glass case on his chest containing a brassiere and Gala dressed as a woman giving birth through her head. A Paris newspaper later claimed that the Dal\u00eds had dressed as the Lindbergh baby and his kidnapper, a claim which Dal\u00ed denied.\nWhile the majority of the Surrealist group had become increasingly associated with leftist politics, Dal\u00ed maintained an ambiguous position on the subject of the proper relationship between politics and art. Leading Surrealist Andr\u00e9 Breton accused Dal\u00ed of defending the \"new\" and \"irrational\" in \"the Hitler phenomenon\", but Dal\u00ed quickly rejected this claim, saying, \"I am Hitlerian neither in fact nor intention\". Dal\u00ed insisted that Surrealism could exist in an apolitical context and refused to explicitly denounce fascism. Later in 1934, Dal\u00ed was subjected to a \"trial\", in which he narrowly avoided being expelled from the Surrealist group. To this, Dal\u00ed retorted, \"The difference between the Surrealists and me is that I am a Surrealist.\"\nIn 1936, Dal\u00ed took part in the \"London International Surrealist Exhibition\". His lecture, titled , was delivered while wearing a deep-sea diving suit and helmet. He had arrived carrying a billiard cue and leading a pair of Russian wolfhounds and had to have the helmet unscrewed as he gasped for breath. He commented that \"I just wanted to show that I was 'plunging deeply into the human mind.\"\nDal\u00ed's first solo London exhibition was held at the Alex, Reid, and Lefevre Gallery the same year. The show included twenty-nine paintings and eighteen drawings. The critical response was generally favorable, although the Daily Telegraph critic wrote: \"These pictures from the subconscious reveal so skilled a craftsman that the artist's return to full consciousness may be awaited with interest.\"\nIn December 1936, Dal\u00ed participated in the \"Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism\" exhibition at MoMA and a solo exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York. Both exhibitions attracted large attendances and widespread press coverage. The painting \"Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)\" (1936) attracted particular attention. Dal\u00ed later described it as, \"a vast human body breaking out into monstrous excrescences of arms and legs tearing at one another in a delirium of auto-strangulation\". On 14 December, Dal\u00ed, aged 32, was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine.\nFrom 1933, Dal\u00ed was supported by Zodiac, a group of affluent admirers who each contributed to a monthly stipend for the painter in exchange for a painting of their choice. From 1936 Dal\u00ed's main patron in London was the wealthy Edward James who would support him financially for two years. One of Dal\u00ed's most important paintings from the period of James' patronage was \"The Metamorphosis of Narcissus\" (1937). They also collaborated on two of the most enduring icons of the Surrealist movement: the \"Lobster Telephone\" and the \"Mae West Lips Sofa\".\nDal\u00ed was in London when the Spanish Civil War broke out in July 1936. When he later learned that his friend Lorca had been executed by Nationalist forces, Dal\u00ed's claimed response was to shout: \"Ol\u00e9!\" Dal\u00ed was to include frequent references to the poet in his art and writings for the remainder of his life. Nevertheless, Dal\u00ed avoided taking a public stand for or against the Republic for the duration of the conflict.\nIn January 1938, Dal\u00ed unveiled \"Rainy Taxi\", a three-dimensional artwork consisting of an automobile and two mannequin occupants being soaked with rain from within the taxi. The piece was first displayed at the Galerie Beaux-Arts in Paris at the \"Exposition Internationale du Surr\u00e9alisme\", organized by Andr\u00e9 Breton and Paul \u00c9luard. The Exposition was designed by artist Marcel Duchamp, who also served as host.\nIn March that year, Dal\u00ed met Sigmund Freud thanks to Stefan Zweig. As Dal\u00ed sketched Freud's portrait, Freud whispered, \"That boy looks like a fanatic.\" Dal\u00ed was delighted upon hearing later about this comment from his hero. The following day Freud wrote to Zweig, \"until now I have been inclined to regard the Surrealists, who have apparently adopted me as their patron saint, as complete fools. ... That young Spaniard, with his candid fanatical eyes and his undeniable technical mastery, has changed my estimate. It would indeed be very interesting to investigate analytically how he came to create that picture [i.e. \"Metamorphosis of Narcissus\"].\"\nIn September 1938, Salvador Dal\u00ed was invited by Gabrielle Coco Chanel to her house \"La Pausa\" in Roquebrune on the French Riviera. There he painted numerous paintings he later exhibited at Julien Levy Gallery in New York. This exhibition in March\u2013April 1939 included twenty-one paintings and eleven drawings. Life reported that no exhibition in New York had been so popular since Whistler's \"Mother\" was shown in 1934.\nAt the 1939 New York World's Fair, Dal\u00ed debuted his \"Dream of Venus\" Surrealist pavilion, located in the Amusements Area of the exposition. It featured bizarre sculptures, statues, mermaids, and live nude models in \"costumes\" made of fresh seafood, an event photographed by Horst P. Horst, George Platt Lynes, and Murray Korman. Dal\u00ed was angered by changes to his designs, railing against mediocrities who thought that \"a woman with the tail of a fish is possible; a woman with the head of a fish impossible.\"\nSoon after Franco's victory in the Spanish Civil War in April 1939, Dal\u00ed wrote to Luis Bu\u00f1uel denouncing socialism and Marxism and praising Catholicism and the Falange. As a result, Bu\u00f1uel broke off relations with Dal\u00ed.\nIn the May issue of the Surrealist magazine \"Minotaure\", Andr\u00e9 Breton announced Dal\u00ed's expulsion from the Surrealist group, claiming that Dal\u00ed had espoused race war and that the over-refinement of his paranoiac-critical method was a repudiation of Surrealist automatism. This led many Surrealists to break off relations with Dal\u00ed. In 1949 Breton coined the derogatory nickname \"Avida Dollars\" (avid for dollars), an anagram for \"Salvador Dal\u00ed\". This was a derisive reference to the increasing commercialization of Dal\u00ed's work, and the perception that Dal\u00ed sought self-aggrandizement through fame and fortune.\nWorld War II.\nThe outbreak of World War II in September 1939 saw the Dal\u00eds in France. Following the German invasion, they were able to escape because on 20 June 1940 they were issued visas by Aristides de Sousa Mendes, Portuguese consul in Bordeaux, France. They crossed into Portugal and subsequently sailed on the \"Excambion\" from Lisbon to New York in August 1940. Dal\u00ed and Gala were to live in the United States for eight years, splitting their time between New York and the Monterey Peninsula, California.\nDal\u00ed spent the winter of 1940\u201341 at Hampton Manor, the residence of Caresse Crosby, in Caroline County, Virginia, where he worked on various projects including his autobiography and paintings for his upcoming exhibition.\nDal\u00ed announced the death of the Surrealist movement and the return of classicism in his exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York in April\u2013May 1941. The exhibition included nineteen paintings (among them \"Slave Market with the Disappearing Bust of Voltaire\" and \"The Face of War\") and other works\".\" In his catalog essay and media comments, Dal\u00ed proclaimed a return to form, control, structure and the Golden Section. Sales however were disappointing and the majority of critics did not believe there had been a major change in Dal\u00ed's work.\nOn 2 September 1941, he hosted \"A Surrealistic Night in an Enchanted Forest\" in Monterey, a charity event which attracted national attention but raised little money for charity.\nThe Museum of Modern Art held two major, simultaneous retrospectives of Dal\u00ed and Joan Mir\u00f3 from November 1941 to February 1942, Dal\u00ed being represented by forty-two paintings and sixteen drawings. Dal\u00ed's work attracted significant attention of critics and the exhibition later toured eight American cities, enhancing his reputation in America.\nIn October 1942, Dal\u00ed's autobiography, \"The Secret Life of Salvador Dal\u00ed\" was published simultaneously in New York and London and was reviewed widely by the press. Time magazine's reviewer called it \"one of the most irresistible books of the year\". George Orwell later wrote a scathing review in the \"Saturday Book\". A passage in the autobiography in which Dal\u00ed claimed that Bu\u00f1uel was solely responsible for the anti-clericalism in the film \"L'Age d'Or\" may have indirectly led to Bu\u00f1uel resigning his position at MoMA in 1943 under pressure from the State Department. Dal\u00ed also published a novel \"Hidden Faces\" in 1944 with less critical and commercial success.\nIn the catalog essay for his exhibition at the Knoedler Gallery in New York in 1943, Dal\u00ed continued his attack on the Surrealist movement, writing: \"Surrealism will at least have served to give experimental proof that total sterility and attempts at automatizations have gone too far and have led to a totalitarian system. ... Today's laziness and the total lack of technique have reached their paroxysm in the psychological signification of the current use of the college [collage]\". The critical response to the society portraits in the exhibition, however, was generally negative.\nIn November\u2013December 1945 Dal\u00ed exhibited new work at the Bignou Gallery in New York. The exhibition included eleven oil paintings, watercolors, drawings, and illustrations. Works included \"Basket of Bread\", \"Atomic and Uranian Melancholic Ideal\", and \"My Wife Nude Contemplating her own Body Transformed into Steps, the Three Vertebrae of a Column, Sky and Architecture\". The exhibition was notable for works in Dal\u00ed's new classicism style and those heralding his \"atomic period\".\nDuring the war years, Dal\u00ed was also engaged in projects in various other fields. He executed designs for a number of ballets including \"Labyrinth\" (1942), \"Sentimental Colloquy\", \"Mad Tristan\", and \"The Cafe of Chinitas\" (all 1944). In 1945 he created the dream sequence for Alfred Hitchcock's film \"Spellbound\". He also produced artwork and designs for products such as perfumes, cosmetics, hosiery and ties.\nPostwar in United States (1946\u201348).\nIn 1946, Dal\u00ed worked with Walt Disney and animator John Hench on an unfinished animated film \"Destino\".\nDal\u00ed exhibited new work at the Bignou Gallery from November 1947 to January 1948. The 14 oil paintings and other works in the exhibition reflected Dal\u00ed's increasing interest in atomic physics. Notable works included \"Dematerialization Near the Nose of Nero (The Separation of the Atom)\", \"Intra-Atomic Equilibrium of a Swan's Feather\", and a study for \"Leda Atomica\". The proportions of the latter work were worked out in collaboration with a mathematician.\nIn early 1948, Dal\u00ed's \"50 Secrets of Magic Craftsmanship\" was published. The book was a mixture of anecdotes, practical advice on painting, and Dal\u00ednian polemics.\nLater years in Spain.\nIn 1948, Dal\u00ed and Gala moved back into their house in Port Lligat, on the coast near Cadaqu\u00e9s. For the next three decades, they would spend most of their time there, spending winters in Paris and New York. Dal\u00ed's decision to live in Spain under Franco and his public support for the regime prompted outrage from many anti-Francoist artists and intellectuals. Pablo Picasso refused to mention Dal\u00ed's name or acknowledge his existence for the rest of his life. In 1960, Andr\u00e9 Breton unsuccessfully fought against the inclusion of Dal\u00ed's \"Sistine Madonna\" in the \"Surrealist Intrusion in the Enchanter's Domain\" exhibition organized by Marcel Duchamp in New York. Breton and other Surrealists issued a tract to coincide with the exhibition denouncing Dal\u00ed as \"the ex-apologist of Hitler ... and friend of Franco\".\nIn December 1949, Dal\u00ed's sister Anna Maria published her book \"Salvador Dal\u00ed Seen by his Sister\". Dal\u00ed was angered by passages that he considered derogatory towards his wife Gala and broke off relations with his family. When Dal\u00ed's father died in September 1950, Dal\u00ed learned that he had been virtually disinherited in his will. A two-year legal dispute followed over paintings and drawings Dal\u00ed had left in his family home, during which Dal\u00ed was accused of assaulting a public notary.\nAs Dal\u00ed moved further towards embracing Catholicism he introduced more religious iconography and themes in his painting. In 1949, he painted a study for \"The Madonna of Port Lligat\" (first version, 1949) and showed it to Pope Pius XII during an audience arranged to discuss Dal\u00ed 's marriage to Gala. This work was a precursor to the phase Dal\u00ed dubbed \"Nuclear Mysticism\", a fusion of Einsteinian physics, classicism, and Catholic mysticism. In paintings such as \"The Madonna of Port Lligat\", \"The Christ of Saint John on the Cross\" and \"The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory\", Dal\u00ed sought to synthesize Christian iconography with images of material disintegration inspired by nuclear physics. His later Nuclear Mysticism works included \"La Gare de Perpignan\" (1965) and \"The Hallucinogenic Toreador\" (1968\u201370).\nDal\u00ed's keen interest in natural science and mathematics was further manifested by the proliferation of images of DNA and rhinoceros horn shapes in works from the mid-1950s. According to Dal\u00ed, the rhinoceros horn signifies divine geometry because it grows in a logarithmic spiral. Dal\u00ed was also fascinated by the Tesseract (a four-dimensional cube), using it, for example, in \"Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)\".\nDal\u00ed had been extensively using optical illusions such as double images, anamorphosis, negative space, visual puns and \"trompe-l'\u0153il\" since his Surrealist period and this continued in his later work. At some point, Dal\u00ed had a glass floor installed in a room near his studio in Port Lligat. He made extensive use of it to study foreshortening, both from above and from below, incorporating dramatic perspectives of figures and objects into his paintings. He also experimented with the bulletist technique pointillism, enlarged half-tone dot grids and stereoscopic images. He was among the first artists to employ holography in an artistic manner. In Dal\u00ed's later years, young artists such as Andy Warhol proclaimed him an important influence on pop art.\nIn 1960, Dal\u00ed began work on his Theatre-Museum in his home town of Figueres. It was his largest single project and a main focus of his energy through to 1974, when it opened. He continued to make additions through the mid-1980s.\nIn 1955, Dal\u00ed met Nanita Kalaschnikoff, who was to become a close friend, muse, and model. At a French nightclub in 1965 Dal\u00ed met Amanda Lear, a fashion model then known as Peki Oslo. Lear became his prot\u00e9g\u00e9e and one of his muses. According to Lear, she and Dal\u00ed were united in a \"spiritual marriage\" on a deserted mountaintop.\nFinal years and death.\nIn 1968, Dal\u00ed bought the Castle of P\u00fabol for Gala, and from 1971 she would retreat there for weeks at a time, Dal\u00ed having agreed not to visit without her written permission. His fears of abandonment and estrangement from his longtime artistic muse contributed to depression and failing health.\nIn 1980, at age 76, Dal\u00ed's health deteriorated sharply and he was treated for depression, drug addiction, and Parkinson-like symptoms, including a severe tremor in his right arm. There were also allegations that Gala had been supplying Dal\u00ed with pharmaceuticals from her own prescriptions.\nGala died on 10 June 1982, at the age of 87. After her death, Dal\u00ed moved from Figueres to the castle in P\u00fabol, where she was entombed.\nIn 1982, King Juan Carlos bestowed on Dal\u00ed the title of \"Marqu\u00e9s de Dal\u00ed de P\u00fabol\" (\"Marquess of Dal\u00ed de P\u00fabol\") in the nobility of Spain, P\u00fabol being where Dal\u00ed then lived. The title was initially hereditary, but at Dal\u00ed's request was changed to life-only in 1983.\nIn May 1983, what was said to be Dal\u00ed's last painting, \"The Swallow's Tail\", was revealed. The work was heavily influenced by the mathematical catastrophe theory of Ren\u00e9 Thom. However, some critics have questioned how Dal\u00ed could have executed a painting with such precision given the severe tremor in his painting arm.\nFrom early 1984, Dal\u00ed's depression worsened and he refused food, leading to severe undernourishment. Dal\u00ed had previously stated his intention to put himself into a state of suspended animation as he had read that some microorganisms could do. In August 1984 a fire broke out in Dal\u00ed's bedroom and he was hospitalized with severe burns. Two judicial inquiries found that the fire was caused by an electrical fault and no findings of negligence were made. After his release from hospital Dal\u00ed moved to the Torre Galatea, an annex to the Dal\u00ed Theatre-Museum.\nThere have been allegations that Dal\u00ed was forced by his guardians to sign blank canvases that could later be used in forgeries. It is also alleged that he knowingly sold otherwise-blank lithograph paper which he had signed, possibly producing over 50,000 such sheets from 1965 until his death. As a result, art dealers tend to be wary of late graphic works attributed to Dal\u00ed.\nIn July 1986, Dal\u00ed had a pacemaker implanted. On his return to his Theatre-Museum he made a brief public appearance, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When you are a genius, you do not have the right to die, because we are necessary for the progress of humanity.\nIn November 1988, Dal\u00ed entered hospital with heart failure. On 5 December 1988, he was visited by King Juan Carlos, who confessed that he had always been a serious devotee of Dal\u00ed. Dal\u00ed gave the king a drawing, \"Head of Europa\", which would turn out to be Dal\u00ed's final drawing.\nOn the morning of 23 January 1989, Dal\u00ed died of cardiac arrest at the age of 84. He is buried in the crypt below the stage of his Theatre-Museum in Figueres. The location is across the street from the church of \"Sant Pere\", where he had his baptism, first communion, and funeral, and is only from the house where he was born.\nExhumation.\nOn 26 June 2017, it was announced that a judge in Madrid had ordered the exhumation of Dal\u00ed's body in order to obtain samples for a paternity suit. Joan Manuel Sevillano, manager of the \"Fundaci\u00f3n Gala Salvador Dal\u00ed\" (The Gala-Salvador Dal\u00ed Foundation), denounced the exhumation as inappropriate. The exhumation took place on the evening of 20 July, and his DNA was extracted. On 6 September 2017, the Foundation stated that the tests carried out proved conclusively that Dal\u00ed and the claimant were not related. On 18 May 2020, a Spanish court dismissed an appeal from the claimant and ordered her to pay the costs of the exhumation.\nSymbolism.\nFrom the late 1920s, Dal\u00ed progressively introduced many bizarre or incongruous images into his work which invite symbolic interpretation. While some of these images suggest a straightforward sexual or Freudian interpretation (Dal\u00ed read Freud in the 1920s) others (such as locusts, rotting donkeys, and sea urchins) are idiosyncratic and have been variously interpreted. Some commentators have cautioned that Dal\u00ed's own comments on these images are not always reliable.\nFood.\nFood and eating have a central place in Dal\u00ed's thoughts and work. He associated food with beauty and sex and was obsessed with the image of the female praying mantis eating her mate after copulation. Bread was a recurring image in Dal\u00ed's art, from his early work \"The Basket of Bread\" to later public performances such as in 1958 when he gave a lecture in Paris using a 12-meter-long baguette an illustrative prop. He saw bread as \"the elementary basis of continuity\" and \"sacred subsistence\".\nThe egg is another common Dal\u00ednian image. He connects the egg to the prenatal and intrauterine, thus using it to symbolize hope and love. It appears in \"The Great Masturbator\", \"The Metamorphosis of Narcissus\" and many other works. There are also giant sculptures of eggs in various locations at Dal\u00ed's house in Portlligat as well as at the Dal\u00ed Theatre-Museum in Figueres.\nThe radial symmetry of the sea urchin intrigued Dal\u00ed. He had enjoyed eating them with his father at Cadaqu\u00e9s and, along with other foods, they became a recurring theme in his work.\nThe famous \"melting watches\" that appear in \"The Persistence of Memory\" suggest Einstein's theory that time is relative and not fixed. Dal\u00ed later claimed that the idea for clocks functioning symbolically in this way came to him when he was contemplating Camembert cheese.\nAnimals.\nThe rhinoceros and rhinoceros horn shapes began to proliferate in Dal\u00ed's work from the mid-1950s. According to Dal\u00ed, the rhinoceros horn signifies divine geometry because it grows in a logarithmic spiral. He linked the rhinoceros to themes of chastity and to the Virgin Mary. However, he also used it as an obvious phallic symbol as in \"Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity\".\nVarious other animals appear throughout Dal\u00ed's work: rotting donkeys and ants have been interpreted as pointing to death, decay, and sexual desire; the snail as connected to the human head (he saw a snail on a bicycle outside Freud's house when he first met him); and locusts as a symbol of waste and fear. The elephant is also a recurring image in his work; for example, \"Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening\". The elephants are inspired by Gian Lorenzo Bernini's sculpture base in Rome of an elephant carrying an ancient obelisk.\nScience.\nDal\u00ed's life-long interest in science and mathematics was often reflected in his work. His soft watches have been interpreted as references to Einstein's theory of the relativity of time and space. Images of atomic particles appeared in his work soon after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and strands of DNA appeared from the mid-1950s. In 1958 he wrote in his \"Anti-Matter Manifesto\": \"In the Surrealist period, I wanted to create the iconography of the interior world and the world of the marvelous, of my father Freud. Today, the exterior world and that of physics have transcended the one of psychology. My father today is Dr. Heisenberg.\"\n\"The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory\" (1954) harks back to \"The Persistence of Memory\" (1931) and in portraying that painting in fragmentation and disintegration has been interpreted as a reference to Heisenberg's quantum mechanics.\nEndeavors outside painting.\nDal\u00ed was a versatile artist. Some of his more popular works are sculptures and other objects, and he is also noted for his contributions to theater, fashion, and photography, among other areas.\nSculptures and other objects.\nFrom the early 1930s, Dal\u00ed was an enthusiastic proponent of the proliferation of three-dimensional Surrealist Objects to subvert perceptions of conventional reality, writing: \"museums will fast fill with objects whose uselessness, size and crowding will necessitate the construction, in deserts, of special towers to contain them.\" His more notable early objects include \"Board of Demented Associations\" (1930\u201331), \"Retrospective Bust of a Woman\" (1933), \"Venus de Milo with Chest of Drawers\" (1936) and \"Aphrodisiac Dinner Jacket\" (1936). Two of the most popular objects of the Surrealist movement were \"Lobster Telephone\" (1936) and \"Mae West Lips Sofa\" (1937) which were commissioned by art patron Edward James. Lobsters and telephones had strong sexual connotations for Dal\u00ed who drew a close analogy between food and sex. The telephone was functional, and James purchased four of them from Dal\u00ed to replace the phones in his home. The \"Mae West Lips Sofa\" was shaped after the lips of actress Mae West, who was previously the subject of Dal\u00ed's watercolor, \"The Face of Mae West which may be used as a Surrealist Apartment (1934\u201335)\". In December 1936 Dal\u00ed sent Harpo Marx a Christmas present of a harp with barbed-wire strings.\nAfter World War II Dal\u00ed authorized many sculptures derived from his most famous works and images. In his later years other sculptures also appeared, often in large editions, whose authenticity has sometimes been questioned.\nBetween 1941 and 1970, Dal\u00ed created an ensemble of 39 pieces of jewelry, many of which are intricate, some containing moving parts. The most famous assemblage, \"The Royal Heart\", is made of gold and is encrusted with 46 rubies, 42 diamonds, and four emeralds, created in such a way that the center \"beats\" like a heart.\nDal\u00ed ventured into industrial design in the 1970s with a 500-piece run of \"Suomi\" tableware by Timo Sarpaneva that Dal\u00ed decorated for the German Rosenthal porcelain maker's \"Studio Linie\". In 1969 he designed the Chupa Chups logo. He facilitated the design of the advertising campaign for the 1969 Eurovision Song Contest and created a large on-stage metal sculpture that stood at the Teatro Real in Madrid.\nTheater and film.\nIn theater, Dal\u00ed designed the scenery for Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca's 1927 romantic play \"Mariana Pineda\". For \"Bacchanale\" (1939), a ballet based on and set to the music of Richard Wagner's 1845 opera \"Tannh\u00e4user\", Dal\u00ed provided both the set design and the libretto. He executed designs for a number of other ballets including \"Labyrinth\" (1942), \"Sentimental Colloquy\", \"Mad Tristan\", \"The Cafe of Chinitas\" (all 1944) and \"The Three-Cornered Hat\" (1949).\nDal\u00ed became interested in film when he was young, going to the theater most Sundays. By the late 1920s he was fascinated by the potential of film to reveal \"the unlimited fantasy born of things themselves\" and went on to collaborate with the director Luis Bu\u00f1uel on two Surrealist films: the 17-minute short \"Un Chien Andalou\" (1929) and the feature film \"L'Age d'Or\" (1930). Dal\u00ed and Bu\u00f1uel agree that they jointly developed the script and imagery of \"Un Chien Andalou\", but there is controversy over the extent of Dal\u00ed's contribution to \"L'Age d'Or\". \"Un Chien Andalou\" features a graphic opening scene of a human eyeball being slashed with a razor and develops surreal imagery and irrational discontinuities in time and space to produce a dreamlike quality. \"L'Age d'Or\" is more overtly anti-clerical and anti-establishment, and was banned after right-wing groups staged a riot in the Parisian theater where it was being shown. Summarizing the impact of these two films on the Surrealist film movement, one commentator has stated: \"If Un Chien Andalou stands as the supreme record of Surrealism's adventures into the realm of the unconscious, then L'\u00c2ge d'Or is perhaps the most trenchant and implacable expression of its revolutionary intent.\"\nAfter he collaborated with Bu\u00f1uel, Dal\u00ed worked on several unrealized film projects including a published script for a film, \"Babaouo\" (1932); a scenario for Harpo Marx called \"Giraffes on Horseback Salad\" (1937); and an abandoned dream sequence for the film \"Moontide\" (1942). In 1945 Dal\u00ed created the dream sequence in Hitchcock's \"Spellbound\", but neither Dal\u00ed nor the director was satisfied with the result. Dal\u00ed also worked with Walt Disney and animator John Hench on the short film \"Destino\" in 1946. After initially being abandoned, the animated film was completed in 2003 by Baker Bloodworth and Walt Disney's nephew Roy E. Disney. Between 1954 and 1961 Dal\u00ed worked with photographer Robert Descharnes on \"The Prodigious History of the Lacemaker and the Rhinoceros\", but the film was never completed.\nIn the 1960s Dal\u00ed worked with some directors on documentary and performance films including with Philippe Halsman on \"Chaos and Creation\" (1960), Jack Bond on \"Dal\u00ed in New York\" (1966) and Jean-Christophe Averty on \"Soft Self-Portrait of Salvador Dal\u00ed\" (1966).\nDal\u00ed collaborated with director Jos\u00e9-Montes Baquer on the pseudo-documentary film \"Impressions of Upper Mongolia\" (1975), in which Dal\u00ed narrates a story about an expedition in search of giant hallucinogenic mushrooms. In the mid-1970s film director Alejandro Jodorowsky initially cast Dal\u00ed in the role of the Padishah Emperor in a production of \"Dune\", based on the novel by Frank Herbert. However, Jodorowsky changed his mind after Dal\u00ed publicly supported the execution of alleged ETA terrorists in December 1975. The film was ultimately never made.\nIn 1972 Dal\u00ed began to write the scenario for an opera-poem called \"\u00catre Dieu\" (https://). The Spanish writer Manuel V\u00e1zquez Montalb\u00e1n wrote the libretto and Igor Wakh\u00e9vitch the music. The opera poem was recorded in Paris in 1974 with Dal\u00ed in the role of the protagonist.\nFashion and photography.\nFashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli worked with Dal\u00ed from the 1930s and commissioned him to produce a white dress with a lobster print. Other designs Dal\u00ed made for her include a shoe-shaped hat and a pink belt with lips for a buckle. He was also involved in creating textile designs and perfume bottles. In 1950, Dal\u00ed created a special \"costume for the year 2045\" with Christian Dior.\nPhotographers with whom he collaborated include Man Ray, Brassa\u00ef, Cecil Beaton, and Philippe Halsman. Halsman produced the \"Dal\u00ed Atomica\" series (1948)\u00a0\u2013 inspired by Dal\u00ed's painting \"Leda Atomica\"\u00a0\u00a0\u2013 which in one photograph depicts \"a painter's easel, three cats, a bucket of water, and Dal\u00ed himself floating in the air\".\nArchitecture.\nDal\u00ed's architectural achievements include his Port Lligat house near Cadaqu\u00e9s, as well as his Theatre Museum in Figueres. A major work outside of Spain was the temporary \"Dream of Venus\" Surrealist pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair, which contained several unusual sculptures and statues, including live performers posing as statues. In 1958, Dal\u00ed completed \"Crisalida\", a temporary installation promoting a drug, which was exhibited at a medical convention in San Francisco.\nLiterary works.\nIn his only novel, \"Hidden Faces\" (1944), Dal\u00ed describes the intrigues of a group of eccentric aristocrats whose extravagant lifestyle symbolizes the decadence of the 1930s. The Comte de Grandsailles and Solange de Cl\u00e9da pursue a love affair, but interwar political turmoil and other vicissitudes drive them apart. It is variously set in Paris, rural France, Casablanca in North Africa, and Palm Springs in the United States. Secondary characters include aging widow Barbara Rogers, her bisexual daughter Veronica, Veronica's sometime female lover Betka, and Baba, a disfigured U.S. fighter pilot. The novel was written in New York, and translated by Haakon Chevalier.\nHis other literary works include \"The Secret Life of Salvador Dal\u00ed\" (1942), \"Diary of a Genius\" (1966), and \"Oui: The Paranoid-Critical Revolution\" (1971). Dal\u00ed also published poetry, essays, art criticism, and a technical manual on art.\nGraphic arts.\nDal\u00ed worked extensively in the graphic arts, producing many drawings, etchings, and lithographs. Among the most notable of these works are forty etchings for an edition of Lautr\u00e9amont's \"The Songs of Maldoror\" (1933) and eighty drypoint reworkings of Goya's \"Caprichos\" (1973\u201377). From the 1960s, however, Dal\u00ed would often sell the rights to images but not be involved in the print production itself. In addition, a large number of fakes were produced in the 1980s and 1990s, thus further confusing the Dal\u00ed print market.\nBook illustrations were an important part of Dal\u00ed's work throughout his career. His first book illustration was for the 1924 publication of the Catalan poem \"Les bruixes de Llers\" (\"The Witches of Liers\") by his friend and schoolmate, poet Carles Fages de Climent. His other notable book illustrations, apart from \"The Songs of Maldoror\", include 101 watercolors and engravings for \"The Divine Comedy\" (1960) and 100 drawings and watercolors for \"The Arabian Nights\" (1964).\nPolitics and personality.\nPolitics and religion.\nAs a youth, Dal\u00ed identified as communist, anti-monarchist and anti-clerical, and in 1924 he was briefly imprisoned by the Primo de Rivera dictatorship as a person \"intensely liable to cause public disorder\". When Dal\u00ed officially joined the Surrealist group in 1929 his political activism initially intensified. In 1931, he became involved in the Workers' and Peasants' Front, delivering lectures at meetings and contributing to their party journal. However, as political divisions within the Surrealist group grew, Dal\u00ed soon developed a more apolitical stance, refusing to publicly denounce fascism. In 1934, Andr\u00e9 Breton accused him of being sympathetic to Hitler and Dal\u00ed narrowly avoided being expelled from the group. In 1935 Dal\u00ed wrote a letter to Breton suggesting that non-white races should be enslaved. After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, Dal\u00ed avoided taking a public stand for or against the Republic. However, immediately after Franco's victory in 1939, Dal\u00ed praised Catholicism and the Falange and was expelled from the Surrealist group.\nAfter Dal\u00ed's return to his native Catalonia in 1948, he publicly supported Franco's regime and announced his return to the Catholic faith. Dal\u00ed was granted an audience with Pope Pius XII in 1949 and with Pope John XXIII in 1959. He had official meetings with General Franco in June 1956, October 1968, and May 1974. In 1968, Dal\u00ed stated that on Franco's death there should be no return to democracy and Spain should become an absolute monarchy. In September 1975, Dal\u00ed publicly supported Franco's decision to execute three alleged Basque terrorists and repeated his support for an absolute monarchy, adding: \"Personally, I'm against freedom; I'm for the Holy Inquisition.\" In the following days, he fled to New York after his home in Port Lligat was stoned and he had received numerous death threats. When King Juan Carlos visited the ailing Dal\u00ed in August 1981, Dal\u00ed told him: \"I have always been an anarchist and a monarchist.\"\nDal\u00ed espoused a mystical view of Catholicism and in his later years he claimed to be a Catholic and an agnostic. He was interested in the writings of the Jesuit priest and philosopher Teilhard de Chardin and his Omega Point theory. Dal\u00ed's painting \"Tuna Fishing (Homage to Meissonier)\" (1967) was inspired by his reading of Chardin.\nSexuality.\nDal\u00ed's sexuality had a profound influence on his work. He stated that as a child he saw a book with graphic illustrations of venereal diseases, and this provoked a life-long disgust of female genitalia and a fear of impotence and sexual intimacy. Dal\u00ed frequently stated that his main sexual activity involved voyeurism and masturbation and his preferred sexual orifice was the anus. Dal\u00ed said that his wife Gala was the only person with whom he had achieved complete coitus. From 1927, Dal\u00ed's work featured graphic and symbolic sexual images usually associated with other images evoking shame and disgust. Anal and fecal imagery is prominent in his work from this time. Some of the most notable works reflecting these themes include \"The First Days of Spring\" (1929), \"The Great Masturbator\" (1929), and \"The Lugubrious Game\" (1929). Several of Dal\u00ed's intimates in the 1960s and 1970s have stated that he would arrange for selected guests to perform choreographed sexual activities to aid his voyeurism and masturbation.\nPersonality.\nDal\u00ed was renowned for his eccentric and ostentatious behavior throughout his career. In 1941, the Director of Exhibitions and Publications at MoMA wrote: \"The fame of Salvador Dal\u00ed has been an issue of particular controversy for more than a decade. ... Dal\u00ed's conduct may have been undignified, but the greater part of his art is a matter of dead earnest.\" When Dal\u00ed was elected to the French Academy of Fine Arts in 1979, one of his fellow academicians stated that he hoped Dal\u00ed would now abandon his \"clowneries\".\nIn 1936, at the premiere screening of Joseph Cornell's film \"Rose Hobart\" at Julien Levy's gallery in New York City, Dal\u00ed knocked over the projector in a rage. \"My idea for a film is exactly that,\" he said shortly afterward, \"I never wrote it down or told anyone, but it is as if he had stolen it!\" In 1939, after creating a window display for Bonwit Teller, he became so enraged by unauthorized changes to his work that he pushed a display bathtub through a plate glass window. In 1955, he delivered a lecture at the Sorbonne, arriving in a Rolls-Royce full of cauliflowers. To promote Robert Descharnes' 1962 book \"The World of Salvador Dal\u00ed\", he appeared in a Manhattan bookstore on a bed, wired up to a machine that traced his brain waves and blood pressure. He would autograph books while thus monitored, and the book buyer would also be given the paper chart recording.\nAfter World War II, Dal\u00ed became one of the most recognized artists in the world, and his long cape, walking stick, haughty expression, and upturned waxed mustache became icons of his brand. His boastfulness and public declarations of his genius became essential elements of the public Dal\u00ed persona: \"every morning upon awakening, I experience a supreme pleasure: that of being Salvador Dal\u00ed\".\nDal\u00ed frequently traveled with his pet ocelot Babou, even bringing it aboard the luxury ocean liner SS \"France\".\nDal\u00ed's fame meant he was a frequent guest on television in Spain, France and the United States, including appearances on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" on 7 January 1963, \"The Mike Wallace Interview\" and the panel show \"What's My Line?\". Dal\u00ed appeared on \"The Dick Cavett Show\" on 6 March 1970 carrying an anteater. He also appeared in numerous advertising campaigns such as Lanvin chocolates and Braniff International Airlines in 1968.\nLegacy.\nTwo major museums are devoted to Dal\u00ed's work: the Dal\u00ed Theatre-Museum in Figueres, Catalonia, Spain, and the Salvador Dal\u00ed Museum in St. Petersburg, Florida, U.S.\nDal\u00ed's life and work have been an important influence on pop art, other Surrealists, and contemporary artists such as Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst. He has also had a continuing influence on contemporary culture. He has been portrayed on film by Robert Pattinson in \"Little Ashes\" (2008), by Adrien Brody in \"Midnight in Paris\" (2011), and by Ben Kingsley in \"Dal\u00edland\". The Spanish television series \"Money Heist\" (2017\u20132021) includes characters wearing a costume of red jumpsuits and Dal\u00ed masks. The creator of the series stated that the Dal\u00ed mask was chosen because it was an iconic Spanish image. The Salvador Dal\u00ed Desert in Bolivia and the Dal\u00ed crater on the planet Mercury are named for him. The container ship MV Dali was also named after him in 2015.\nThe Gala-Salvador Dal\u00ed Foundation currently serves as his official estate. The US copyright representative for the Gala-Salvador Dal\u00ed Foundation is the Artists Rights Society.\nSelected works.\nDal\u00ed produced over 1,600 paintings and numerous graphic works, sculptures, three-dimensional objects, and designs. Some of his major works are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nImportant books by or about Salvador Dal\u00ed readily available in English include:"}
{"id": "40113", "revid": "16852310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40113", "title": "Ides of March", "text": "Midpoint day in the Roman month of March\nThe Ides of March (; , Medieval Latin: ) is the day on the Roman calendar marked as the , roughly the midpoint of a month, of Martius, corresponding to 15 March on the Gregorian calendar. It was marked by several major religious observances. In 44 BC, it became notorious as the date of the assassination of Julius Caesar, which made the Ides of March a turning point in Roman history.\nIdes.\nThe Romans did not number each day of a month from the first to the last day. Instead, they counted back from three fixed points of the month: the Nones (the 5th or 7th, eight days before the Ides), the Ides (the 13th for most months, but the 15th in March, May, July, and October), and the Kalends (1st of the following month).\nOriginally the Ides were supposed to be determined by the full moon, reflecting the lunar origin of the Roman calendar. \"Martius\" (March) was the first month of the Roman year until as late as the mid-second century BC, an order reflected in the numerical names of the months of September (the seventh month) through December (the tenth month) not corresponding to their current position on the Gregorian calendar. In the earliest Roman calendar, the Ides of March would have been the first full moon of the new year. As a fixed point in the month, the Ides accumulated functions set to occur every month, and was the day when debt payments and rents were due.\nReligious observances.\nThe month of Martius was named for the god Mars, whose \"birthday\" was celebrated on the first, but the Ides of each month were sacred to Jupiter, the Romans' supreme deity. The Flamen Dialis, Jupiter's high priest, led the \"Ides sheep\" () in procession along the Via Sacra to the , where it was sacrificed.\nMarch retained many of its new-year ceremonies even when it was preceded on the calendar by January and February. In addition to the monthly sacrifice, the Ides of March was also the occasion of the Feast of Anna Perenna, a goddess of the year (Latin ) whose festival originally concluded the ceremonies of the new year. The day was enthusiastically celebrated among the common people with picnics, drinking, and revelry. One source from late antiquity also places the Mamuralia on the Ides of March. This observance, which has aspects of scapegoat or ancient Greek \"\" ritual, involved beating an old man dressed in animal skins and perhaps driving him from the city. The ritual may have been a new-year festival representing the expulsion of the old year.\nIn the later Imperial period, the Ides began a \"holy week\" of festivals celebrating Cybele and Attis, being the day (\"The Reed enters\"), when Attis was born and found among the reeds of a Phrygian river. He was discovered by shepherds or the goddess Cybele, who was also known as the (\"Great Mother\") (narratives differ). A week later, on 22 March, the solemn commemoration of (\"The Tree enters\") commemorated the death of Attis under a pine tree. A college of priests, the (\"tree bearers\") annually cut down a tree, hung from it an image of Attis, and carried it to the temple of the with lamentations. The day was formalized as part of the official Roman calendar under Claudius (d. 54 AD). A three-day period of mourning followed, culminating with celebrating the rebirth of Attis on 25 March, the date of the vernal equinox on the Julian calendar.\nAssassination of Caesar.\nIn modern times, the Ides of March is best known as the date on which Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC. Caesar was stabbed to death at a meeting of the Senate. As many as 60 conspirators, led by Brutus and Cassius, were involved. According to Plutarch, a seer had warned that harm would come to Caesar on the Ides of March. On his way to the Theatre of Pompey, where he would be assassinated, Caesar passed the seer and joked, \"Well, the Ides of March are come\", implying that the prophecy had not been fulfilled, to which the seer replied, \"Aye, they are come, but they are not gone.\" This meeting is famously dramatised in William Shakespeare's play \"Julius Caesar\", when Caesar is warned by the soothsayer to \"beware the Ides of March.\" Roman biographer Suetonius identifies the \"seer\" as a \"haruspex\" named Spurinna.\nCaesar's assassination opened the final chapter in the crisis of the Roman Republic. After his victory in Caesar's civil war, his death triggered a series of further Roman civil wars that would finally result in the rise to sole power of his adopted heir Octavian. In 27 BC, Octavian became emperor Augustus, and thus he finally terminated the Roman Republic. Writing under Augustus, Ovid portrays the murder as a sacrilege, since Caesar was also the of Rome and a priest of Vesta. On the fourth anniversary of Caesar's death in 40 BC, after achieving a victory at the siege of Perugia, Octavian executed 300 senators and equites who had fought against him under Lucius Antonius, the brother of Mark Antony. The executions were one of a series of actions taken by Octavian to avenge Caesar's death. Suetonius and the historian Cassius Dio characterised the slaughter as a religious sacrifice, noting that it occurred on the Ides of March at the new altar to the deified Julius.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40114", "revid": "42117739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40114", "title": "Escherichia coli", "text": "Rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEscherichia coli ( ) is a gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped, coliform bacterium of the genus \"Escherichia\" that is commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-blooded organisms. Most \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains are part of the normal microbiota of the gut, where they constitute about 0.1%, along with other facultative anaerobes. These bacteria are mostly harmless or even beneficial to humans. For example, some strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" benefit their hosts by producing vitamin K2 or by preventing the colonization of the intestine by harmful pathogenic bacteria. These mutually beneficial relationships between \"E.\u00a0coli\" and humans are a type of mutualistic biological relationship\u2014where both the humans and the \"E.\u00a0coli\" are benefitting each other. \"E.\u00a0coli\" is expelled into the environment within fecal matter. The bacterium grows massively in fresh fecal matter under aerobic conditions for three days, but its numbers decline slowly afterwards.\nSome serotypes, such as EPEC and ETEC, are pathogenic, causing serious food poisoning in their hosts. Fecal\u2013oral transmission is the major route through which pathogenic strains of the bacterium cause disease. This transmission method is occasionally responsible for food contamination incidents that prompt product recalls. Cells are able to survive outside the body for a limited amount of time, which makes them potential indicator organisms to test environmental samples for fecal contamination. A growing body of research, though, has examined environmentally persistent \"E.\u00a0coli\" which can survive for many days and grow outside a host.\nThe bacterium can be grown and cultured easily and inexpensively in a laboratory setting, and has been intensively investigated for over 60 years. \"E.\u00a0coli\" is a chemoheterotroph whose chemically defined medium must include a source of carbon and energy. \"E.\u00a0coli\" is the most widely studied prokaryotic model organism, and an important species in the fields of biotechnology and microbiology, where it has served as the host organism for the majority of work with recombinant DNA. Under favourable conditions, it takes as little as 20 minutes to reproduce.\nBiology and biochemistry.\nType and morphology.\n\"E. coli\" is a gram-negative, facultative anaerobe, nonsporulating coliform bacterium. Cells are typically rod-shaped, and are about 2.0 \u03bcm long and 0.25\u20131.0\u00a0\u03bcm in diameter, with a cell volume of 0.6\u20130.7\u00a0\u03bcm3.\n\"E. coli\" stains gram-negative because its cell wall is composed of a thin peptidoglycan layer and an outer membrane. During the staining process, \"E.\u00a0coli\" picks up the color of the counterstain safranin and stains pink. The outer membrane surrounding the cell wall provides a barrier to certain antibiotics, such that \"E.\u00a0coli\" is not damaged by penicillin.\nThe flagella which allow the bacteria to swim have a peritrichous arrangement. It also attaches and effaces to the microvilli of the intestines via an adhesion molecule known as intimin.\nMetabolism.\n\"E. coli\" can live on a wide variety of substrates and uses mixed acid fermentation in anaerobic conditions, producing lactate, succinate, ethanol, acetate, and carbon dioxide. Since many pathways in mixed-acid fermentation produce hydrogen gas, these pathways require the levels of hydrogen to be low, as is the case when \"E.\u00a0coli\" lives together with hydrogen-consuming organisms, such as methanogens or sulphate-reducing bacteria.\nIn addition, \"E.\u00a0coli\"'s metabolism can be rewired to solely use CO2 as the source of carbon for biomass production. In other words, this obligate heterotroph's metabolism can be altered to display autotrophic capabilities by heterologously expressing carbon fixation genes as well as formate dehydrogenase and conducting laboratory evolution experiments. This may be done by using formate to reduce electron carriers and supply the ATP required in anabolic pathways inside of these synthetic autotrophs.\n\"E. coli\" has three native glycolytic pathways: EMPP, EDP, and OPPP. The EMPP employs ten enzymatic steps to yield two pyruvates, two ATP, and two NADH per glucose molecule while OPPP serves as an oxidation route for NADPH synthesis. Although the EDP is the more thermodynamically favourable of the three pathways, \"E.\u00a0coli\" do not use the EDP for glucose metabolism, relying mainly on the EMPP and the OPPP. The EDP mainly remains inactive except for during growth with gluconate.\nCatabolite repression.\nWhen growing in the presence of a mixture of sugars, bacteria will often consume the sugars sequentially through a process known as catabolite repression. By repressing the expression of the genes involved in metabolizing the less preferred sugars, cells will usually first consume the sugar yielding the highest growth rate, followed by the sugar yielding the next highest growth rate, and so on. In doing so the cells ensure that their limited metabolic resources are being used to maximize the rate of growth. The well-used example of this with \"E.\u00a0coli\" involves the growth of the bacterium on glucose and lactose, where \"E.\u00a0coli\" will consume glucose before lactose. Catabolite repression has also been observed in \"E.\u00a0coli\" in the presence of other non-glucose sugars, such as arabinose and xylose, sorbitol, rhamnose, and ribose. In \"E.\u00a0coli\", glucose catabolite repression is regulated by the phosphotransferase system, a multi-protein phosphorylation cascade that couples glucose uptake and metabolism.\nCulture growth.\nOptimum growth of \"E.\u00a0coli\" occurs at , but some laboratory strains can multiply at temperatures up to . \"E.\u00a0coli\" grows in a variety of defined laboratory media, such as lysogeny broth, or any medium that contains glucose, ammonium phosphate monobasic, sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium phosphate dibasic, and water. Growth can be driven by aerobic or anaerobic respiration, using a large variety of redox pairs, including the oxidation of pyruvic acid, formic acid, hydrogen, and amino acids, and the reduction of substrates such as oxygen, nitrate, fumarate, dimethyl sulfoxide, and trimethylamine N-oxide. \"E.\u00a0coli\" is classified as a facultative anaerobe. It uses oxygen when it is present and available. It can, however, continue to grow in the absence of oxygen using fermentation or anaerobic respiration. Respiration type is managed in part by the arc system. The ability to continue growing in the absence of oxygen is an advantage to bacteria because their survival is increased in environments where water predominates.\nCell cycle.\nThe bacterial cell cycle is divided into three stages. The B period occurs between the completion of cell division and the beginning of DNA replication. The C period encompasses the time it takes to replicate the chromosomal DNA. The D period refers to the stage between the conclusion of DNA replication and the end of cell division. The doubling rate of \"E.\u00a0coli\" is higher when more nutrients are available. However, the length of the C and D periods do not change, even when the doubling time becomes less than the sum of the C and D periods. At the fastest growth rates, replication begins before the previous round of replication has completed, resulting in multiple replication forks along the DNA and overlapping cell cycles.\nThe number of replication forks in fast growing \"E.\u00a0coli\" typically follows 2n (n = 1, 2 or 3). This only happens if replication is initiated simultaneously from all origins of replications, and is referred to as synchronous replication. However, not all cells in a culture replicate synchronously. In this case cells do not have multiples of two replication forks. Replication initiation is then referred to being asynchronous. However, asynchrony can be caused by mutations to for instance \"dnaA\" or DnaA initiator-associating protein DiaA.\nAlthough \"E.\u00a0coli\" reproduces by binary fission the two supposedly identical cells produced by cell division are functionally asymmetric with the old pole cell acting as an aging parent that repeatedly produces rejuvenated offspring. When exposed to an elevated stress level, damage accumulation in an old \"E.\u00a0coli\" lineage may surpass its immortality threshold so that it arrests division and becomes mortal. Cellular aging is a general process, affecting prokaryotes and eukaryotes alike.\nGenetic adaptation.\n\"E. coli\" and related bacteria possess the ability to transfer DNA via bacterial conjugation or transduction, which allows genetic material to spread horizontally through an existing population. The process of transduction, which uses the bacterial virus called a bacteriophage, is where the spread of the gene encoding for the Shiga toxin from the \"Shigella\" bacteria to \"E.\u00a0coli\" helped produce , the Shiga toxin-producing strain of \"E.\u00a0coli.\"\nDiversity.\n\"E. coli\" encompasses an enormous population of bacteria that exhibit a very high degree of both genetic and phenotypic diversity. Genome sequencing of many isolates of \"E.\u00a0coli\" and related bacteria shows that a taxonomic reclassification would be desirable. However, this has not been done, largely due to its medical importance, and \"E.\u00a0coli\" remains one of the most diverse bacterial species: only 20% of the genes in a typical \"E.\u00a0coli\" genome is shared among all strains.\nIn fact, from the more constructive point of view, the members of genus \"Shigella\" (\"S.\u00a0dysenteriae\", \"S.\u00a0flexneri\", \"S.\u00a0boydii\", and \"S.\u00a0sonnei\") should be classified as \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains, a phenomenon termed taxa in disguise. Similarly, other strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" (e.g. the K-12 strain commonly used in recombinant DNA work) are sufficiently different that they would merit reclassification.\nA strain is a subgroup within the species that has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other strains. These differences are often detectable only at the molecular level; however, they may result in changes to the physiology or lifecycle of the bacterium. For example, a strain may gain pathogenic capacity, the ability to use a unique carbon source, the ability to take upon a particular ecological niche, or the ability to resist antimicrobial agents. Different strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" are often host-specific, making it possible to determine the source of fecal contamination in environmental samples. For example, knowing which \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains are present in a water sample allows researchers to make assumptions about whether the contamination originated from a human, another mammal, or a bird.\nSerotypes.\nA common subdivision system of \"E.\u00a0coli\", but not based on evolutionary relatedness, is by serotype, which is based on major surface antigens (O antigen: part of lipopolysaccharide layer; H: flagellin; K antigen: capsule), e.g. ). It is, however, common to cite only the serogroup, i.e. the O-antigen. At present, about 190 serogroups are known. Nonpathogenic strains which are commonly used in research laboratories lack an O-antigen and are thus not serotypeable.\nGenome plasticity and evolution.\nLike all lifeforms, new strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" evolve through the natural biological processes of mutation, gene duplication, and horizontal gene transfer; in particular, 18% of the genome of the laboratory strain MG1655 was horizontally acquired since the divergence from \"Salmonella\". \"E.\u00a0coli\" K-12 and \"E.\u00a0coli\" B strains are the most frequently used varieties for laboratory purposes. Some strains develop traits that can be harmful to a host animal. These virulent strains typically cause a bout of diarrhea that is often self-limiting in healthy adults but is frequently lethal to children in the developing world. More virulent strains, such as , cause serious illness or death in the elderly, the very young, or the immunocompromised.\nThe genera \"Escherichia\" and \"Salmonella\" diverged around 102\u00a0million years ago (credibility interval: 57\u2013176\u00a0mya), an event unrelated to the much earlier (see \"Synapsid\") divergence of their hosts: the former being found in mammals and the latter in birds and reptiles. This was followed by a split of an \"Escherichia\" ancestor into five species (\"E.\u00a0albertii\", \"E.\u00a0coli\", \"E.\u00a0fergusonii\", \"E.\u00a0hermannii\", and \"E.\u00a0vulneris\"). The last \"E.\u00a0coli\" ancestor split between 20 and 30\u00a0million years ago.\nThe long-term evolution experiments using \"E.\u00a0coli\", begun by Richard Lenski in 1988, have allowed direct observation of genome evolution over more than 65,000 generations in the laboratory. For instance, \"E.\u00a0coli\" typically do not have the ability to grow aerobically with citrate as a carbon source, which is used as a diagnostic criterion with which to differentiate \"E.\u00a0coli\" from other, closely, related bacteria such as \"Salmonella\". In this experiment, one population of \"E.\u00a0coli\" unexpectedly evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate, a major evolutionary shift with some hallmarks of microbial speciation.\nIn the microbial world, a relationship of predation can be established similar to that observed in the animal world. Considered, it has been seen that \"E.\u00a0coli\" is the prey of multiple generalist predators, such as \"Myxococcus xanthus\". In this predator-prey relationship, a parallel evolution of both species is observed through genomic and phenotypic modifications, in the case of \"E.\u00a0coli\" the modifications are modified in two aspects involved in their virulence such as mucoid production (excessive production of exoplasmic acid alginate ) and the suppression of the OmpT gene, producing in future generations a better adaptation of one of the species that is counteracted by the evolution of the other, following a co-evolutionary model demonstrated by the Red Queen hypothesis.\nNeotype strain.\n\"E. coli\" is the type species of the genus (\"Escherichia\") and in turn \"Escherichia\" is the type genus of the family Enterobacteriaceae, where the family name does not stem from the genus \"Enterobacter\" + \"i\" (sic.) + \"aceae\", but from \"enterobacterium\" + \"aceae\" (enterobacterium being not a genus, but an alternative trivial name to enteric bacterium).\nThe original strain described by Escherich is believed to be lost, consequently a new type strain (neotype) was chosen as a representative: the neotype strain is U5/41T, also known under the deposit names DSM 30083, ATCC 11775, and NCTC 9001, which is pathogenic to chickens and has an O1:K1:H7 serotype. However, in most studies, either , K-12 MG1655, or K-12 W3110 were used as a representative \"E.\u00a0coli\". The genome of the type strain has only lately (2013) been sequenced.\nPhylogeny of \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains.\nMany strains belonging to this species have been isolated and characterised. In addition to serotype (\"vide supra\"), they can be classified according to their phylogeny, i.e. the inferred evolutionary history, as shown below where the species is divided into six groups as of 2014. Particularly the use of whole genome sequences yields highly supported phylogenies. The phylogroup structure remains robust to newer methods and sequences, which sometimes adds newer groups, giving 8 or 14 as of 2023.\nThe link between phylogenetic distance (\"relatedness\") and pathology is small, \"e.g.\" the serotype strains, which form a clade (\"an exclusive group\")\u2014group E below\u2014are all enterohaemorragic strains (EHEC), but not all EHEC strains are closely related. In fact, four different species of \"Shigella\" are nested among \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains (\"vide supra\"), while \"E.\u00a0albertii\" and \"E.\u00a0fergusonii\" are outside this group. Indeed, all \"Shigella\" species were placed within a single subspecies of \"E.\u00a0coli\" in a phylogenomic study that included the type strain. All commonly used research strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" belong to group A and are derived mainly from Clifton's K-12 strain (\u03bb+ F+; O16) and to a lesser degree from d'Herelle's \"Bacillus coli\" strain (B strain; O7).\nThere have been multiple proposals to revise the taxonomy to match phylogeny. However, all these proposals need to face the fact that \"Shigella\" remains a widely used name in medicine and find ways to reduce any confusion that can stem from renaming.\nGenomics.\nThe first complete DNA sequence of an \"E.\u00a0coli\" genome (laboratory strain K-12 derivative MG1655) was published in 1997. It is a circular DNA molecule 4.6\u00a0million base pairs in length, containing 4288 annotated protein-coding genes (organized into 2584 operons), seven ribosomal RNA (rRNA) operons, and 86 transfer RNA (tRNA) genes. Despite having been the subject of intensive genetic analysis for about 40 years, many of these genes were previously unknown. The coding density was found to be very high, with a mean distance between genes of only 118 base pairs. The genome was observed to contain a significant number of transposable genetic elements, repeat elements, cryptic prophages, and bacteriophage remnants. Most genes have only a single copy.\nMore than three hundred complete genomic sequences of \"Escherichia\" and \"Shigella\" species are known. The genome sequence of the type strain of \"E.\u00a0coli\" was added to this collection before 2014. Comparison of these sequences shows a remarkable amount of diversity; only about 20% of each genome represents sequences present in every one of the isolates, while around 80% of each genome can vary among isolates. Each individual genome contains between 4,000 and 5,500 genes, but the total number of different genes among all of the sequenced \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains (the pangenome) exceeds 16,000. This very large variety of component genes has been interpreted to mean that two-thirds of the \"E.\u00a0coli\" pangenome originated in other species and arrived through the process of horizontal gene transfer.\nGene nomenclature.\nGenes in \"E.\u00a0coli\" are usually named in accordance with the uniform nomenclature proposed by Demerec et al. Gene names are 3-letter acronyms that derive from their function (when known) or mutant phenotype and are italicized. When multiple genes have the same acronym, the different genes are designated by a capital later that follows the acronym and is also italicized. For instance, \"recA\" is named after its role in homologous recombination plus the letter A. Functionally related genes are named \"recB\", \"recC\", \"recD\" etc. The proteins are named by uppercase acronyms, e.g. RecA, RecB, etc. When the genome of \"E.\u00a0coli\" strain K-12 substr. MG1655 was sequenced, all known or predicted protein-coding genes were numbered (more or less) in their order on the genome and abbreviated by b numbers, such as b2819 (= \"recD\"). The \"b\" names were created after Fred Blattner, who led the genome sequence effort. Another numbering system was introduced with the sequence of another \"E.\u00a0coli\" K-12 substrain, W3110, which was sequenced in Japan and hence uses numbers starting by JW... (Japanese W3110), e.g. JW2787 (= \"recD\"). Hence, \"recD\" = b2819 = JW2787. Note, however, that most databases have their own numbering system, e.g. the EcoGene database uses EG10826 for \"recD\". Finally, ECK numbers are specifically used for alleles in the MG1655 strain of \"E.\u00a0coli\" K-12. Complete lists of genes and their synonyms can be obtained from databases such as EcoGene or Uniprot.\nProteomics.\nProteome.\nThe genome sequence of \"E.\u00a0coli\" predicts 4288 protein-coding genes, of which 38 percent initially had no attributed function. Comparison with five other sequenced microbes reveals ubiquitous as well as narrowly distributed gene families; many families of similar genes within \"E.\u00a0coli\" are also evident. The largest family of paralogous proteins contains 80 ABC transporters. The genome as a whole is strikingly organized with respect to the local direction of replication; guanines, oligonucleotides possibly related to replication and recombination, and most genes are so oriented. The genome also contains insertion sequence (IS) elements, phage remnants, and many other patches of unusual composition indicating genome plasticity through horizontal transfer.\nSeveral studies have experimentally investigated the proteome of \"E.\u00a0coli\". By 2006, 1,627 (38%) of the predicted proteins (open reading frames, ORFs) had been identified experimentally. Mateus et al. 2020 detected 2,586 proteins with at least 2 peptides (60% of all proteins).\nPost-translational modifications (PTMs).\nAlthough much fewer bacterial proteins seem to have post-translational modifications (PTMs) compared to eukaryotic proteins, a substantial number of proteins are modified in \"E.\u00a0coli\". For instance, Potel et al. (2018) found 227 phosphoproteins of which 173 were phosphorylated on histidine. The majority of phosphorylated amino acids were serine (1,220 sites) with only 246 sites on histidine and 501 phosphorylated threonines and 162 tyrosines.\nInteractome.\nThe interactome of \"E.\u00a0coli\" has been studied by affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP/MS) and by analyzing the binary interactions among its proteins.\nProtein complexes. A 2006 study purified 4,339 proteins from cultures of strain K-12 and found interacting partners for 2,667 proteins, many of which had unknown functions at the time. A 2009 study found 5,993 interactions between proteins of the same \"E.\u00a0coli\" strain, though these data showed little overlap with those of the 2006 publication.\nBinary interactions. Rajagopala \"et al.\" (2014) have carried out systematic yeast two-hybrid screens with most \"E.\u00a0coli\" proteins, and found a total of 2,234 protein-protein interactions. This study also integrated genetic interactions and protein structures and mapped 458 interactions within 227 protein complexes.\nNormal microbiota.\n\"E. coli\" belongs to a group of bacteria informally known as coliforms that are found in the gastrointestinal tract of warm-blooded animals. \"E.\u00a0coli\" normally colonizes an infant's gastrointestinal tract within 40 hours of birth, arriving with food or water or from the individuals handling the child. In the bowel, \"E.\u00a0coli\" adheres to the mucus of the large intestine. It is the primary facultative anaerobe of the human gastrointestinal tract. (Facultative anaerobes are organisms that can grow in either the presence or absence of oxygen.) As long as these bacteria do not acquire genetic elements encoding for virulence factors, they remain benign commensals.\nTherapeutic use.\nDue to the low cost and speed with which it can be grown and modified in laboratory settings, \"E.\u00a0coli\" is a popular expression platform for the production of recombinant proteins used in therapeutics. One advantage to using \"E.\u00a0coli\" over another expression platform is that \"E.\u00a0coli\" naturally does not export many proteins into the periplasm, making it easier to recover a protein of interest without cross-contamination. The \"E.\u00a0coli\" K-12 strains and their derivatives (DH1, DH5\u03b1, MG1655, RV308 and W3110) are the strains most widely used by the biotechnology industry. Nonpathogenic \"E.\u00a0coli\" strain Nissle 1917 (EcN), (Mutaflor) and \"E.\u00a0coli\" O83:K24:H31 (Colinfant)) are used as probiotic agents in medicine, mainly for the treatment of various gastrointestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease. It is thought that the EcN strain might impede the growth of opportunistic pathogens, including \"Salmonella\" and other coliform enteropathogens, through the production of microcin proteins the production of siderophores.\nRole in disease.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMost \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains do not cause disease, naturally living in the gut, but virulent strains can cause gastroenteritis, urinary tract infections, neonatal meningitis, hemorrhagic colitis, and Crohn's disease. Common signs and symptoms include severe abdominal cramps, diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, vomiting, and sometimes fever. In rarer cases, virulent strains are also responsible for bowel necrosis (tissue death) and perforation without progressing to hemolytic\u2013uremic syndrome, peritonitis, mastitis, sepsis, and gram-negative pneumonia. Very young children are more susceptible to develop severe illness, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome; however, healthy individuals of all ages are at risk to the severe consequences that may arise as a result of being infected with \"E.\u00a0coli\".\nSome strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\", for example O157:H7, can produce Shiga toxin. The Shiga toxin causes inflammatory responses in target cells of the gut, leaving behind lesions which result in the bloody diarrhea that is a symptom of a Shiga toxin-producing \"E.\u00a0coli\" (STEC) infection. This toxin further causes premature destruction of the red blood cells, which then clog the body's filtering system, the kidneys, in some rare cases (usually in children and the elderly) causing hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), which may lead to kidney failure and even death. Signs of hemolytic uremic syndrome include decreased frequency of urination, lethargy, and paleness of cheeks and inside the lower eyelids. In 25% of HUS patients, complications of the nervous system occur, which in turn causes strokes. In addition, this strain causes the buildup of fluid (since the kidneys do not work), leading to edema around the lungs, legs, and arms. This increase in fluid buildup, especially around the lungs, impedes the functioning of the heart, causing an increase in blood pressure.\nUropathogenic \"E.\u00a0coli\" (UPEC) is one of the main causes of urinary tract infections. It is part of the normal microbiota in the gut and can be introduced in many ways. In particular for females, the direction of wiping after defecation (wiping back to front) can lead to fecal contamination of the urogenital orifices. Anal intercourse can also introduce this bacterium into the male urethra, and in switching from anal to vaginal intercourse, the male can also introduce UPEC to the female urogenital system.\nEnterotoxigenic \"E.\u00a0coli\" (ETEC) is the most common cause of traveler's diarrhea, with as many as 840\u00a0million cases worldwide in developing countries each year. The bacteria, typically transmitted through contaminated food or drinking water, adheres to the intestinal lining, where it secretes either of two types of enterotoxins, leading to watery diarrhea. The rate and severity of infections are higher among children under the age of five, including as many as 380,000 deaths annually.\nIn May 2011, one \"E.\u00a0coli\" strain, , was the subject of a that began in Germany. Certain strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" are a major cause of foodborne illness. The outbreak started when several people in Germany were infected with enterohemorrhagic \"E.\u00a0coli\" (EHEC) bacteria, leading to hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), a medical emergency that requires urgent treatment. The outbreak did not only concern Germany, but also 15 other countries, including regions in North America. On 30 June 2011, the German \"Bundesinstitut f\u00fcr Risikobewertung (BfR)\" (Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, a federal institute within the German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection) announced that seeds of fenugreek from Egypt were likely the cause of the EHEC outbreak.\nSome studies have demonstrated an absence of \"E.\u00a0coli\" in the gut flora of subjects with the metabolic disorder Phenylketonuria. It is hypothesized that the absence of these normal bacteria impairs the production of the key vitamins B2 (riboflavin) and K2 (menaquinone) \u2013 vitamins which are implicated in many physiological roles in humans such as cellular and bone metabolism \u2013 and so contributes to the disorder.\nCarbapenem-resistant \"E.\u00a0coli\" (carbapenemase-producing \"E.\u00a0coli\") that are resistant to the carbapenem class of antibiotics, considered the drugs of last resort for such infections. They are resistant because they produce an enzyme called a carbapenemase that disables the drug molecule.\nIncubation period.\nThe time between ingesting the STEC bacteria and feeling sick is called the \"incubation period\". The incubation period is usually 3\u20134 days after the exposure, but may be as short as 1 day or as long as 10 days. The symptoms often begin slowly with mild belly pain or non-bloody diarrhea that worsens over several days. HUS, if it occurs, develops an average 7 days after the first symptoms, when the diarrhea is improving.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis of infectious diarrhea and identification of antimicrobial resistance is performed using a stool culture with subsequent antibiotic sensitivity testing. It requires a minimum of 2 days and maximum of several weeks to culture gastrointestinal pathogens. The sensitivity (true positive) and specificity (true negative) rates for stool culture vary by pathogen, although a number of human pathogens can not be cultured. For culture-positive samples, antimicrobial resistance testing takes an additional 12\u201324 hours to perform.\nCurrent point of care molecular diagnostic tests can identify \"E.\u00a0coli\" and antimicrobial resistance in the identified strains much faster than culture and sensitivity testing. Microarray-based platforms can identify specific pathogenic strains of \"E.\u00a0coli\" and \"E.\u00a0coli\"-specific AMR genes in two hours or less with high sensitivity and specificity, but the size of the test panel (i.e., total pathogens and antimicrobial resistance genes) is limited. Newer metagenomics-based infectious disease diagnostic platforms are currently being developed to overcome the various limitations of culture and all currently available molecular diagnostic technologies.\nTreatment.\nThe mainstay of treatment is the assessment of dehydration and replacement of fluid and electrolytes. Administration of antibiotics has been shown to shorten the course of illness and duration of excretion of enterotoxigenic \"E.\u00a0coli\" (ETEC) in adults in endemic areas and in traveller's diarrhea, though the rate of resistance to commonly used antibiotics is increasing and they are generally not recommended. The antibiotic used depends upon susceptibility patterns in the particular geographical region. Currently, the antibiotics of choice are fluoroquinolones or azithromycin, with an emerging role for rifaximin. Rifaximin, a semisynthetic rifamycin derivative, is an effective and well-tolerated antibacterial for the management of adults with non-invasive traveller's diarrhea. Rifaximin was significantly more effective than placebo and no less effective than ciprofloxacin in reducing the duration of diarrhea. While rifaximin is effective in patients with \"E.\u00a0coli\"-predominant traveller's diarrhea, it appears ineffective in patients infected with inflammatory or invasive enteropathogens.\nPrevention.\nETEC is the type of \"E.\u00a0coli\" that most vaccine development efforts are focused on. Antibodies against the LT and major CFs of ETEC provide protection against LT-producing, ETEC-expressing homologous CFs. Oral inactivated vaccines consisting of toxin antigen and whole cells, i.e. the licensed recombinant cholera B subunit (rCTB)-WC cholera vaccine Dukoral, have been developed. There are currently no licensed vaccines for ETEC, though several are in various stages of development. In different trials, the rCTB-WC cholera vaccine provided high (85\u2013100%) short-term protection. An oral ETEC vaccine candidate consisting of rCTB and formalin inactivated \"E.\u00a0coli\" bacteria expressing major CFs has been shown in clinical trials to be safe, immunogenic, and effective against severe diarrhoea in American travelers but not against ETEC diarrhoea in young children in Egypt. A modified ETEC vaccine consisting of recombinant \"E.\u00a0coli\" strains over-expressing the major CFs and a more LT-like hybrid toxoid called LCTBA, are undergoing clinical testing.\nOther proven prevention methods for \"E.\u00a0coli\" transmission include handwashing and improved sanitation and drinking water, as transmission occurs through fecal contamination of food and water supplies. Additionally, thoroughly cooking meat and avoiding consumption of raw, unpasteurized beverages, such as juices and milk are other proven methods for preventing \"E.\u00a0coli\". Lastly, cross-contamination of utensils and work spaces should be avoided when preparing food.\nModel organism in life science research.\nBecause of its long history of laboratory culture and ease of manipulation, \"E.\u00a0coli\" plays an important role in modern biological engineering and industrial microbiology. The work of Stanley Norman Cohen and Herbert Boyer in \"E.\u00a0coli\", using plasmids and restriction enzymes to create recombinant DNA, became a foundation of biotechnology.\n\"E. coli\" is a very versatile host for the production of heterologous proteins, and various protein expression systems have been developed which allow the production of recombinant proteins in \"E.\u00a0coli\". Researchers can introduce genes into the microbes using plasmids which permit high level expression of protein, and such protein may be mass-produced in industrial fermentation processes. One of the first useful applications of recombinant DNA technology was the manipulation of \"E.\u00a0coli\" to produce human insulin.\nMany proteins previously thought difficult or impossible to be expressed in \"E.\u00a0coli\" in folded form have been successfully expressed in \"E.\u00a0coli\". For example, proteins with multiple disulphide bonds may be produced in the periplasmic space or in the cytoplasm of mutants rendered sufficiently oxidizing to allow disulphide-bonds to form, while proteins requiring post-translational modification such as glycosylation for stability or function have been expressed using the N-linked glycosylation system of \"Campylobacter jejuni\" engineered into \"E.\u00a0coli\".\nModified \"E.\u00a0coli\" cells have been used in vaccine development, bioremediation, production of biofuels, lighting, and production of immobilised enzymes.\nStrain K-12 is a mutant form of \"E.\u00a0coli\" that over-expresses the enzyme Alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The mutation arises due to a defect in the gene that constantly codes for the enzyme. A gene that is producing a product without any inhibition is said to have constitutive activity. This particular mutant form is used to isolate and purify the aforementioned enzyme.\nStrain OP50 of \"Escherichia coli\" is used for maintenance of \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" cultures.\nStrain JM109 is a mutant form of \"E.\u00a0coli\" that is recA and endA deficient. The strain can be utilized for blue/white screening when the cells carry the fertility factor episome. Lack of recA decreases the possibility of unwanted restriction of the DNA of interest and lack of endA inhibit plasmid DNA decomposition. Thus, JM109 is useful for cloning and expression systems.\nModel organism.\n\"E. coli\" is frequently used as a model organism in microbiology studies. Cultivated strains (e.g. \"E.\u00a0coli\" K12) are well-adapted to the laboratory environment, and, unlike wild-type strains, have lost their ability to thrive in the intestine. Many laboratory strains lose their ability to form biofilms. These features protect wild-type strains from antibodies and other chemical attacks, but require a large expenditure of energy and material resources. \"E.\u00a0coli\" is often used as a representative microorganism in the research of novel water treatment and sterilisation methods, including photocatalysis. By standard plate count methods, following sequential dilutions, and growth on agar gel plates, the concentration of viable organisms or CFUs (Colony Forming Units), in a known volume of treated water can be evaluated, allowing the comparative assessment of materials performance.\nIn 1946, Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum first described the phenomenon known as bacterial conjugation using \"E.\u00a0coli\" as a model bacterium, and it remains the primary model to study conjugation. \"E.\u00a0coli\" was an integral part of the first experiments to understand phage genetics, and early researchers, such as Seymour Benzer, used \"E.\u00a0coli\" and phage T4 to understand the topography of gene structure. Prior to Benzer's research, it was not known whether the gene was a linear structure, or if it had a branching pattern.\n\"E. coli\" was one of the first organisms to have its genome sequenced; the complete genome of \"E.\u00a0coli\" K12 was published by \"Science\" in 1997.\nMDS42.\nFrom 2002 to 2010, a team at the Hungarian Academy of Science created a strain of \"Escherichia coli\" called MDS42, which is now sold by Scarab Genomics of Madison, WI under the name of \"Clean Genome \"E.\u00a0coli\"\", where 15% of the genome of the parental strain (\"E.\u00a0coli\" K-12 MG1655) were removed to aid in molecular biology efficiency, removing IS elements, pseudogenes and phages, resulting in better maintenance of plasmid-encoded toxic genes, which are often inactivated by transposons. Biochemistry and replication machinery were not altered.\nBy evaluating the possible combination of nanotechnologies with landscape ecology, complex habitat landscapes can be generated with details at the nanoscale. On such synthetic ecosystems, evolutionary experiments with \"E.\u00a0coli\" have been performed to study the spatial biophysics of adaptation in an island biogeography on-chip.\nIn other studies, non-pathogenic \"E.\u00a0coli\" has been used as a model microorganism towards understanding the effects of simulated microgravity (on Earth) on the same.\nUses in biological computing.\nSince 1961, scientists proposed the idea of genetic circuits used for computational tasks. Collaboration between biologists and computing scientists has allowed designing digital logic gates on the metabolism of \"E.\u00a0coli\". As Lac operon is a two-stage process, genetic regulation in the bacteria is used to realize computing functions. The process is controlled at the transcription stage of DNA into messenger RNA.\nStudies are being performed attempting to program \"E.\u00a0coli\" to solve complicated mathematics problems, such as the Hamiltonian path problem.\nA computer to control protein production of \"E.\u00a0coli\" within yeast cells has been developed. A method has also been developed to use bacteria to behave as an LCD screen.\nIn July 2017, separate experiments with \"E.\u00a0coli\" published on Nature showed the potential of using living cells for computing tasks and storing information. A team formed with collaborators of the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University and Harvard's Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering developed a biological computer inside \"E.\u00a0coli\" that responded to a dozen inputs. The team called the computer \"ribocomputer\", as it was composed of ribonucleic acid. Meanwhile, Harvard researchers probed that is possible to store information in bacteria after successfully archiving images and movies in the DNA of living \"E.\u00a0coli\" cells. In 2021, a team led by biophysicist Sangram Bagh realized a study with \"E.\u00a0coli\" to solve 2 \u00d7 2 maze problems to probe the principle for distributed computing among cells.\nHistory.\nIn 1885, the German-Austrian pediatrician Theodor Escherich discovered this organism in the feces of healthy individuals. He called it \"Bacterium coli commune\" because it is found in the colon. Early classifications of prokaryotes placed these in a handful of genera based on their shape and motility (at that time Ernst Haeckel's classification of bacteria in the kingdom Monera was in place).\n\"Bacterium coli\" was the type species of the now invalid genus \"Bacterium\" when it was revealed that the former type species (\"Bacterium triloculare\") was missing. Following a revision of \"Bacterium\", it was reclassified as \"Bacillus coli\" by Migula in 1895 and later reclassified in the newly created genus \"Escherichia\", named after its original discoverer, by Aldo Castellani and Albert John Chalmers.\nIn 1996, an outbreak of \"E.\u00a0coli\" food poisoning occurred in Wishaw, Scotland, killing 21 people. This death toll was exceeded in 2011, when the , linked to organic fenugreek sprouts, killed 53 people.\nIn 2024, an outbreak of \"E.\u00a0coli\" food poisoning occurred across the U.S. was linked to U.S.-grown organic carrots causing one fatality and dozens of illnesses.\nUses.\n\"E. coli\" has several practical uses besides its use as a vector for genetic experiments and processes. For example, \"E.\u00a0coli\" can be used to generate synthetic propane and recombinant human growth hormone.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40115", "revid": "16980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40115", "title": "Antiamericanism", "text": ""}
{"id": "40117", "revid": "244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40117", "title": "William Makepeace Thackery", "text": ""}
{"id": "40119", "revid": "28090721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40119", "title": "William Makepeace Thackeray", "text": "English novelist and illustrator (1811\u20131863)\nWilliam Makepeace Thackeray ( ; 18 July 1811 \u2013 24 December 1863) was an English novelist and illustrator. He is known for his satirical works, particularly his 1847\u20131848 novel \"Vanity Fair\", a panoramic portrait of British society, and the 1844 novel \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\", which was adapted for a 1975 film by Stanley Kubrick.\nThackeray was born in Calcutta, British India, and was sent to England after his father's death in 1815. He studied at various schools and briefly attended Trinity College, Cambridge, before leaving to travel Europe. Thackeray squandered much of his inheritance on gambling and unsuccessful newspapers. He turned to journalism to support his family, primarily working for \"Fraser's Magazine\", \"The Times\", and \"Punch\". His wife Isabella suffered from mental illness. Thackeray gained fame with his novel \"Vanity Fair\" and produced several other notable works. He unsuccessfully ran for Parliament in 1857 and edited the \"Cornhill Magazine\" in 1860. Thackeray's health declined due to excessive eating, drinking, and lack of exercise. He died from a stroke at the age of fifty-two.\nThackeray began as a satirist and parodist, gaining popularity through works that showcased his fondness for roguish characters. Thackeray's early works were marked by savage attacks on high society, military prowess, marriage, and hypocrisy, often written under various pseudonyms. His writing career began with satirical sketches like \"The Yellowplush Papers\". Thackeray's later novels, such as \"Pendennis\" and \"The Newcomes\", reflected a mellowing in his tone, focusing on the coming of age of characters and critical portrayals of society. During the Victorian era, Thackeray was ranked second to Charles Dickens, but he is now primarily known for \"Vanity Fair\".\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nThackeray, an only child, was born in Calcutta, British India, where his father, Richmond Thackeray (1\u00a0September 1781 \u2013 13\u00a0September 1815), was secretary to the Board of Revenue in the East India Company. His mother, Anne Becher (1792\u20131864), was the second daughter of Harriet Becher and John Harman Becher, who was also a secretary (writer) for the East India Company. His father was a grandson of Thomas Thackeray (1693\u20131760), headmaster of Harrow School.\nRichmond died in 1815, which caused Anne to send her son to England that same year, while she remained in India. The ship on which he travelled made a short stopover at Saint Helena, where the imprisoned Napoleon was pointed out to him. Once in England, he was educated at schools in Southampton and Chiswick, and then at Charterhouse School, where he overlapped with John Leech. Thackeray disliked Charterhouse, and parodied it in his fiction as \"Slaughterhouse\". Nevertheless, Thackeray was honoured in the Charterhouse Chapel with a monument after his death.\nCollege education.\nIllness in his last year at Charterhouse, during which he reportedly grew to his full height of , postponed his matriculation at Trinity College, Cambridge, until February\u00a01829.\nNever very keen on academic studies, Thackeray left Cambridge in 1830, but some of his earliest published writing appeared in two university periodicals, \"The Snob\" and \"The Gownsman\".\nThackeray then travelled for some time on Continental Europe, visiting Paris and Weimar, where he met Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. He returned to England and began to study law at the Middle Temple, but soon gave that up. On reaching age\u00a021, he came into his inheritance from his father, but he squandered much of it on gambling and on funding two unsuccessful newspapers, \"The National Standard\" and \"The Constitutional\", for which he had hoped to write. He also lost a good part of his fortune in the collapse of two Indian banks. Forced to consider a profession to support himself, he turned first to art, which he studied in Paris, but did not pursue it, except in later years as the illustrator of some of his own novels and other writings.\nMarriage and children.\nThackeray's years of semi-idleness ended on 20\u00a0August 1836, when he married Isabella Gethin Shawe (1816\u20131894), second daughter of Isabella Creagh Shawe and Matthew Shawe, a colonel who had died after distinguished service, primarily in India. The Thackerays had three children, all daughters: Anne Isabella (1837\u20131919), Jane (who died at eight months old), and Harriet Marian (1840\u20131875), who married Sir\u00a0Leslie Stephen, editor, biographer and philosopher.\nProfessional journalist.\nThackeray now began \"writing for his life\", as he put it, turning to journalism in an effort to support his young family. He primarily worked for \"Fraser's Magazine\", a sharp-witted and sharp-tongued conservative publication for which he produced art criticism, short fictional sketches, and two longer fictional works, \"Catherine\" and \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\". Between 1837 and 1840, he also reviewed books for \"The Times\".\nHe was also a regular contributor to \"The Morning Chronicle\" and \"The Foreign Quarterly Review\". Later, through his connection to the illustrator John Leech, he began writing for the newly created magazine \"Punch\", in which he published \"The Snob Papers\", later collected as \"The Book of Snobs\". This work popularised the modern meaning of the word \"snob\".\nThackeray was a regular contributor to \"Punch\" between 1843 and 1854.\nMental decline of his wife and romantic relationships.\nIn Thackeray's personal life, his wife Isabella succumbed to depression after the birth of their third child in 1840. Finding that he could get no work done at home, he spent more and more time away, until September\u00a01840, when he realised how grave his wife's condition was. Struck by guilt, he set out with his wife to Ireland. During the crossing, she threw herself from a water-closet into the sea, but she was pulled from the waters. They fled back home after a four-week battle with her mother. From November\u00a01840 to February\u00a01842, Isabella was in and out of professional care, as her condition waxed and waned.\nShe eventually deteriorated into a permanent state of detachment from reality. Thackeray desperately sought cures for her, but nothing worked, and she ended up in two different asylums in or near Paris until 1845, after which Thackeray took her back to England, where he installed her with a Mrs.\u00a0Bakewell at Camberwell. Isabella outlived her husband by 30\u00a0years, in the end being cared for by a family named Thompson in Leigh-on-Sea at Southend, until her death in 1894. After his wife's illness, Thackeray never established another permanent relationship. He did pursue other women, however, in particular Mrs.\u00a0Jane Brookfield and Sally Baxter. In 1851, Mr.\u00a0Brookfield barred Thackeray from further visits or correspondence with Jane. Baxter, an American twenty years Thackeray's junior whom he met during a lecture tour in New York City in 1852, married another man in 1855.\nAnti-Irish works for Punch.\nIn the early 1840s, Thackeray had some success with two travel books, \"The Paris Sketch Book\" and \"The Irish Sketch Book\", the latter marked by its hostility towards Irish Catholics. However, as the book appealed to anti-Irish sentiment in Britain at the time, Thackeray was given the job of being \"Punch\"'s Irish expert, often under the pseudonym Hibernis Hibernior (\"more Irish than the Irish\"). Thackeray became responsible for creating \"Punch\"'s notoriously hostile and negative depictions of the Irish during the Great Irish Famine of 1845 to 1851.\nStatus as a celebrity and lecture tours.\nThackeray achieved more recognition with his \"Snob Papers\" (serialised 1846/7, published in book form in 1848), but the work that really established his fame was the novel \"Vanity Fair\", which first appeared in serialised instalments beginning in January\u00a01847. Even before \"Vanity Fair\" completed its serial run, Thackeray had become a celebrity, sought after by the very lords and ladies whom he satirised. They hailed him as the equal of Charles Dickens.\nHe remained \"at the top of the tree\", as he put it, for the rest of his life, during which he produced several large novels, notably \"Pendennis\", \"The Newcomes\", and \"The History of Henry Esmond\", despite various illnesses, including a near-fatal one that struck him in 1849 in the middle of writing \"Pendennis\". He twice visited the United States on lecture tours during this period. Longtime Washington journalist B.P. Poore described Thackeray on one of those tours:The citizens of Washington enjoyed a rare treat when Thackeray came to deliver his lectures on the English essayists, wits, and humorists of the eighteenth century. Accustomed to the spread-eagle style of oratory too prevalent at the Capitol, they were delighted with the pleasing voice and easy manner of the burly, gray-haired, rosy-cheeked Briton, who made no gestures, but stood most of the time with his hands in his pockets, as if he were talking with friends at a cozy fireside. Thackeray also gave lectures in London on the English humorists of the eighteenth century, and on the first four Hanoverian monarchs. The latter series was published in book form in 1861 as \"The Four Georges: Sketches of Manners, Morals, Court, and Town Life \".\nFailed candidate for the Liberal Party.\nIn July\u00a01857, Thackeray stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for the city of Oxford in Parliament. Although not the most fiery agitator, Thackeray was always a decided liberal in his politics, and he promised to vote for the ballot in extension of the suffrage and was ready to accept triennial parliaments. He was narrowly beaten by Cardwell, who received 1,070\u00a0votes, as against 1,005\u00a0for Thackeray.\nMagazine editor.\nIn 1860, Thackeray became editor of the newly established \"Cornhill Magazine\", but he was never comfortable in the role, preferring to contribute to the magazine as the writer of a column called \"Roundabout Papers\".\nHealth problems.\nThackeray's health worsened during the 1850s, and he was plagued by a recurring stricture of the urethra that laid him up for days at a time. He also felt that he had lost much of his creative impetus. He worsened matters by excessive eating and drinking and avoiding exercise, though he enjoyed riding (he kept a horse). He has been described as \"the greatest literary glutton who ever lived\". His main activity apart from writing was \"gutting and gorging\". He could not break his addiction to spicy peppers, further ruining his digestion.\nDeath and funeral.\nOn 23 December 1863, after returning from dining out and before dressing for bed, he suffered a stroke. He was found dead in his bed the following morning. His death at the age of fifty-two was unexpected and shocked his family, his friends and the reading public. An estimated 7,000\u00a0people attended his funeral at Kensington Gardens. He was buried on 29 December at Kensal Green Cemetery, and a memorial bust sculpted by Marochetti can be found in Westminster Abbey.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThackeray began as a satirist and parodist, writing works that displayed a sneaking fondness for roguish upstarts, such as Becky Sharp in \"Vanity Fair\" and the title characters of \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\" and \"Catherine\". In his earliest works, written under such pseudonyms as Charles James Yellowplush, Michael Angelo Titmarsh and George Savage Fitz-Boodle, he tended towards savagery in his attacks on high society, military prowess, the institution of marriage and hypocrisy.\nOne of his earliest works, \"Timbuctoo\" (1829), contains a burlesque upon the subject set for the Cambridge Chancellor's Medal for English Verse. (The contest was won by Tennyson with a poem of the same title, \"Timbuctoo\".) Thackeray's writing career really began with a series of satirical sketches now usually known as \"The Yellowplush Papers\", which appeared in \"Fraser's Magazine\" beginning in 1837. These were adapted for BBC Radio 4 in 2009, with Adam Buxton playing Charles Yellowplush.\nBetween May 1839 and February 1840 \"Fraser's\" published the work sometimes considered Thackeray's first novel, \"Catherine\". Originally intended as a satire of the Newgate school of crime fiction, it ended up being more of a picaresque tale. He also began work, never finished, on the novel later published as \"A Shabby Genteel Story\".\nAlong with \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\", Thackeray is probably best known now for \"Vanity Fair\". Literary theorist Kornelije Kvas wrote that \"the meteoric rise of the heroine of \"Vanity Fair\" Rebecca Sharp is a satirical presentation of the striving for profit, power, and social recognition of the new middle class. Old and new members of the middle class strive to emulate the lifestyle of the higher class (noblemen and landowners), and thereby to increase their material possessions and to own luxury objects. In \"Vanity Fair\", one can observe a greater degree of violation of moral values among members of the new middle class, for the decline of morality is proportionate to the degree of closeness of the individual to the market and its laws.\" In contrast, his large novels from the period after \"Vanity Fair\", which were once described by Henry James as examples of \"loose baggy monsters\", have largely faded from view, perhaps because they reflect a mellowing in Thackeray, who had become so successful with his satires on society that he seemed to lose his zest for attacking it. These later works include \"Pendennis\", a Bildungsroman depicting the coming of age of Arthur Pendennis, an alter ego of Thackeray, who also features as the narrator of two later novels, \"The Newcomes\" and \"The Adventures of Philip\". \"The Newcomes\" is noteworthy for its critical portrayal of the \"marriage market\", while \"Philip\" is known for its semi-autobiographical depiction of Thackeray's early life, in which he partially regains some of his early satirical power.\nAlso notable among the later novels is \"The History of Henry Esmond\", in which Thackeray tried to write a novel in the style of the eighteenth century, a period that held great appeal for him. About this novel, there have been found evident analogies\u2014in the fundamental structure of the plot; in the psychological outlines of the main characters; in frequent episodes; and in the use of metaphors\u2014to Ippolito Nievo's \"Confessions of an Italian\". Nievo wrote his novel during his stay in Milan where, in the \"Ambrosiana\" library, \"The History of Henry Esmond\" was available, just published.\nNot only \"Esmond\" but also \"Barry Lyndon\" and \"Catherine\" are set in that period, as is the sequel to \"Esmond\", \"The Virginians\", which is set partially in North America and includes George Washington as a character who nearly kills one of the protagonists in a duel.\nFamily.\nParents.\nThackeray's father, Richmond Thackeray, was born at South Mimms and went to India in 1798 at age sixteen as a writer (civil servant) with the East India Company. Richmond's father's name was also William Makepeace Thackeray. Richmond fathered a daughter, Sarah Redfield, in 1804 with Charlotte Sophia Rudd, his possibly Eurasian mistress, and both mother and daughter were named in his will. Such liaisons were common among gentlemen of the East India Company, and it formed no bar to his later courting and marrying William's mother.\nThackeray's mother, Anne Becher (born 1792), was \"one of the reigning beauties of the day\" and a daughter of John Harmon Becher, Collector of the South 24 Parganas district (d. Calcutta, 1800), of an old Bengal civilian family \"noted for the tenderness of its women\". Anne Becher, her sister Harriet and their widowed mother, also Harriet, had been sent back to India by her authoritarian guardian grandmother, Ann Becher, in 1809 on the \"Earl Howe\". Anne's grandmother had told her that the man she loved, Henry Carmichael-Smyth, an ensign in the Bengal Engineers whom she met at an Assembly Ball in 1807 in Bath, had died, while he was told that Anne was no longer interested in him. Neither of these assertions was true. Though Carmichael-Smyth was from a distinguished Scottish military family, Anne's grandmother went to extreme lengths to prevent their marriage. Surviving family letters state that she wanted a better match for her granddaughter.\nAnne Becher and Richmond Thackeray were married in Calcutta on 13\u00a0October 1810. Their only child, William, was born on 18\u00a0July 1811. There is a fine miniature portrait of Anne Becher Thackeray and William Makepeace Thackeray, aged about two, done in Madras by George Chinnery c.\u20091813.\nAnne's family's deception was unexpectedly revealed in 1812, when Richmond Thackeray unwittingly invited the supposedly dead Carmichael-Smyth to dinner. Five years later, after Richmond had died of a fever on 13\u00a0September 1815, Anne married Henry Carmichael-Smyth, on 13\u00a0March 1817. The couple moved to England in 1820, after having sent William off to school there more than three years earlier. The separation from his mother had a traumatic effect on the young Thackeray, which he discussed in his essay \"On Letts's Diary\" in \"The Roundabout Papers\".\nDescendants.\nThackeray is an ancestor of the British financier Ryan Williams, and is the great-great-great-grandfather of the British comedian Al Murray and author Joanna Nadin.\nReputation and legacy.\nDuring the Victorian era Thackeray was ranked second only to Charles Dickens, but he is now much less widely read and is known almost exclusively for \"Vanity Fair\". The novel has become a fixture in university courses, and has been repeatedly adapted for the cinema and television.\nIn Thackeray's own day some commentators, such as Anthony Trollope, ranked his \"History of Henry Esmond\" as his greatest work, perhaps because it expressed Victorian values of duty and earnestness, as did some of his other later novels. It is perhaps for this reason that they have not survived as well as \"Vanity Fair\", which satirises those values.\nThackeray saw himself as writing in the realistic tradition, and distinguished his work from the exaggerations and sentimentality of Dickens. Some later commentators have accepted this self-evaluation and seen him as a realist, but others note his inclination to use eighteenth-century narrative techniques, such as digressions and direct addresses to the reader, and argue that through them he frequently disrupts the illusion of reality. The school of Henry James, with its emphasis on maintaining that illusion, marked a break with Thackeray's techniques.\nCharlotte Bront\u00eb dedicated the second edition of \"Jane Eyre\" to Thackeray.\nIn 1887 the Royal Society of Arts unveiled a blue plaque to commemorate Thackeray at the house at 2 Palace Green, London, that had been built for him in the 1860s. It is now the location of the Israeli Embassy.\nThackeray's former home in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, is now a restaurant named after the author.\nThackeray was also a member of the Albion Lodge of the Ancient Order of Druids at Oxford.\nConnection to Balasaheb Thackeray.\nIndian popular Marathi politician Bal Thackeray's father Keshav Sitaram Thackeray was an admirer of William; Keshav later changed his surname from Panvelkar to \"Thackeray\".\nList of works.\nSeries.\nArthur Pendennis\nThe Christmas Books of Mr M. A. Titmarsh\nThackeray wrote and illustrated five Christmas books as \"by Mr M. A. Titmarsh\". They were collected under the pseudonymous title and his real name no later than 1868 by Smith, Elder &amp; Co.\n\"The Rose and the Ring\" was dated 1855 in its first edition, published for Christmas 1854. \nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40120", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40120", "title": "Petrus Peregrinus", "text": ""}
{"id": "40121", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40121", "title": "Vanity Fair (novel)", "text": "1847\u20131848 novel by William Makepeace Thackeray\nVanity Fair is a novel by the English author William Makepeace Thackeray, which follows the lives of Becky Sharp and Amelia Sedley amid their friends and families during and after the Napoleonic Wars. It was first published as a 19-volume monthly serial (the last containing Parts 19 \"and\" 20) from 1847 to 1848, carrying the subtitle Pen and Pencil Sketches of English Society, which reflects both its satirisation of early 19th-century British society and the many illustrations drawn by Thackeray to accompany the text. It was published as a single volume in 1848 with the subtitle A Novel without a Hero, reflecting Thackeray's interest in deconstructing his era's conventions regarding literary heroism. It is sometimes considered the \"principal founder\" of the Victorian domestic novel.\nThe story is framed as a puppet play, and the narrator, despite being an authorial voice, is somewhat unreliable. The serial was a popular and critical success; the novel is now considered a classic and has inspired several audio, film, and television adaptations. It also inspired the title of the British lifestyle magazine first published in 1868, which became known for its caricatures of famous people of Victorian and Edwardian society. In 2003, \"Vanity Fair\" was listed at No. 122 on the BBC's The Big Read poll of the UK's best-loved books.\nTitle.\nThe book's title comes from John Bunyan's \"Pilgrim's Progress\", a Dissenter allegory first published in 1678. In that work, \"Vanity Fair\" refers to a stop along the pilgrim's route: a never-ending fair held in a town called Vanity, which represents man's sinful attachment to worldly things. Thackeray does not mention Bunyan in the novel or in his surviving letters about it, where he describes himself dealing with \"living without God in the world\", but he did expect the reference to be understood by his audience, as shown in an 1851 \"Times\" article likely written by Thackeray himself. \nRobert Bell\u2014whose friendship later became so great that he was buried near Thackeray at Kensal Green Cemetery\u2014complained that the novel could have used \"more light and air\" to make it \"more agreeable and healthy\". Thackeray rebutted this with Evangelist's words as the pilgrims entered Bunyan's Vanity Fair: \"The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?\"\nFrom its appearance in Bunyan, \"Vanity Fair\" or a \"vanity-fair\" was also in general use for \"the world\" in a range of connotations from the blandly descriptive to the wearily dismissive to the condemning. By the 18th century, it was generally taken as a playground and, in the first half of the 19th century, more specifically the playground of the idle and undeserving rich. All of these senses appear in Thackeray's work. The name \"Vanity Fair\" has also been used for at least 5 periodicals.\nPlot summary.\nThe story is framed by its preface and coda as a puppet show taking place at a fair; the cover illustration of the serial installments was not of the characters but of a troupe of comic actors at Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park. The narrator, variously a show manager or writer, appears at times within the work itself and is somewhat unreliable, repeating a tale of gossip at second or third hand.\nIn London in 1814, Rebecca Sharp (\"Becky\"), daughter of an art teacher and a French dancer, is a strong-willed, cunning, moneyless young woman determined to make her way in society. After leaving school, Becky stays with her friend Amelia Sedley (\"Emmy\"), who is a good-natured, simple-minded young girl, of a wealthy London family. There, Becky meets the dashing and self-obsessed Captain George Osborne (Amelia's betrothed) and Amelia's brother Joseph (\"Jos\") Sedley, a clumsy and vainglorious but rich civil servant home from the East India Company. Hoping to marry Sedley, the richest young man she has met, Becky entices him, but she fails. George Osborne's friend Captain William Dobbin loves Amelia, but only wishes her happiness, which is centred on George.\nBecky Sharp says farewell to the Sedley family and enters the service of the crude and profligate baronet Sir Pitt Crawley, who has engaged her as a governess to his daughters. Her behaviour at Sir Pitt's house gains his favour, and after the premature death of his second wife, he proposes marriage to her. However, he finds that Becky has secretly married his second son, Captain Rawdon Crawley, a plot orchestrated by Bute Crawley to ensure that Sir Pitt's elder half sister, the spinster Miss Crawley, who is very rich (having inherited her mother's fortune) disinherits Rawdon; and the whole Crawley family compete for her favour so she will bequeath them her wealth. Initially her favourite is Rawdon Crawley, but his marriage with Becky enrages her. First she favours the family of Sir Pitt's brother, but when she dies, she leaves her money to Sir Pitt's eldest son, also called Pitt.\nNews arrives that Napoleon has escaped from Elba, and as a result the stockmarket becomes jittery, causing Amelia's stockbroker father, John Sedley, to become bankrupt. George's rich father forbids George to marry Amelia, who is now poor. Dobbin persuades George to marry Amelia, and George is consequently disinherited. George Osborne, William Dobbin and Rawdon Crawley are deployed to Brussels, accompanied by Amelia and Becky, and Amelia's brother, Jos.\nGeorge is embarrassed by the vulgarity of Mrs. Major O'Dowd, the wife of the head of the regiment. The newly wedded Osborne is already growing tired of Amelia, and he becomes increasingly attracted to Becky, which makes Amelia jealous and unhappy. He is also losing money to Rawdon at cards and billiards. At a ball in Brussels, George gives Becky a note inviting her to run away with him (although this fact is not revealed until the end of the book). But then the army have marching orders to the Battle of Waterloo, and George spends a tender night with Amelia and leaves.\nThe noise of battle horrifies Amelia, and she is comforted by the brisk but kind Mrs. O'Dowd. Becky is indifferent and makes plans for whatever the outcome (for example, if Napoleon wins, she would aim to become the mistress of one of his Marshals). She also makes a profit selling her carriage and horses at inflated prices to Jos, who is seeking to flee Brussels.\nGeorge Osborne is killed at the Battle of Waterloo, while Dobbin and Rawdon survive the battle. Amelia bears him a posthumous son, who carries on the name George. She returns to live in genteel poverty with her parents, spending her life in memory of her husband and care of her son. Dobbin pays for a small annuity for Amelia and expresses his love for her by small kindnesses toward her and her son. She is too much in love with her husband's memory to return Dobbin's love. Saddened, he goes with his regiment to India for many years.\nBecky also gives birth to a son, named Rawdon after his father. Becky is a cold, distant mother, although Rawdon loves his son. Becky continues her ascent first in post-war Paris and then in London where she is patronised by the rich and powerful Marquis of Steyne. She is eventually presented at court to the Prince Regent and charms him further at a game of \"acting charades\" where she plays the roles of Clytemnestra and Philomela. The elderly Sir Pitt Crawley dies and is succeeded by his son Pitt, who had married Lady Jane Sheepshanks, Lord Southdown's third daughter. Becky is on good terms with Pitt and Jane originally, but Jane is disgusted by Becky's attitude to her son and jealous of Becky's relationship with Pitt.\nAt the summit of their social success, Rawdon is arrested for debt, possibly at Becky's connivance. The financial success of the Crawleys had been a topic of gossip; in fact they were living on credit even when it ruined those who trusted them, such as their landlord, an old servant of the Crawley family. The Marquis of Steyne had given Becky money, jewels, and other gifts but Becky does not use them for expenses or to free her husband. Instead, Rawdon's letter to his brother is received by Lady Jane, who pays the \u00a3170 that prompted his imprisonment.\nHe returns home to find Becky singing to Steyne and strikes him down on the assumption\u2014despite her protestations of innocence\u2014that they are having an affair. Steyne is indignant, having assumed the \u00a31000 he had just given Becky was part of an arrangement with her husband. Rawdon finds Becky's hidden bank records and leaves her, expecting Steyne to challenge him to a duel. Instead Steyne arranges for Rawdon to be made Governor of Coventry Island, a pestilential and disease-ridden location. Becky, having lost both husband and credibility, leaves England and wanders the continent, leaving her son in the care of Pitt and Lady Jane.\nAs Amelia's adored son George grows up, his grandfather Mr Osborne relents towards him (though not towards Amelia) and takes him from his impoverished mother, who knows the rich old man will give him a better start in life than she could manage. After twelve years abroad, both Joseph Sedley and Dobbin return. Dobbin professes his unchanged love to Amelia. Amelia is affectionate, but she cannot forget the memory of her dead husband. Dobbin mediates a reconciliation between Amelia and her father-in-law, who dies soon after. He had amended his will, bequeathing young George half his large fortune and Amelia a generous annuity.\nAfter the death of Mr Osborne, Amelia, Jos, George and Dobbin go to Pumpernickel (Weimar in Germany), where they encounter the destitute Becky. Becky has fallen in life. She lives among card sharps and con artists, drinking heavily and gambling. Becky enchants Jos Sedley all over again, and Amelia is persuaded to let Becky join them. Dobbin forbids this, and reminds Amelia of her jealousy of Becky with her husband. Amelia feels that this dishonours the memory of her dead and revered husband, and this leads to a complete breach between her and Dobbin. Dobbin leaves the group and rejoins his regiment, while Becky remains with the group.\nHowever, Becky has decided that Amelia should marry Dobbin, even though Becky knows Dobbin is her enemy. Becky shows Amelia George's note, kept all this time from the eve of the Battle of Waterloo, and Amelia finally realises that George was not the perfect man she always thought, and that she has rejected a better man, Dobbin. Amelia and Dobbin are reconciled and return to England. Becky and Jos stay in Europe. Jos dies, possibly suspiciously, after signing a portion of his money to Becky as life insurance, thereby setting her up with an income. She returns to England, and manages a respectable life, although all her previous friends refuse to acknowledge her.\nCharacters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEmmy Sedley (Amelia).\nAmelia, called Emmy, is good-natured but passive and na\u00efve. Pretty rather than beautiful, she has a snub nose and round, rosy cheeks. She is well-liked by men, and women when few men are around, as was the case when she was at school. She begins the work as its heroine (\"selected for the very reason that she was the best-natured of all\") and marries the dashing George Osborne against his father's wishes, but the narrator is soon forced to admit \"she wasn't a heroine\" after all as she remains soppily devoted to him despite his neglect of her and his flirtation with Becky.\nAfter George dies in the Battle of Waterloo, she brings up little George alone while living with her parents. She is completely dominated by her increasingly peevish mother and her spendthrift father, who, to finance one of his failing investment schemes, sells the annuity Jos had provided. Amelia becomes obsessed with her son and the memory of her husband. She ignores William Dobbin, who courts her for years and treats him shabbily until he leaves. Only when Becky shows her George's letter to her, indicating his unfaithfulness, can Amelia move on. She then marries Dobbin.\nIn a letter to his close friend Jane Octavia Brookfield while the book was being written, Thackeray confided that \"You know you are only a piece of Amelia, my mother is another half, my poor little wife \"y est pour beaucoup\"\". Within the work, her character is compared and connected to Iphigenia, although two of the references extend the allusion to all daughters in all drawing rooms as potential Iphigenias waiting to be sacrificed by their families.\nBecky Sharp (Rebecca).\nRebecca Sharp, called Becky, is Amelia's opposite: an intelligent, conniving young woman with a gift for satire. She is described as a short, sandy-haired girl who has green eyes and a great deal of wit. Becky is born to a French opera dancer mother and an art teacher and artist father Francis. Fluent in both French and English, Becky has a beautiful singing voice, plays the piano, and shows great talent as an actress. Without a mother to guide her into marriage, Becky resolves that \"I must be my own Mamma\".\nShe thereafter appears to be completely amoral and without conscience and has been called the work's \"anti-heroine\". She does not seem to have the ability to get attached to other people, and lies easily and intelligently to get her way. She is extremely manipulative and, after the first few chapters and her failure to attract Jos Sedley, is not shown as being particularly sincere.\nNever having known financial or social security even as a child, Becky desires it above all things. Nearly everything she does is with the intention of securing a stable position for herself, or herself and her husband after she and Rawdon are married. She advances Rawdon's interests tirelessly, flirting with men such as General Tufto and the Marquis of Steyne to get him promoted. She also uses her feminine wiles to distract men at card parties while Rawdon cheats them blind.\nMarrying Rawdon Crawley in secret was a mistake, as was running off instead of begging Miss Crawley's forgiveness. She also fails to manipulate Miss Crawley through Rawdon so as to obtain an inheritance. Although Becky manipulates men very easily, she is less successful with women. She is utterly hostile to Lady Bareacres, dismissive of Mrs. O'Dowd, and Lady Jane, although initially friendly, eventually distrusts and dislikes her.\nThe exceptions to this trend are (at least initially) Miss Crawley, her companion Miss Briggs, and her school friend Amelia; the latter is the recipient of more-or-less the only kindnesses Becky expresses in the work, persuading her to marry Dobbin in light of what Becky comes to appreciate to be his good qualities and protecting Amelia from two ruffians vying for her attentions. This comparative loyalty to Amelia stems from Becky having no other friends at school, and Amelia having \"by a thousand kind words and offices, overcome... (Becky's) hostility\"; 'The gentle tender-hearted Amelia Sedley was the only person to whom she could attach herself in the least; and who could help attaching herself to Amelia?'\nBeginning with her determination to be her \"own Mamma\", Becky begins to assume the role of Clytemnestra. Becky and her necklace from Steyne also allude to the fallen Eriphyle in Racine's retelling of \"Iphigenia at Aulis\", where she doubles and rescues Iphigenia. In lesser contexts, Becky also appears as Arachne to Miss Pinkerton's Minerva and as a variety of classical figures in the works' illustrations.\nGeorge Osborne.\nGeorge Osborne, his father (a merchant, of considerably superior social status to Dobbin's grocer father, albeit self made, and ironically a mere corporal in the City Light Horse regiment of which Dobbin senior, by this time an alderman and a knight, is colonel), and his two sisters are close to the Sedley family until Mr. Sedley (the father of Jos and Amelia, and George Osborne's godfather, from whom the latter takes his middle name of 'Sedley') goes bankrupt following some ill-advised speculation. Since George and Amelia were raised in close company and were childhood sweethearts, George defies his father to marry Amelia. Before father and son can be reconciled, George is killed at the battle of Waterloo, leaving the pregnant Amelia to carry on as well as she can.\nRaised to be a selfish, vain, profligate spender, handsome and self-obsessed, George squanders the last of the money he receives from his father and sets nothing aside to help support Amelia. After marrying Amelia, he finds after a couple of weeks that he is bored. He flirts with Becky quite seriously and is reconciled to Amelia only a short time before he is killed in battle.\nWilliam Dobbin.\nThe best friend of George Osborne, Captain William Dobbin is tall, ungainly, and not particularly handsome. He is a few years older than George but has been friends with him since his schooldays, even though Dobbin's father is a fig-merchant (Dobbin &amp; Rudge, grocers and oilmen, Thames Street, London - he is later an alderman and colonel of the City Light Horse regiment, and knighted) and the Osbornes belong to the genteel class and have become independently wealthy. He defends George and is blind to his faults in many ways, although he tries to force George to do the right thing. He pushes George to keep his promise to marry Amelia even though Dobbin is in love with Amelia himself. After George is killed, Dobbin puts together an annuity to help support Amelia, ostensibly with the help of George's fellow officers.\nLater, Major and Lieutenant Colonel Dobbin discreetly does what he can to help support Amelia and her son George. He allows Amelia to continue with her obsession over George and does not correct her erroneous beliefs about him. He hangs about for years, either pining away over her while serving in India or waiting on her in person, allowing her to take advantage of his good nature. After Amelia finally chooses Becky's friendship over his during their stay in Germany, Dobbin leaves in disgust. He returns when Amelia writes to him and admits her feelings for him, marries her (despite having lost much of his passion for her), and has a daughter whom he loves deeply.\nRawdon Crawley.\nRawdon, the younger of the two Crawley sons, is an empty-headed cavalry officer who is his wealthy aunt's favourite until he marries Becky Sharp, who is of a far lower class. He permanently alienates his aunt, who leaves her estate to Rawdon's elder brother Sir Pitt instead. Sir Pitt has by this time inherited their father's estate, leaving Rawdon destitute.\nThe well-meaning Rawdon does have a few talents in life, most of them having to do with gambling and duelling. He is very good at cards and billiards, and although he does not always win he is able to earn cash by betting against less talented gamblers. He is heavily indebted throughout most of the book, not so much for his own expenses as for Becky's. Not particularly talented as a military officer, he is content to let Becky manage his career.\nAlthough Rawdon knows Becky is attractive to men, he believes her reputation is spotless even though she is widely suspected of romantic intrigue with General Tufto and other powerful men. Nobody dares to suggest otherwise to Rawdon because of his temper and his reputation for duelling. Yet other people, particularly the Marquis of Steyne, find it impossible to believe that Crawley is unaware of Becky's tricks. Steyne in particular believes Rawdon is fully aware Becky is prostituting herself, and believes Rawdon is going along with the charade in the hope of financial gain.\nAfter Rawdon finds out the truth and leaves Becky for an assignment overseas, he leaves his son to be brought up by his brother Sir Pitt and his wife Lady Jane. While overseas, Rawdon dies of yellow fever.\nPitt Crawley.\nRawdon Crawley's elder brother inherits the Crawley estate from his father, the boorish and vulgar Sir Pitt, and also inherits the estate of his wealthy aunt, Miss Crawley, after she disinherits Rawdon. Pitt is very religious and has political aspirations, although not many people appreciate his intelligence or wisdom because there's not much there to appreciate.\nSomewhat pedantic and conservative, Pitt does nothing to help Rawdon or Becky even when they fall on hard times. This is chiefly due to the influence of his wife, Lady Jane, who dislikes Becky because of her callous treatment of her son, and also because Becky repaid Lady Jane's earlier kindness by patronising her and flirting with Sir Pitt.\nMiss Matilda Crawley.\nThe elderly Miss Crawley is everyone's favourite wealthy aunt. Sir Pitt and Rawdon both dote on her, although Rawdon is her favourite nephew and sole heir until he marries Becky. While Miss Crawley likes Becky and keeps her around to entertain her with sarcasm and wit, and while she loves scandal and particularly stories of unwise marriage, she does not want scandal or unwise marriage in her family. A substantial part of the early section of the book deals with the efforts the Crawleys make to kowtow to Miss Crawley in the hope of receiving a big inheritance.\nThackeray spent time in Paris with his maternal grandmother Harriet Becher, and Miss Crawley's character is said to be based on her.\nJoseph Sedley.\nAmelia's older brother, Joseph \"Jos\" Sedley, is a \"nabob\", who made a respectable fortune as a collector in India. Obese and self-important but very shy and insecure, he is attracted to Becky Sharp but circumstances prevent him from proposing. He never marries, but when he meets Becky again he is easily manipulated into falling in love with her. Jos is not a courageous or intelligent man, displaying his cowardice at the Battle of Waterloo by trying to flee and purchasing both of Becky's overpriced horses. Becky ensnares him again near the end of the book and, it is hinted, murders him for his life insurance.\nPublication history.\nThackeray may have begun working out some of the details of \"Vanity Fair\" as early as 1841 but probably began writing it in late 1844. Like many novels of the time, \"Vanity Fair\" was published as a serial before being sold in book form. It was printed in 20 monthly parts between January 1847 and July 1848 for \"Punch\" by Bradbury &amp; Evans in London. The first three had already been completed before publication, while the others were written after it had begun to sell.\nAs was standard practice, the last part was a \"double number\" containing parts 19 and 20. Surviving texts, his notes, and letters show that adjustments were made \u2013 e.g., the Battle of Waterloo was delayed twice \u2013 but that the broad outline of the story and its principal themes were well established from the beginning of publication. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNo. 1 (January 1847) Ch. 1\u20134\nNo. 2 (February 1847) Ch. 5\u20137\nNo. 3 (March 1847) Ch. 8\u201311\nNo. 4 (April 1847) Ch. 12\u201314\nNo. 5 (May 1847) Ch. 15\u201318\nNo. 6 (June 1847) Ch. 19\u201322\nNo. 7 (July 1847) Ch. 23\u201325\nNo. 8 (August 1847) Ch. 26\u201329\nNo. 9 (September 1847) Ch. 30\u201332\nNo. 10 (October 1847) Ch. 33\u201335\nNo. 11 (November 1847) Ch. 36\u201338\nNo. 12 (December 1847) Ch. 39\u201342\nNo. 13 (January 1848) Ch. 43\u201346\nNo. 14 (February 1848) Ch. 47\u201350\nNo. 15 (March 1848) Ch. 51\u201353\nNo. 16 (April 1848) Ch. 54\u201356\nNo. 17 (May 1848) Ch. 57\u201360\nNo. 18 (June 1848) Ch. 61\u201363\nNo. 19/20 (July 1848) Ch. 64\u201367\nThe parts resembled pamphlets and contained the text of several chapters between outer pages of steel engravings and advertising. Wood engravings, which could be set along with normal moveable type, appeared within the text. The same engraved illustration appeared on the canary-yellow cover of each monthly part; this colour became Thackeray's signature, as a light blue-green was Dickens's, allowing passers-by to notice a new Thackeray number in a bookstall from a distance.\n\"Vanity Fair\" was the first work that Thackeray published under his own name and was extremely well received at the time. After the conclusion of its serial publication, it was printed as a bound volume by Bradbury &amp; Evans in 1848 and was quickly picked up by other London printers as well. As a collected work, the novels bore the subtitle \"A Novel without a Hero\". By the end of 1859, royalties on \"Vanity Fair\" had only given Thackeray about \u00a32000, a third of his take from \"The Virginians\", but was responsible for his still more lucrative lecture tours in Britain and the United States.\nFrom his first draft and following publication, Thackeray occasionally revised his allusions to make them more accessible for his readers. In Chapter 5, an original \"Prince Whadyecallem\" became \"Prince Ahmed\" by the 1853 edition. In Chapter 13, a passage about the filicidal Biblical figure Jephthah was removed, although references to Iphigenia remained important. In Chapter 56, Thackeray originally confused Samuel \u2013 the boy whose mother Hannah had given him up when called to by God \u2013 with Eli, the old priest to whose care he was entrusted; this mistake was not corrected until the 1889 edition, after Thackeray's death.\nThe serials had been subtitled \"Pen and Pencil Sketches of English Society\" and both they and the early bound versions featured Thackeray's own illustrations. These sometimes provided symbolically-freighted images, such as one of the female characters being portrayed as a man-eating mermaid. In at least one case, a major plot point is provided through an image and its caption. Although the text makes it clear that other characters suspect Becky Sharp to have murdered her second husband, there is nothing definitive in the text itself. However, an image reveals her overhearing Jos pleading with Dobbin while clutching a small white object in her hand. The caption that this is \"Becky's second appearance in the character of Clytemnestra\" clarifies that she did indeed murder him for the insurance money, likely through laudanum or another poison.\n\"The final three illustrations of \"Vanity Fair\" are tableaux that insinuate visually what the narrator is unwilling to articulate: that Becky... has actually been substantially rewarded \u2013 by society \u2013 for her crimes.\" One of the Thackeray's plates for the 11th issue of \"Vanity Fair\" was suppressed from publication by threat of prosecution for libel, so great was the resemblance of its depiction of Lord Steyne to the Marquis of Hertford. Despite their relevance, most modern editions either do not reproduce all the illustrations or do so with poor detail.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReception and criticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporaneous reception.\nThe style is highly indebted to Henry Fielding. Thackeray meant the book to be not only entertaining but also instructive, an intention demonstrated through the book's narration and through Thackeray's private correspondence. A letter to his editor at \"Punch\" expressed his belief that \"our profession... is as serious as the parson's own\". He considered it his own coming-of-age as a writer and greatest work.\nCritics hailed the work as a literary treasure before the last part of the serial was published. In her correspondence, Charlotte Bront\u00eb was effusive regarding his illustrations as well: \"You will not easily find a second Thackeray. How he can render, with a few black lines and dots, shades of expression, so fine, so real; traits of character so minute, so subtle, so difficult to seize and fix, I cannot tell\u2014I can only wonder and admire... If Truth were again a goddess, Thackeray should be her high priest.\"\nThe early reviewers took the debt to Bunyan as self-evident and compared Becky with Pilgrim and Thackeray with Faithful. Although they were superlative in their praise, some expressed disappointment at the unremittingly dark portrayal of human nature, fearing Thackeray had taken his dismal metaphor too far. In response to these critics, Thackeray explained that he saw people for the most part as \"abominably foolish and selfish\".\nThe unhappy ending was intended to inspire readers to look inward at their own shortcomings. Other critics took notice of or exception to the social subversion in the work; in his correspondence, Thackeray stated his criticism was not reserved to the upper class: \"My object is to make every body engaged, engaged in the pursuit of Vanity Fair and I must carry my story through in this dreary minor key, with only occasional hints here and there of better things\u2014of better things which it does not become me to preach\".\nAnalysis.\nThe novel is considered a classic of English literature, though some critics claim that it has structural problems; Thackeray sometimes lost track of the huge scope of his work, mixing up characters' names and minor plot details. The number of allusions and references it contains can make it difficult for modern readers to follow.\nThe subtitle, \"A Novel without a Hero\", refers to the characters all being flawed to a greater or lesser degree; even the most sympathetic have weaknesses, for example Captain Dobbin, who is prone to vanity and melancholy. The human weaknesses Thackeray illustrates are mostly to do with greed, idleness, and snobbery, and the scheming, deceit and hypocrisy which mask them. None of the characters is wholly evil, although Becky's manipulative, amoral tendencies make her come pretty close. However, even Becky, who is amoral and cunning, is thrown on her own resources by poverty and its stigma. (She is the orphaned daughter of a poor artist and an opera dancer.) Thackeray's tendency to highlight faults in all of his characters displays his desire for a greater level of realism in his fiction compared to the rather unlikely or idealised people in many contemporary novels.\nThe novel is a satire of society as a whole, characterised by hypocrisy and opportunism, but it is not necessarily a reforming novel; there is no clear suggestion that social or political changes or greater piety and moral reformism could improve the nature of society. It thus paints a fairly bleak view of the human condition. This bleak portrait is continued with Thackeray's own role as an omniscient narrator, one of the writers best known for using the technique. He continually offers asides about his characters and compares them to actors and puppets, but his cheek goes even as far as his readers, accusing all who may be interested in such \"Vanity Fairs\" as being either \"of a lazy, or a benevolent, or a sarcastic mood\". As Lord David Cecil remarked, \"Thackeray liked people, and for the most part he thought them well-intentioned. But he also saw very clearly that they were all in some degree weak and vain, self-absorbed and self-deceived.\" Amelia begins as a warm-hearted and friendly girl, though sentimental and naive, but by the story's end she is portrayed as vacuous and shallow. Dobbin appears first as loyal and magnanimous, if unaware of his own worth; by the end of the story he is presented as a tragic fool, a prisoner of his own sense of duty who knows he is wasting his gifts on Amelia but is unable to live without her. The novel's increasingly grim outlook can take readers aback, as characters whom the reader at first holds in sympathy are shown to be unworthy of such regard.\nThe work is often compared to the other great historical novel of the Napoleonic Wars, Tolstoy's \"War and Peace\". While Tolstoy's work has a greater emphasis on the historical detail and the effect the war has upon his protagonists, Thackeray instead uses the conflict as a backdrop to the lives of his characters. The momentous events on the continent do not always have an equally important influence on the behaviours of Thackeray's characters. Rather their faults tend to compound over time. This is in contrast to the redemptive power the conflict has on the characters in \"War and Peace\". For Thackeray, the Napoleonic Wars as a whole can be thought of as one more of the vanities expressed in the title.\nA common critical topic is to address various objects in the book and the characters' relationships with them, such as Rebecca's diamonds or the piano Amelia values when she thinks it came from George and dismisses upon learning that Dobbin provided it. Marxist and similar schools of criticism that go farther and see Thackeray condemning consumerism and capitalism. However, while Thackeray is pointed in his criticism of the commodification of women in the marriage market, his variations on Ecclesiastes's \"all is vanity\" are often interpreted as personal rather than institutional. He also has broad sympathy with a measure of comfort and financial and physical \"snugness\". At one point, the narrator even makes a \"robust defense of his lunch\": \"It is all vanity to be sure: but who will not own to liking a little of it? I should like to know what well-constituted mind, merely because it is transitory, dislikes roast-beef?\"\nDespite the clear implications of Thackeray's illustration on the topic, John Sutherland has argued against Becky having murdered Jos on the basis of Thackeray's criticism of the \"Newgate novels\" of Edward Bulwer-Lytton and other authors of Victorian crime fiction. Although what Thackeray principally objected to was glorification of a criminal's deeds, his intent may have been to entrap the Victorian reader with their own prejudices and make them think the worst of Becky Sharp even when they have no proof of her actions.\nAdaptations.\nThe book has inspired a number of adaptations:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40124", "revid": "48026580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40124", "title": "Acetic acid bacteria", "text": "Group of bacteria\nAcetic acid bacteria (AAB) are a group of Gram-negative bacteria that oxidize sugars or ethanol and produce acetic acid during fermentation. The acetic acid bacteria consist of 10 genera in the family Acetobacteraceae. Several species of acetic acid bacteria are used in industry for production of certain foods and chemicals.\nDescription.\nAll acetic acid bacteria are rod-shaped and obligate aerobes. Acetic acid bacteria are airborne and are ubiquitous in nature. They are actively present in environments where ethanol is being formed as a product of the fermentation of sugars. They can be isolated from the nectar of flowers and from damaged fruit. Other good sources are fresh apple cider and unpasteurized beer that has not been filter sterilized. In these liquids, they grow as a surface film due to their aerobic nature and active motility. Fruit flies or vinegar eels are considered common vectors in the propagation of acetic acid bacteria.\nThe growth of \"Acetobacter\" in wine can be suppressed through effective sanitation, by complete exclusion of air from wine in storage, and by the use of moderate amounts of sulfur dioxide in the wine as a preservative.\nMetabolism.\nVinegar is produced when acetic acid bacteria act on alcoholic beverages such as wine. Specific oxidation reactions occur through oxidative fermentation, which creates vinegar as a byproduct. In the biotechnological industry, these bacteria's oxidation mechanism is exploited to produce a number of compounds such as l-ascorbic acid, dihydroxyacetone, gluconic acid, and cellulose. Besides food industry, some acetic acid bacteria are used as biocatalysts for the industrial production of compounds. They are used as the important biocatalysts for the development of eco-friendly fermentation processes as an alternative to the chemical synthesis. Some genera, such as \"Acetobacter\", can oxidize ethanol to carbon dioxide and water using Krebs cycle enzymes. Other genera, such as \"Gluconobacter\", do not oxidize ethanol, as they do not have a full set of Krebs cycle enzymes. As these bacteria produce acid, they are usually acid-tolerant, growing well below pH 5.0, although the pH optimum for growth is 5.4-6.3. \"Acetobacter xylinum\" is able to synthesize cellulose, something normally done only by plants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40127", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40127", "title": "Arthrobacter", "text": "Genus of bacteria\nArthrobacter (from the Greek, \"jointed small stick\u201d) is a genus of bacteria that is commonly found in soil. All species in this genus are Gram-positive obligate aerobes that are rods during exponential growth and cocci in their stationary phase. \"Arthrobacter\" have a distinctive method of cell division called \"snapping division\" or reversion in which the outer bacterial cell wall ruptures at a joint.\nDescription.\n\"Arthrobacter\" can be grown on mineral salts pyridone broth, where colonies have a greenish metallic center on incubated at . Under the microscope, \"Arthrobacter\" appear as rods when rapidly dividing, and cocci when in stationary phase. Dividing cells may also appear as chevrons (\"V\" shapes). Other notable characteristics are that it can use pyridone as its sole carbon source, and that its cocci are resistant to desiccation and starvation.\nUse in industry.\n\"Arthrobacter\", like other bacterial genera including \"Brevibacterium\", \"Microbacterium\", and \"Corynebacterium\" are used for industrial production of L-glutamate. In industrial applications, \"Arthrobacter\" is often grown with low-cost sugar sources such as cane or beet molasses, starch hydrolysates from corn or cassava tubers, or tapioca. Along with sugar, ammonia and ammonium salts are added as a nitrogen source. The vitamins, minerals, and some other types of nutrients can be provided by adding corn steep liquour.\nOther uses.\nVarious \"Arthrobacter\" species have been investigated for other commercial applications. \"A. crystallopoietes\" and \"A. chlorophenolicus\" have been shown to reduce hexavalent chromium and 4-chlorophenol levels in contaminated soil, suggesting they may be useful for bioremediation. Similarly, \"Arthrobacter\" sp. strain R1 (American Type Culture Collection strain number 49987) has been shown to grow on a variety of aromatic compounds, including homocyclic compounds, such as hydroxybenzoates, as well as N-heterocycles, including pyridine and picoline.\n\"Arthrobacter\" sp. H65-7 produces the enzyme inulase II that converts inulin into the medically relevant nutrient difructose anhydride.\nThe enzyme Alu obtained from \"Arthrobacter luteus\" is able to cleave Alu sequences which is frequently repeated in human DNA.\nSpecies.\n\"Arthrobacter\" comprises the following species:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40130", "revid": "2991199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40130", "title": "Mineral salts pyridone broth", "text": "Mineral salts pyridine broth is a selective medium for bacteria that can metabolize pyridine (which is an unusual carbon source that a select few types of bacteria can use). This medium is used to isolate bacteria belonging to the genus \"Arthrobacter\" among other bacteria genera."}
{"id": "40132", "revid": "50595063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40132", "title": "The Muppet Show", "text": "1976\u20131981 American-British variety television series\nThe Muppet Show is a variety sketch comedy family television series created by Jim Henson and starring the Muppets. It is presented as a variety show, featuring recurring sketches and musical numbers interspersed with ongoing plot-lines with running gags taking place backstage and in other areas of the venue. \n\"The Muppet Show\" is known for its uniquely designed characters, burlesque nature, slapstick, sometimes absurdist and surreal humour, and parodies. Within its context, Kermit the Frog (performed by Henson) acts as showrunner and host, who tries to maintain control of the overwhelming antics of the other Muppet characters as well as appease the rotating slate of guest stars. As \"The Muppet Show\" became popular, many celebrities were eager to perform with the Muppets on television and in subsequent films.\nHenson produced two pilot episodes for ABC in 1974 and 1975, but neither went forward as a series. While other networks in the United States rejected Henson's proposals, British producer Lew Grade expressed enthusiasm for the project and agreed to co-produce \"The Muppet Show\" for ATV, part of the UK ITV network. \"The Muppet Show\" was produced by ITC Entertainment and Henson Associates with programmes produced and recorded at the ATV Elstree Studios in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. \nThe series was premiered in the UK on 5 September 1976 and ended on 23 May 1981. Five seasons, totalling 120 episodes, were broadcast on ATV and other ITV franchises in the UK and in first-run syndication in the United States from 1976 to 1981.\nThe cast of performers over the course of the series included Henson, Frank Oz (credited as featured performer as well as creative consultant), Jerry Nelson, Richard Hunt, Dave Goelz, Steve Whitmire, Fran Brill, Eren \u00d6zker, Louise Gold, Kathryn Mullen, Karen Prell, Brian Muehl, Bob Payne, John Lovelady, Jane Henson, Peter Friedman, Betsy Baytos, and dancer Graham Fletcher. Many of the performers also worked on \"Sesame Street\", whose characters made sporadic appearances on \"The Muppet Show\". Jack Burns served as the head writer for the first season, before Jerry Juhl became the head writer from the second season. The music was performed by ATV's musical director Jack Parnell and his orchestra.\nThe rights to the series have been owned by the Muppets Studio\u00a0(a division of\u00a0the Walt Disney Company) since they were acquired from the Jim Henson Company in 2004.\nHistory.\nSince its debut in 1969, \"Sesame Street\" had given Jim Henson's Muppet characters exposure. However, he began to perceive that he was becoming typecast as a children's entertainer. Subsequently, he began to conceive a programme for a more adult audience. Two television specials, \"The Muppets Valentine Show\" (1974) and \"\" (1975), were produced for ABC and are considered pilots for \"The Muppet Show\". Neither of them were ordered to series. However, the prime-time access rule was recently enacted, moving the 7:30 to 8\u00a0pm ET slot from the networks to their affiliates. CBS became interested in Henson's series proposals and expressed intent to broadcast it weekly on its owned and operated stations. According to Henson's pitch reel, George Schlatter was originally involved.\nLew Grade, the proprietor of the British commercial station ATV, was familiar with puppet television programmes, having underwritten the various works of Gerry Anderson, while also producing two specials with Henson: \"Julie on Sesame Street\" and a special on Herb Alpert &amp; the Tijuana Brass. Grade offered Henson a deal that resulted in the latter's programme being produced at the ATV Elstree Studios. ATV, as part of the ITV network, would broadcast the programme to other ITV stations in the United Kingdom, and its distribution arm, ITC Entertainment, would handle international broadcasts. Henson set aside his misgivings about syndication and accepted.\nMeanwhile, Henson's Muppets were featured in \"The Land of Gorch\" skits during the first (1975\u201376) season of the American comedy television programme \"Saturday Night Live\". Although they lasted for only that one season on \"Saturday Night Live\" because of conflicts with that show's writers and producers, Henson and his team learned a great deal from being involved with the production. They gained institutional knowledge about adapting and quickly creating a television programme within a seven-day period. Henson also gained valuable friendships with multiple celebrities through his work on \"Saturday Night Live\". Henson and his team were later able to use these skills and relationships on \"The Muppet Show\".\n\"The Muppet Show\" was first aired in September 1976 in the UK and by December the series had around 14 million viewers tuning in on Sunday evenings. In January 1977, over 100 countries had either acquired the series or were making offers, which had resulted in over \u00a36 million in overseas sales and by its third season in 1978 it had a weekly worldwide audience of 235 million.\nOverview.\nOpening and closing sequences.\n\"The Muppet Show Theme\" (written by Henson and Sam Pottle in 1976) is the show's theme song. While the opening sequence changed from season to season, the overall concept remained the same. Each episode began with \"The Muppet Show\" logo on a title card. The centre of the \"O\" then opened to reveal host Kermit the Frog, who announced, \"It's \"The Muppet Show\", with our very special guest star, [name of guest star]!\" usually cheering afterwards.\nDuring the first season, the theme song contained a joke from Fozzie Bear and featured Kermit introducing the guest star (\"To introduce our guest star, that's what I'm here to do, so it really makes me happy to introduce to you...\"). At the song's end, Gonzo the Great appeared in front of the \"Muppet Show\" banner, attempting to play the \"O\" in \"Show\" like a gong, with various comical results.\nFrom the second to fourth seasons, the joke and Kermit's introduction were replaced by a short quip from Statler and Waldorf, then a shot of the audience singing \"Why don't they get things started?\" The fifth season version had an extra verse from the hecklers (\"Why do we always come here? I guess we'll never know. It's like a kind of torture to have to watch the show!\"). At the end of the song, Gonzo appeared inside the \"O\" in \"Show\" to play the final note on a trumpet; again, with various comical results.\nEach episode ended with an extended instrumental performance of \"The Muppet Show Theme\" by the Muppet orchestra before Statler and Waldorf gave the last laugh of the night, followed by Zoot playing an off-key final note on his saxophone. Some last-laugh sequences had other Muppets on the balcony. For example, in one episode, the Muppets of \"Sesame Street\" appeared behind Statler and Waldorf, who told them, \"How should we know how to get to Sesame Street? We don't even know how to get out of this stupid theatre box!\"\nEvery season, the TV version of the song was presented with re-worked lyrics. While the opening sequence evolved visually over the show's five seasons, the musical composition remained essentially the same. Over the years, the song has become a staple of the Muppets franchise as a whole.\nMuppet Theater.\nThe Muppet Theater is the setting for \"The Muppet Show\", a grand old vaudeville house that has seen better days. In episode 106, Kermit identifies the name of the theatre as The Benny Vandergast Memorial Theater, although other episodes merely identify it as \"the Muppet Theater\". It is also identified as simply \"Muppet Theater\" in \"It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie\". It is then that the theatre becomes registered as a historical landmark, and it cannot be shut down. In the film, the theatre is shown to be in New York City.\nAccording to \"The Phantom of the Muppet Theater\", the theatre was built by a stage actor named John Stone in 1802. At some point, a production of \"Hamlet\" ran in the theatre, with Stone playing the title role. An alternative exterior is also shown in the book.\nLocations seen in the Muppet Theater include backstage right (which includes Kermit's desk), the dressing rooms, the attic (seen in four compilation videos released in 1985), the canteen, the prop room, the stage, Statler and Waldorf's box, the auditorium, reception, the recording studio, the stage door lobby, the boiler room and the back alley. Some of these sets were later re-used as the Happiness Hotel in \"The Great Muppet Caper\". A replica of the theatre is used as the setting for the \"Muppet*Vision 3D\" attraction at Disney's Hollywood Studios.\nScooter's uncle J.P. Grosse owns the theatre and rents it to the Muppets. In a deleted scene from \"It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie\", Kermit reveals that J.P. has died and left the theatre to the Muppets in his will. This would have taken place some time after 1996, as J.P. can be seen (and referred to as such by the head of the KMUP network) in episode 107 of \"Muppets Tonight\", the 1990s reworking of \"The Muppet Show\".\nIn the film \"The Muppets\", a badly deteriorated version of the Muppet Theater is located next to Muppet Studios in Los Angeles. The Muppets reunite in hopes of raising enough money to buy the theatre from the oil magnate Tex Richman before he can demolish it and start drilling for oil on the site.\nCharacters and performers.\nMany of the characters who appeared on \"The Muppet Show\" have appeared in previous and subsequent Muppet productions.\nGuest stars.\nNo guest star ever appeared twice on \"The Muppet Show\", although John Denver appeared both on the show and in two specials (\"\" and \"John Denver &amp; the Muppets: Rocky Mountain Holiday\"), while Dudley Moore reappeared in the special \"The Muppets Go to the Movies\". Additionally, several guest stars from the series had cameos in the first three Muppet theatrical films, and the season four guest Alan Arkin had a cameo in \"The Muppets\". Originally, the producers had to call on their personal contacts to appeal to them to appear, especially considering that doing so required an overseas trip to Britain. However, the situation changed when the ballet dancer Rudolf Nureyev offered to appear; his performance on this unusual TV programme produced so much favourable publicity that the series became one of the most sought after for various celebrities to appear in.\nMany episodes featured actors, such as Gilda Radner, Steve Martin, Harvey Korman, Sylvester Stallone, Julie Andrews, Carol Burnett, Liza Minnelli, Christopher Reeve, Raquel Welch, Joel Grey and Dom DeLuise; some had veteran performers like Ethel Merman, Bob Hope, Danny Kaye, Don Knotts, Liberace, Peter Ustinov, James Coburn, Lena Horne, Zero Mostel and Vincent Price, and others had well-known pop singers, including Elton John, Diana Ross, Harry Belafonte, Kenny Rogers, Linda Ronstadt, Alice Cooper, Paul Simon, Helen Reddy, Twiggy, Debbie Harry, Buddy Rich, and Leo Sayer. Sayer's show used his hit song \"The Show Must Go On\" with slightly changed lyrics in the second verse, from \"I wish I could tear down the walls of this theatre\" to \"I wish I could tear down the walls of this Muppet Theatre\". Some guest stars, such as the Monty Python star John Cleese, co-wrote much of their own episodes. The second-to-last episode, in 1981, had the then-James Bond actor Roger Moore, while the final episode to be taped guest-starred the actor and dancer Gene Kelly. Mark Hamill appeared in one episode as both himself and Luke Skywalker, his role in the \"Star Wars\" film series. Two of Henson's childhood idols, Edgar Bergen and Milton Berle, also guest-starred during the second season.\nIn 1977, Rita Moreno won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program for her appearance. The next year, Peter Sellers \u2014 who chose not to appear as himself, instead appearing in a variety of characters \u2014 and Bernadette Peters earned nominations for the same award. One episode had the staff writer Chris Langham (who wrote some episodes of this show, starting in the third season) guest-starring when Richard Pryor was unable to make the taping of the episode at the last minute.\nAn early tradition was to present the guest star with a Muppet likeness of themselves as a parting gift at the end of the show, but this only lasted for the first two episodes produced, with Connie Stevens and Juliet Prowse. The high cost and effort of creating these unique Muppets, scheduling conflicts, and potential legal issues contributed to the decline of this practice, although Muppet caricatures and parodies continued to appear. The practice did, however, take place for actors Michael Caine and Tim Curry, who were the lead performers in \"The Muppet Christmas Carol\" and \"Muppet Treasure Island\", respectively.\nEpisodes.\nThe Muppet Show ran for five seasons, with minor alterations taking place each season.\nSoundtracks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and nominations.\n\"The Muppet Show\" was nominated for nine BAFTA Awards during its run, winning three. It was nominated for 21 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning four, including the 1978 award for Outstanding Comedy-Variety or Music Series. It was presented with a Peabody Award in 1978. Also in 1978, the show received the Television Award of Merit from the Mary Washington Colonial Chapter of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution.\nThe series also won the top Variety Prize in the Golden Rose of Montreux international Contest in May 1977.\nHome media.\nCompilation releases.\nIn 1985, Playhouse Video released a collection of video compilations under the Jim Henson's Muppet Video banner. Ten videos were released, featuring original linking material in addition to clips from the show.\nVideos included:\nIn 1993, Jim Henson Video released two compilations under the \"It's the Muppets\" banner, \"Meet the Muppets\" and \"More Muppets, Please!\" Later, three volumes of \"The Very Best of The Muppet Show\" were released on VHS and DVD in the UK (volume 3 was a release of full episodes as opposed to compilations). Unlike the Playhouse Video releases, \"It's the Muppets\" and \"The Very Best of The Muppet Show\" did not include any original footage or guest star clips, but all compilation collections did include material cut from the original US broadcasts.\nSeries releases.\nIn 1994, Buena Vista Home Video under the Jim Henson Video imprint released \"The Muppet Show: Monster Laughs with Vincent Price\", featuring the episodes with Vincent Price and Alice Cooper. Both episodes were edited. In addition to replacing the first series opening and the ending logos with Zoot, the Vincent Price episode was edited to remove the songs \"I'm Looking Through You\" and \"You've Got a Friend\" (the latter of which would be cut again when released on the first series DVD) as well as a sketch with the Talking Houses, while the Alice Cooper episode removed Robin the Frog's performance of \"Somewhere Over the Rainbow\".\nTime-Life and Jim Henson Home Entertainment began marketing \"best of\" volumes of \"The Muppet Show\" for mail-order in 2000, with six initial volumes with three episodes on each VHS and DVD. Unique to each episode was an introduction by Jim Henson's son, Brian. Nine more volumes were added for 2001, the series' 25th anniversary. The collection was available for retail in 2002 via Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment and Jim Henson Home Entertainment by which time Time-Life had released its tenth volume.\nBuena Vista Home Entertainment released the first three seasons on DVD between 2005 and 2008. The rights to the episodes and characters used in \"The Muppet Show\", and subsequent film outings, were bought in February 2004 by The Walt Disney Company.\nSeveral songs were cut from the series 1 DVD release due to music licensing issues. There have also been some cuts in the intro sequence, and backstage scenes leading up to these songs. However, episodes that used Disney music remained unaltered (for example, episode 14 of series 1 used \"Never Smile at a Crocodile\" from \"Peter Pan\").\n* \"Stormy Weather\" (Joel Grey episode) sung by Wayne and Wanda\n* \"Gone with the Wind\" (Jim Nabors episode) sung by Jim Nabors\n* \"The Danceros\" (Jim Nabors episode) sung by The Danceros\n* \"All of Me\" (Paul Williams episode) sung by Two Monsters\n* \"Old Fashioned Way\" (Charles Aznavour episode) sung by Charles Aznavour with Mildred Huxtetter\n* \"You've Got A Friend\" (Vincent Price episode) sung by Vincent Price, Uncle Deadly and a chorus of Muppet Monsters\nThe only uncut release of Season 1 on DVD so far is the German DVD release by Buena Vista Home Entertainment Germany in 2010 (which also contains English audio). However, the intro and end credit sequences on this release are in German. Also, the Paul Williams episode is missing a scene following \"All of Me\" wherein Fozzie and Scooter first discuss the \"Old Telephone Pole bit\". This scene does appear (albeit slightly abridged) in the international release. The German version also lacks the song \"In My Life\" performed by Twiggy, instead replacing it with a performance of \"Lean on Me\" by German singer Mary Roos.\nStreaming.\n\"The Muppet Show\" was released for streaming on Disney+ on 19 February 2021. However, two episodes featuring guests Brooke Shields and Chris Langham are omitted from the streaming service. In several European countries, the episode with John Denver is omitted as well. A content advisory was attached to several episodes describing \"negative depictions and/or mistreatment of people or cultures\".\nIn other media.\n2001: \"The Muppet Show Live!\".\nDuring the 2001 MuppetFest celebration, \"The Muppet Show Live\" was staged at the Hollywood Palace in Hollywood, Los Angeles on 9 December 2001. The performance featured Steve Whitmire, Brian Henson, Bill Barretta, Kevin Clash, John Kennedy, John Henson, and Julianne Buescher.\nAdditional puppeteers including Allan Trautman, Bruce Lanoil, Drew Massey, Karen Prell and Mike Quinn.\n2026: Revival special.\nOn 17 September 2025, Disney announced that an untitled \"event special\" for \"The Muppet Show\" was being produced for Disney+, to premiere in 2026 to coincide with the show's 50th anniversary. The special is described as \"Kermit the Frog, Miss Piggy, Fozzie Bear, Gonzo and the gang as they return to the Muppet Theatre to produce a variety show.\" The special will star Muppet performers Bill Barretta, Dave Goelz, Eric Jacobson, Peter Linz, David Rudman and Matt Vogel performing the majority of the Muppet characters, alongside a supporting cast of additional performers; Goelz reprises the same character roles he originated during the show's original 1976\u20131981 run. The special will be directed by Alex Timbers and feature special guest star Sabrina Carpenter, who is also credited as an executive producer alongside Seth Rogen, Evan Goldberg, Vogel, Jacobson, David Lightbody, Leigh Slaughter, Michael Steinbach, Albertina Rizzo, James Weaver and Alex McAtee.\nThe special will be co-produced by 20th Television, Disney Branded Television, The Muppets Studio, and Point Grey Pictures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40133", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40133", "title": "Bacillus cereus", "text": "Species of bacterium\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBacillus cereus is a Gram-positive rod-shaped bacterium commonly found in soil, food, and marine sponges. The specific name, \"cereus\", meaning \"waxy\" in Latin, refers to the appearance of colonies grown on blood agar. Some strains are harmful to humans and cause foodborne illness due to their spore-forming nature, while other strains can be beneficial as probiotics for animals, and even exhibit mutualism with certain plants. \"B.\u00a0cereus\" bacteria may be aerobes or facultative anaerobes, and like other members of the genus \"Bacillus\", can produce protective endospores. They have a wide range of virulence factors, including phospholipase C, cereulide, sphingomyelinase, metalloproteases, and cytotoxin K, many of which are regulated via quorum sensing. \"B. cereus\" strains exhibit flagellar motility.\nThe \"Bacillus cereus\" group comprises seven closely related species: \"B.\u00a0cereus\" \"sensu stricto\" (referred to herein as \"B.\u00a0cereus\"), \"B.\u00a0anthracis\", \"B.\u00a0thuringiensis\", \"B. mycoides\", \"B. pseudomycoides\", and \"B.\u00a0cytotoxicus\"; or as six species in a \"Bacillus cereus\" sensu lato: \"B. weihenstephanensis\", \"B. mycoides\", \"B. pseudomycoides\", \"B. cereus\", \"B. thuringiensis\", and \"B. anthracis\". A phylogenomic analysis combined with average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis revealed that the \"B. anthracis\" species also includes strains annotated as \"B. cereus\" and \"B. thuringiensis.\"\nHistory.\nColonies of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" were originally isolated by Percy F. Frankland from a gelatine plate left exposed to the air in a cow shed in 1887. In the 2010s, examination of warning letters issued by the US Food and Drug Administration issued to pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities addressing facility microbial contamination revealed that the most common contaminant was \"B.\u00a0cereus\".\nSeveral new enzymes have been discovered in \"B.\u00a0cereus\", such as AlkC and AlkD, both of which are involved in DNA repair.\nMicrobiology.\n\"B. cereus\" is a rod-shaped bacterium with a Gram-positive cell envelope. Depending on the strain, it may be aerobic or facultatively anaerobic. Most strains are mesophilic, having an optimal temperature between 25\u00a0\u00b0C and 37\u00a0\u00b0C, and neutralophilic, preferring neutral pH, but some have been found to grow in environments with much more extreme conditions.\nThese bacteria are both spore-forming and biofilm-forming, presenting a large challenge to the food industry due to their contamination capability. Biofilms of \"B. cereus\" most commonly form on air-liquid interfaces or on hard surfaces such as glass. \"B. cereus\" display flagellar motility, which has been shown to aid in biofilm formation via an increased ability to reach surfaces suitable for biofilm formation, to spread the biofilm over a larger surface area, and to recruit planktonic, or single, free-living bacteria. Biofilm formation may also occur while in spore form due to varying adhesion ability of spores.\nTheir flagella are peritrichous, meaning there are many flagella located all around the cell body that can bundle together at a single location on the cell to propel it. This flagellar property also allows the cell to change directions of movement depending on where on the cell the flagellum filaments come together to generate movement.\nSome studies and observations have shown that silica particles the size of a few nanometers have been deposited in a spore coat layer in the extracytoplasmic region of the \"Bacillus cereus\" spore. The layer was first discovered by the use of scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), however the images taken did not have resolution high enough to determine the precise location of the silica. Some investigators hypothesize that the layer helps different spores from sticking together. It has also been shown to provide some resistance to acidic environments. The silica coat is related to the permeability of the spore's inner membrane. Strong mineral acids are able to break down spore permeability barriers and kill the spore. However, when the spore has a silica coating, it may reduce the permeability of the membrane and provide resistance to many acids.\nMetabolism.\n\"Bacillus cereus\" has mechanisms for both aerobic and anaerobic respiration, making it a facultative anaerobe. Its aerobic pathway consists of three terminal oxidases: cytochrome aa3, cytochrome caa3, and cytochrome bd, the use of each dependent on the amount of oxygen present in the environment. The \"B. cereus\" genome encodes genes for metabolic enzymes including NADH dehydrogenases, succinate dehydrogenase, complex III, and cytochrome c oxidase, as well as others. \"Bacillus cereus\" can metabolize several different compounds to create energy, including carbohydrates, proteins, peptides, and amino acids.\nThe Embden-Meyerhof pathway is the predominant pathway used by \"Bacillus cereus\" to catabolize glucose at every stage of the cell's development, according to estimates of a radiorespirometric method of glucose catabolism. This is true at times of germinative phases, as well as sporogenic phases. At the filamentous, granular, forespore, and transitional stages, the Embden-Meyerhof pathway was responsible for the catabolism of 98% of the cell's glucose. The remainder of the glucose was catabolized by the hexose monophosphate oxidative pathway.\nAnalysis of the core genome of \"B. cereus\" reveals a limited presence of enzymes meant for breakdown of polysaccharides and a prevalence of proteases and amino acid degradation and transport pathways, indicating that their preferred diet consists of proteins and their breakdown products.\nAn isolate of a bacterium found to produce PHBs was identified as \"B. cereus\" through analysis of 16S rRNA sequences as well as similarity of morphological and biochemical characteristics. PHBs may be produced when there is excess carbon or limited essential nutrients present in the environment, and they are later broken down by the microbe as a fuel source under starvation conditions. This indicates the potential role of \"B. cereus\" in producing biodegradable plastic substitutes. PHB production was highest when provided with glucose as a carbon source.\nGenomics.\nThe genome of \"B. cereus\" has been characterized and shown to contain over 5 million bp of DNA. Out of these, more than 5500 protein-encoding genes have been identified, of which the top categories of genes with known functions include: metabolic processes, processing of proteins, virulence factors, response to stress, and defense mechanisms. Many of the genes categorized as virulence factors, stress responses, and defense mechanisms encode factors in antibiotic resistance. There are approximately 600 genes which are common in 99% of the taxa of \"B. cereus\" sensu lato, which constitutes around 1% of all genes in the pan-genome. Due to the prevalence of horizontal gene transfer among bacteria, the pan-genome of \"B. cereus\" is continually expanding. The GC content of its DNA across all strains is approximately 35%.\nFollowing exposure to non-lethal acid shock at pH 5.4-5.5, the arginine deiminase gene in \"B. cereus\", \"arcA,\" shows substantial up-regulation. This gene is part of the \"arcABC\" operon which is induced by low-pH environments in \"Listeria monocytogenes\", and is associated with growth and survival in acidic environments. This suggests that this gene is also important for survival of \"B. cereus\" in acidic environments.\nThe activation of virulence factors has been shown to be transcriptionally regulated via quorum-sensing in \"B. cereus.\" The activation of many virulence factors secreted is dependent on the activity of the Phospholipase C regulator (PlcR), a transcriptional regulator which is most active at the beginning of the stationary phase of growth. A small peptide called PapR acts as the effector in the quorum-sensing pathway, and when reimported into the cell, it interacts with PlcR to activate transcription of these virulence genes. When point mutations were introduced into the plcR gene using the CRISPR/Cas9 system, it was observed that the mutated bacteria lost their hemolytic and phospholipase activity.\nThe flagella of \"B. cereus\" are encoded by 2 to 5 \"fla\" genes, depending on the strain.\nIdentification.\nFor the isolation and enumeration of \"B.\u00a0cereus\", there are two standardized methods by International Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO 7932 and ISO 21871. Because of \"B.\u00a0cereus\"' ability to produce lecithinase and its inability to ferment mannitol, there are some proper selective media for its isolation and identification such as mannitol-egg yolk-polymyxin (MYP) and polymyxin-pyruvate-egg yolk-mannitol-bromothymol blue agar (PEMBA). \"B.\u00a0cereus\" colonies on MYP have a violet-red background and are surrounded by a zone of egg-yolk precipitate.\nBelow is a list of differential techniques and results that can help to identify \"B.\u00a0cereus\" from other bacteria and \"Bacillus\" species.\nThe Central Public Health Laboratory in the United Kingdom tests for motility, hemolysis, rhizoid growth, susceptibility to \u03b3-phage, and fermentation of ammonium salt-based glucose but no mannitol, arabinose, or xylose.\nGrowth.\nThe optimal growth temperature range for \"B. cereus\" is 30-40\u00a0\u00b0C. At , a population of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" can double in as little as 20 minutes or as long as 3 hours, depending on the food product. Spores of \"B. cereus\" are not metabolically active, but can rapidly become active and begin replicating once they encounter adequate growth conditions.\nEcology.\nLike most \"Bacilli,\" the most common ecosystem of \"Bacillus cereus\" is the soil. In concert with arbuscular mycorrhiza (and \"Rhizobium leguminosarum\" in clover), they can up-regulate plant growth in heavy metal soils by decreasing heavy metal concentrations via bioaccumulation and biotransformation in addition to increasing phosphorus, nitrogen, and potassium uptake in certain plants. \"B. cereus\" was also shown to aid in survival of earthworms in heavy metal soils resulting from the use of metal-based fungicides, showing increases in biomass, reproduction and reproductive viability, and a decrease in metal content of tissues in those inoculated with the bacterium. These results suggest strong possibilities for its application in ecological bioremediation. Evidence of bioremediation potential by \"Bacillus cereus\" was also found in the aquatic ecosystem, where organic nitrogen and phosphorus wastes polluting a eutrophic lake were broken down in the presence of \"B. cereus\".\nIn a study measuring the ability of \"B. cereus\" to degrade keratin in chicken feathers, bacteria were found to sufficiently biodegrade keratin via hydrolytic mechanisms. These results indicate its potential to degrade keratinous waste from the poultry industry for potential recycling of the byproducts.\n\"B.\u00a0cereus\" competes with Gram-negative bacteria species such as \"Salmonella\" and \"Campylobacter\" in the gut; its presence reduces the number of Gram-negative bacteria, specifically via antibiotic activity via enzymes such as cereins that impede their quorum sensing ability and exhibit bactericidal activity. In food animals such as chickens, rabbits and pigs, some harmless strains of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" are used as a probiotic feed additive to reduce \"Salmonella\" in the animals' intestines and cecum. This improves the animals' growth, as well as food safety for humans who eat them. In addition, \"B. cereus\" create and release enzymes that aid in the digestion of materials that are typically difficult to digest, such as woody plant matter, in the guts of other organisms.\nThe strain &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;\"B. cereus\" B25 is a biofungicide. A study by Figueroa-L\u00f3pez \"et al.\" showed that the presence of this strain reduced \"Fusarium verticillioides\" growth. B25 shows promise for reduction of mycotoxin concentrations in grains.\nPathogenesis.\n\"B.\u00a0cereus\" is responsible for a minority of foodborne illnesses (2\u20135%), causing severe nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. \"Bacillus\" foodborne illnesses occur due to survival of the bacterial endospores when contaminated food is not, or is inadequately, cooked. Cooking temperatures less than or equal to allow some \"B.\u00a0cereus\" spores to survive. This problem is compounded when food is then improperly refrigerated, allowing the endospores to germinate. Cooked foods not meant for either immediate consumption or rapid cooling and refrigeration should be kept at temperatures below or above . Germination and growth generally occur between 10\u00a0\u00b0C and 50\u00a0\u00b0C, though some strains can grow at low temperatures, and Bacillus cytotoxicus strains have been shown to grow at temperatures up to . Bacterial growth results in production of enterotoxins, one of which is highly resistant to heat and acids (pH levels between 2 and 11); ingestion leads to two types of illness: diarrheal and emetic (vomiting) syndrome. The enterotoxins produced by \"B. cereus\" have beta-hemolytic activity.\nThe diarrhetic syndromes observed in patients are thought to stem from the three toxins: hemolysin BL (Hbl), nonhemolytic enterotoxin (Nhe), and cytotoxin K (CytK). The \"nhe\"/\"hbl\"/\"cytK\" genes are located on the chromosome of the bacteria. Transcription of these genes is controlled by \"PlcR\". These genes occur in the taxonomically related \"B.\u00a0thuringiensis\" and \"B.\u00a0anthracis\", as well. These enterotoxins are all produced in the small intestine of the host, thus thwarting digestion by host endogenous enzymes. The Hbl and Nhe toxins are pore-forming toxins closely related to ClyA of \"E.\u00a0coli\". The proteins exhibit a conformation known as a \"beta-barrel\" that can insert into cellular membranes due to a hydrophobic exterior, thus creating pores with hydrophilic interiors. The effect is loss of cellular membrane potential and eventually cell death.\nPreviously, it was thought that the timing of the toxin production was responsible for the two different courses of disease, but it has since been found that the emetic syndrome is caused by the toxin cereulide, which is found only in emetic strains and is not part of the \"standard toolbox\" of \"B.\u00a0cereus\". Cereulide is a cyclic polypeptide containing three repeats of four amino acids: D-oxy-Leu\u2014D-Ala\u2014L-oxy-Val\u2014L-Val (similar to valinomycin produced by \"Streptomyces griseus\") produced by nonribosomal peptide synthesis. Cereulide is believed to bind to 5-hydroxytryptamine\u00a03 (5-HT3) serotonin receptors, activating them and leading to increased afferent vagus nerve stimulation. It was shown independently by two research groups to be encoded on multiple plasmids: pCERE01 or pBCE4810. Plasmid pBCE4810 shares homology with the \"B.\u00a0anthracis\" virulence plasmid pXO1, which encodes the anthrax toxin. Periodontal isolates of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" also possess distinct pXO1-like plasmids. Like most of cyclic peptides containing nonproteogenic amino acids, cereulide is resistant to heat, proteolysis, and acid conditions.\n\"B.\u00a0cereus\" is also known to cause difficult-to-eradicate chronic skin infections, though less aggressive than necrotizing fasciitis. \"B.\u00a0cereus\" can also cause keratitis.\nWhile often associated with gastrointestinal illness, \"B. cereus\" is also associated with illnesses such as fulminant bacterial infection, central nervous system involvement, respiratory tract infection, and endophthalmitis. Endophthalmitis is the most common form of extra-gastrointestinal pathogenesis, which is an infection of the eye that may cause permanent vision loss. Infections typically cause a corneal ring abscess, followed by other symptoms such as pain, proptosis, and retinal hemorrhage. While different from \"B. anthracis, B. cereus\" contains some toxin genes originally found in \"B. anthracis\" that are attributed to anthrax-like respiratory tract infections.\nA case study was published in 2019 of a catheter-related bloodstream infection of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" in a 91-year-old male previously being treated with hemodialysis via PermCath for end-stage renal disease. He presented with chills, tachypnea, and high-grade fever, his white blood cell count and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) were significantly elevated, and CT imaging revealed a thoracic aortic aneurysm. He was successfully treated for the aneurysm with intravenous vancomycin, oral fluoroquinolones, and PermCath removal. Another case study of \"B. cereus\" infection was published in 2021 of a 30-year-old woman with lupus who was diagnosed with infective endocarditis after receiving a catheter. The blood samples were positive for B. cereus and the patient was subsequently treated with vancomycin. PCR was also used to verify toxins that the isolate produces.\nDiagnosis.\nIn case of foodborne illness, the diagnosis of \"B.\u00a0cereus\" can be confirmed by the isolation of more than 100,000 \"B.\u00a0cereus\" organisms per gram from epidemiologically implicated food, but such testing is often not done because the illness is relatively harmless and usually self-limiting.\nPrognosis.\nMost emetic patients recover within 6 to 24 hours, but in some cases, the toxin can be fatal via fulminant hepatic failure. In 2014, 23 newborns in the UK receiving total parenteral nutrition contaminated with \"B.\u00a0cereus\" developed sepsis, with three of the infants later dying as a result of infection.\nPrevention.\nWhile \"B.\u00a0cereus\" vegetative cells are killed during normal cooking, spores are more resistant. Viable spores in food can become vegetative cells in the intestines and produce a range of diarrheal enterotoxins, so elimination of spores is desirable. In wet heat (poaching, simmering, boiling, braising, stewing, pot roasting, steaming), spores require more than 5 minutes at at the coldest spot to be destroyed. In dry heat (grilling, broiling, baking, roasting, searing, saut\u00e9ing), for 1 hour kills all spores on the exposed surface. This process of eliminating spores is very important, as spores of \"B. cereus\" are particularly resistant, even after pasteurization or exposure to gamma rays.\n\"B.\u00a0cereus\" and other members of \"Bacillus\" are not easily killed by alcohol; they have been known to colonize distilled liquors and alcohol-soaked swabs and pads in numbers sufficient to cause infection.\nA study of an isolate of \"Bacillus cereus\" that was isolated from the stomach of a sheep was shown to be able to break down \u03b2-cypermethrin (\u03b2-CY) which has been known to be an antimicrobial agent. This strain, known as GW-01, can break down \u03b2-CY at a significant rate when the bacterial cells are in high concentrations relative to the antimicrobial agent. It has also been noted that the ability to break down \u03b2-CY is inducible. However, as the concentration of \u03b2-CY increases, the rate of \u03b2-CY degradation decreases. This suggests that the agent also functions as a toxin against the GW-01 strain. This is significant as it shows that in the right concentrations, \u03b2-CY can be used as an antimicrobial agent against \"Bacillus cereus\".\nDiseases in aquatic animals.\n\"Bacillus cereus\" group bacteria, notably \"B. cereus\" and \"B. thuringiensis\", are also pathogenic to multiple aquatic organisms including Chinese softshell turtle (\"Pelodiscus sinensis\"), causing infection characterized by gross lesions such as hepatic congestion and enlarged spleen with high mortality.\nBacteriophages.\nBacteria of the \"B.\u00a0cereus\" group are infected by bacteriophages belonging to the family Tectiviridae. This family includes tailless phages that have a lipid membrane or vesicle beneath the icosahedral protein shell and that are formed of approximately equal amounts of virus-encoded proteins and lipids derived from the host cell's plasma membrane. Upon infection, the lipid membrane becomes a tail-like structure used in genome delivery. The genome is composed of about 15-kilobase, linear, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) with long, inverted terminal-repeat sequences (100 base pairs). GIL01, Bam35, GIL16, AP50, and Wip1 are examples of temperate tectiviruses infecting the \"B.\u00a0cereus\" group. Bacteriophage PBC1 is an exampled of a tailed virus that infects \"B.\u00a0cereus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40135", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40135", "title": "Lumen gentium", "text": "Catholic ecclesiology text of the Second Vatican Council\n, the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, is one of the principal documents of the Second Vatican Council. This dogmatic constitution was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 21 November 1964, following approval by the assembled bishops by a vote of 2,151 to 5. As is customary with significant Catholic Church documents, it is known by its incipit, \"\", Latin for 'Light of the Nations'.\nThe eight chapters of the document can be paired thematically: chapters one and two treat the church's nature and historical existence, chapters three and four treat different roles in the church, chapters five and six treat holiness and religious life, while chapters seven and eight discuss the saints and Mary.\nContents.\nChapter 1: The Mystery of the Church (1\u20138).\nIn its first chapter on ecclesiology, the constitution states that \"all the just, from Adam and 'from Abel, the just one, to the last of the elect,' will be gathered together with the Father in the universal Church[...] a people made one with the unity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.\"(2) \"Christ made His brothers, called together from all nations, mystically the components of His own Body.\"(7)\nIt goes on to describe \"the sole Church of Christ which in the Creed is professed as one, holy, catholic and apostolic, which our Saviour, after His Resurrection, commissioned Peter to shepherd, and him and the other apostles to extend and direct with authority, which He erected for all ages as 'the pillar and mainstay of the truth.' This Church, constituted and organized as a society in the present world, subsists in the Catholic Church, which is governed by the successor of Peter and by the bishops in communion with him, although many elements of sanctification and of truth are found outside its visible confines.\"(8)\nPope Francis took a central theme of his pontificate from \u00a7 8 on the Church following Christ, \"its poor and suffering founder\" (8) in his poverty and humility, in order to bring the Good News to the poor.\nChapter 2: On The People of God (9\u201317).\nChurch is the people of God.\nOne of the key portions of is its second chapter, with its declaration that the Church is \"the People of God\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommon and ministerial priesthoods.\nThe three-fold ministry of Christ is also exercised by every baptized. Thus in a sense all the baptized share in the priesthood of Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though they differ from one another in essence and not only in degree, the common priesthood of the faithful and the ministerial or hierarchical priesthood are nonetheless interrelated: each of them in its own special way is a participation in the one priesthood of Christ. The ministerial priest, by the sacred power he enjoys, teaches and rules the priestly people; acting in the person of Christ, he makes present the eucharistic sacrifice, and offers it to God in the name of all the people. But the faithful, in virtue of their royal priesthood, join in the offering of the Eucharist. They likewise exercise that priesthood in receiving the sacraments, in prayer and thanksgiving, in the witness of a holy life, and by self-denial and active charity.(10)\nPossibility of salvation for those outside the Church.\nIn the second chapter, the Council teaches that God wills to save people not just as individuals but as a people. For this reason God chose the Israelite people to be his own people and established a covenant with it, as a preparation and figure of the covenant ratified in Christ that constitutes the new People of God, which would be one, not according to the flesh, but in the Spirit and which is called the Church of Christ.(9)\nConsequently, \"it [the Council] teaches that the Church, now sojourning on earth as an exile, is necessary for salvation. Christ, present to us in His Body, which is the Church, is the one Mediator and the unique way of salvation.\" Those who \"knowing that the Catholic Church was made necessary by Christ, would refuse to enter or to remain in it, could not be saved.\"(14)\nAll human beings are called to belong to the Church. Not all are yet fully incorporated into the Church, but \"the Church recognizes that in many ways she is linked with those who, being baptized, are honored with the name of Christian, though they do not profess the faith in its entirety or do not preserve unity of communion with the successor of Peter.\"(15) In addition, the Council describes how non-Christians and non-theists are related to the Church and that God does not deny them the helps necessary for salvation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Finally, those who have not yet received the Gospel are related in various ways to the people of God. In the first place we must recall the people to whom the testament and the promises were given and from whom Christ was born according to the flesh. On account of their fathers this people remains most dear to God, for God does not repent of the gifts He makes nor of the calls He issues. But the plan of salvation also includes those who acknowledge the Creator. In the first place amongst these there are the Muslims, who, professing to hold the faith of Abraham, along with us adore the one and merciful God, who on the last day will judge mankind. Nor is God far distant from those who in shadows and images seek the unknown God, for it is He who gives to all men life and breath and all things, and as Saviour wills that all men be saved. Those also can attain to salvation who through no fault of their own do not know the Gospel of Christ or His Church, yet sincerely seek God and moved by grace strive by their deeds to do His will as it is known to them through the dictates of conscience. Nor does Divine Providence deny the helps necessary for salvation to those who, without blame on their part, have not yet arrived at an explicit knowledge of God and with His grace strive to live a good life.(16)\nNew Evangelization.\nThe New Evangelization message in the Catholic Church is rooted in LG 17 and is one of the signs that the Church is seeking to fulfill . As the Father sent the Son, so he too sent the Apostles (Matthew 28:18\u201320).\nChapter 3: The Hierarchical Structure of the Church and In Particular on the Episcopate (18\u201329).\nThe third chapter of the document, which spoke of the bishops as a \"college\"(22) that, within the Church, succeeds to the place of the \"college\" or \"stable group\" of the apostles(19) and is \"the subject of supreme and full power over the universal Church, provided we understand this body together with its head, the Roman Pontiff.\"(22)\nConservative bishops in the council were fearful that the idea of the College of Bishops would be interpreted as a new conciliarism, a 15th-century idea that an ecumenical council was the supreme authority under Christ in the Catholic Church. Of the members of the council, 322, a substantial minority, voted against any mention whatever in the document of a \"college\" of bishops), and were now proposing 47 amendments to chapter III. Accordingly, a \"Preliminary Note of Explanation\" (in Latin, , often referred to as \"the \") intended to reconcile them with the text was added on 16 November 1964. The Note reaffirmed that the college of bishops exercises its authority only with the assent of the pope, thus safeguarding the primacy and pastoral independence of the pope.\nThe Note achieved its purpose: on the following day, 17 November, the No votes against chapter III dropped to 46, a number that may have included some who opposed it because they felt the Preliminary Note of Explanation had weakened the concept of collegiality. In the final vote on 18 November only five of the 2200+ participants voted against the dogmatic constitution as a whole.\nThe Note is introduced by the following words: \"A preliminary note of explanation is being given to the Council Fathers from higher authority, regarding the Modi bearing on Chapter III of the Schema de Ecclesia; the doctrine set forth in Chapter III ought to be explained and understood in accordance with the meaning and intent of this explanatory note.\" \"Higher authority\" refers to the Pope, Paul VI, and \"the Schema de Ecclesia\" to the draft text for the dogmatic constitution . By \"the Modi\" is meant the proposals for amendments of that draft text which some of the Council participants had presented.\nThe Note was thus added by papal authority, consistently with the idea that the consent of the Pope, as head of the College of Bishops was necessary, and that he had the \"right to make his consent dependent on an interpretation determined in advance\".\nThe Preliminary Note of Explanation did not in fact alter the value of the statement on collegiality in the text of : it \"strengthened the adherence to the doctrine of the First Vatican Council on the primacy, but it did not subsequently strike out anything from the direct divine origin of the episcopal office and its function, and the responsibility of the College of Bishops for the Universal Church.\"\nPart 4 of the Note reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As Supreme Pastor of the Church, the Supreme Pontiff can always exercise his power at will, as his very office demands. Though it is always in existence, the College is not as a result permanently engaged in strictly collegial activity; the Church's Tradition makes this clear. In other words, the College is not always fully active [in actu pleno]; rather, it acts as a college in the strict sense only from time to time and only with the consent of its head. The phrase 'with the consent of its head' is used to avoid the idea of dependence on some kind of outsider; the term \"consent\" suggests rather communion between the head and the members, and implies the need for an act which belongs properly to the competence of the head. This is explicitly affirmed in n. 22, 12 and is explained at the end of that section. The word \"only\" takes in all cases. It is evident from this that the norms approved by the supreme authority must always be observed. Cf. Modus 84\nIt is clear throughout that it is a question of the bishops acting in conjunction with their head, never of the bishops acting independently of the Pope. In the latter instance, without the action of the head, the bishops are not able to act as a College: this is clear from the concept of \"College.\" This hierarchical communion of all the bishops with the Supreme Pontiff is certainly firmly established in Tradition.\nBishop Christopher Butler, a major contributor to the council and strong proponent of its teachings, finds that the document gives a \"reaffirmation\" to \"a genuine sacramental episcopal collegiality\" which was thrown into the background by the premature ending of Vatican I. He goes on to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This seems to afford the basis for a recovery of the principle that the papacy\u2014and now we must add the episcopate\u2014is not the source of the actual life of the Church, but the coordinator of that life's various and peripheral spontaneities. This principle of subsidiarity is carried through to the point at which the lay Catholic is seen as a genuine creative force in the life of the People of God; and to the further point where it is realised that the whole human family, insofar as good will prevails, is a theatre of the operations of the grace-gifts of the Holy Spirit, and is cooperating in the building up of Christ's kingdom.\nHe concludes that the Church which makes contemporary the saving truth of the gospel \"is the sign and the instrument of the unity of the whole human race.\"\nThis part of the document also endorsed the revival of the office of deacon as found in the early church, as a permanent vocation rather than a stage through which candidates for the priesthood pass, as had been the case since about the 5th century, and that it should open to married men. It said that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he diaconate can in the future be restored as a proper and permanent rank of the hierarchy. It pertains to the competent territorial bodies of bishops, of one kind or another, with the approval of the Supreme Pontiff, to decide whether and where it is opportune for such deacons to be established for the care of souls. With the consent of the Roman Pontiff, this diaconate can, in the future, be conferred upon men of more mature age, even upon those living in the married state. It may also be conferred upon suitable young men, for whom the law of celibacy must remain intact.\nChapter 4: The Laity (30\u201338).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But the Lord wishes to spread His kingdom also by means of the laity, namely, a kingdom of truth and life, a kingdom of holiness and grace, a kingdom of justice, love and peace. (36)\nChapter 5: The Universal Call to Holiness in the Church (39\u201342).\nThe theme of the universal call to holiness was built on in the fifth chapter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus it is evident to everyone, that all the faithful of Christ of whatever rank or status, are called to the fullness of the Christian life and to the perfection of charity; by this holiness as such a more human manner of living is promoted in this earthly society. In order that the faithful may reach this perfection, they must use their strength accordingly as they have received it, as a gift from Christ. They must follow in His footsteps and conform themselves to His image seeking the will of the Father in all things. They must devote themselves with all their being to the glory of God and the service of their neighbor. In this way, the holiness of the People of God will grow into an abundant harvest of good, as is admirably shown by the life of so many saints in Church history.\nThe classes and duties of life are many, but holiness is one\u2014that sanctity which is cultivated by all who are moved by the Spirit of God, and who obey the voice of the Father and worship God the Father in spirit and in truth. These people follow the poor Christ, the humble and cross-bearing Christ in order to be worthy of being sharers in His glory. Every person must walk unhesitatingly according to his own personal gifts and duties in the path of living faith, which arouses hope and works through charity.(40, 41)\nChapter 6: The Religious (43\u201347).\n\"The religious state clearly manifests that the Kingdom of God and its needs, in a very special way, are raised above all earthly considerations. Finally, it clearly shows all men, both the unsurpassed breadth of the strength of Christ the King and the infinite power of the Holy Spirit, marvelously working in the Church.\" It is considered a \"deepening of the baptismal character.\" The religious life is conducive to the building up of others and the world in Christ.\nChapter 7: The Eschatological Nature of the Pilgrim Church and Its Union with the Church in Heaven (48\u201351).\nChapter 7 affirms the oneness of the Church on earth with the Church in heaven. It makes an indirect allusion to the future fulfillment of Bible prophecy in history. It continues themes of sanctification and holiness from earlier sections. It affirms the ancient Church practices of remembering the saints and imploring their intercession. It affirms \"the sacred Liturgy, wherein the power of the Holy Spirit acts upon us through sacramental signs\" and anticipates worship in heaven.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Until the Lord shall come in His majesty, and all the angels with Him and death being destroyed, all things are subject to Him, some of His disciples are exiles on earth, some having died are purified, and others are in glory beholding \"clearly God Himself triune and one, as He is\"; but all in various ways and degrees are in communion in the same charity of God and neighbor and all sing the same hymn of glory to our God. For all who are in Christ, having His Spirit, form one Church and cleave together in Him. (49)\nChapter 8: The Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, in the Mystery of Christ and the Church (52\u201369).\nThe chapter on Mary was the subject of debate, since the original plans had called for a separate document about the role of Mary, keeping the document on the Church \"ecumenical,\" not to offend Protestant Christians, who were suspicious of special veneration of Mary. However, the Council Fathers, supported by the Pope, insisted that, considering that Mary's place is within the Church, her treatment should be addressed by the Church's Constitution.\nVatican II was sensitive to the views of other Christians, as the council, at the request of Pope John XXIII, sought to promote Christian unity; however, it was aware that concepts about Mary varied among other Christians, especially Protestants. The council, once referring to Mary as \"Mediatrix\", took her as an example of strengthening \u2013 not decreasing \u2013 confidence in Christ as the one essential Mediator. When speaking of Mary, the council used a biblical approach, strongly emphasizing her pilgrimage of faith. It also drew significantly from the Fathers of the Church, who were respected by all Christian denominations.\nPope Paul VI, in a speech to the council fathers, called the document \"a vast synthesis of the Catholic doctrine regarding the place which the Blessed Mary occupies in the mystery of Christ and of the Church\".\nBishop Christopher Butler mentions that prior to Vatican II, the one area where uncritical development of Catholic theology was allowed, apart from the total life of theology, was in devotion to Mary, so that \"it began to seem that the Catholicism of the future would approximate more and more to the condition of an Italian tribal cult\". This century-long drift was brought to an end by the Council on October 29, 1963, \"a fixed point of the Marian paradigm shift\", the date on which the Council decided, in a very close vote, not to give Mary a separate document but to situate her properly within the larger Church.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]n the most holy Virgin the Church has already reached that perfection whereby she is without spot or wrinkle. (65)\nContributors.\nMarie Rosaire Gagnebet O.P. (1904\u20131983), professor of theology at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\" from 1938 to 1976 and during Vatican II, was influential in the redaction of the .\nIssues surrounding the document.\nTraditionalist reaction.\nCertain Traditionalist Catholic groups, particularly Sedevacantists, consider to be the demarcation of when the Roman Church fell into heresy, pointing to the use of \"subsistit in\" rather than \"est\" as an abdication of the Church's historic (and to them compulsory) identification of itself alone as God's church. In an interview with the , Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger responded to this criticism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The concept expressed by 'is' (to be) is far broader than that expressed by 'to subsist'. 'To subsist' is a very precise way of being, that is, to be as a subject, which exists in itself. Thus the Council Fathers meant to say that the being of the Church as such is a broader entity than the Roman Catholic Church, but within the latter it acquires, in an incomparable way, the character of a true and proper subject.\nPossibility of salvation outside the Catholic Church.\nOne point of confusion was the document's treatment of the possibility of salvation outside of the Catholic Church. In 2000, Pope John Paul II issued with the theme of \"the unicity and salvific universality of Jesus Christ and the Church\". He also stated earlier in the encyclical, , \"The universality of salvation means that it is granted not only to those who explicitly believe in Christ and have entered the Church\", thus affirming the belief that not only Catholics can achieve salvation and sanctification. Such a belief has been controversial among many traditionalist Catholics to this day.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40137", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40137", "title": "Dei verbum", "text": "Catholic Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation\nDei verbum, the Second Vatican Council's Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation, was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 18 November 1965, following approval by the assembled bishops by a vote of 2,344 to 6. It is one of the principal documents of the Second Vatican Council.\nThe phrase \"Dei verbum\" is Latin for \"Word of God\" and is taken from the first line of the document, as is customary for titles of major Catholic documents.\nHistory.\nAn initial \"Schema Constitutionis Dogmaticae de Fontibus Revelationis\" (\"On the Sources of Revelation\") was prepared by the Council's Preparatory Theological Commission before a period of world-wide consultation led to the formation of a draft for the bishops to consider. A subcommission of the Preparatory Theological Commission was appointed to prepare the draft, which was finalised after discussions during November 1961 and approved by Pope John XXIII in July 1962. Joseph Ratzinger, then one of the \"periti\" or expert advisors, but later Pope Benedict XVI, privately objected to the \"negative tone\" of the draft document and its lack [of] theological finesse\". The final version of the Constitution was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 18 November 1965.\nContents.\nPreface.\nThe preface links the document to its biblical foundations (quoting 1 John 1:2-3) and to the work of two earlier Councils, the Council of Trent (1545-63) and the First Vatican Council (1869-70).\nRevelation, sacred tradition and sacred Scripture.\nChapter I deals with \"Revelation itself\", while Chapter II deals with the \"handing on\" of this revelation.\nIn Chapter II, section 7 refers to the revelation of the Gospel, encountered by the first apostles in hearing Jesus speak and \"living with him\". This section refers to \"the apostles and apostolic men\" (Latin: \"Apostolis virisque apostolicis\"), without defining who they were.\nFurther, under the heading \"Handing On Divine Revelation\", the Constitution states among other points:\nHence there exists a close connection and communication between sacred Tradition and sacred Scripture. For both of them, flowing from the same divine wellspring, in a certain way merge into a unity and tend toward the same end. For Sacred Scripture is the word of God inasmuch as it is consigned to writing under the inspiration of the divine Spirit, while sacred tradition takes the word of God entrusted by Christ the Lord and the Holy Spirit to the Apostles, and hands it on to their successors in its full purity, so that led by the light of the Spirit of truth, they may in proclaiming it preserve this word of God faithfully, explain it, and make it more widely known. Consequently it is not from Sacred Scripture alone that the Church draws her certainty about everything which has been revealed. Therefore both sacred tradition and Sacred Scripture are to be accepted and venerated with the same sense of loyalty and reverence.\nThe Word of God is transmitted both through the canonical texts of Sacred Scripture, and through Sacred Tradition, which includes various forms such as liturgy, prayers, and the teachings of the Apostles and their successors. The Church looks to Tradition as a protection against errors that could arise from private interpretation.\nConcerning the inspiration and interpretation of sacred Scripture.\nThe teaching of the Magisterium on the interpretation of Scripture was summarized in paragraph 12, expressly devoted to biblical interpretation and the task of the interpreter. Avery Dulles observed that \"Dei Verbum\" distinguished between two levels of meaning, the literal sense intended by the biblical writers and the further understanding that may be attained due to context within the whole of Scripture.\nThe Old Testament.\nIn Chapter IV (paragraphs 14-16), \"Dei Verbum\" affirms the saying of Augustine that \"the New Testament is hidden in the Old, and that the Old Testament is manifest in the New\" (paragraph 16).\nThe New Testament.\nChapter V (paragraphs 17-20) covers the New Testament, especially the four gospels, which are \"of apostolic origin\" and \"have a special preeminence\" within sacred scripture.\nSacred Scripture in the Life of the Church.\nFinally, the Council directs that \"easy access to Sacred Scripture should be provided for all the Christian faithful\". Treasured translations include the Greek Septuagint translation of the Old Testament, which the church has \"accepted as her own\", and the Latin Vulgate, but the objective of accessibility requires that \"suitable and correct translations are made into different languages, especially from the original texts of the sacred books\". Approved ecumenical cooperation on biblical translation is to be commended.\nFrequent reading of the divine Scriptures is encouraged for all the Christian faithful, together with the guidance that prayer should accompany the reading of Sacred Scripture, \"so that God and man may talk together\". Some are ordained to preach the Word, while others reveal Christ in the way they live and interact in the world.\nScholarly opinion.\nThe schema, or draft document, prepared for the first council session (October\u2013December 1962) reflected the conservative theology of the Holy Office, led by Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani. Pope John intervened directly to promote instead the preparation of a new draft which was assigned to a mixed commission of conservatives and progressives, and it was this on which the final document was based. Wording in the first draft, which alluded to the several or \"double\" sources of revelation, was removed the final document, where the term \"divine revelation\" points to revelation having only one \"source\".\nThe doctrines of \"Dei Verbum\" bear a striking similarity to the writings of St. John Henry Newman in \"An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine\". \"Dei Verbum\" espouses Newman's concept of the \"development of doctrine\", writing \"there is a growth in the understanding of the realities and the words which have been handed down. This happens through the contemplation and study made by believers, who treasure these things in their hearts.\" For his contributions to \"Dei Verbum\" and many other parts of Vatican II, Pope Paul VI called it \"Newman's Council\". Dennis Hamm has also identified Pope Leo XIII's encyclical letter \"Providentissimus Deus\", Pius XII's \"Divino Afflante Spiritu\", and a document issued shortly before the Council by the Pontifical Biblical Commission, \"Sancta Mater Ecclesia: An instruction on the Truth of the Gospels\" (21 April 1964) as other doctrinal writings which had \"contributed conspicuously\" to the formation of the ideas expressed in the constitution.\nThe final draft was also significantly influenced by the work of the Dominican theologian Yves Congar, who had been appointed a \"peritus\" at the council.\nJoseph Ratzinger identified three overall themes in \"Dei verbum\":\nRegarding article 1 of the preface of \"Dei verbum\", Ratzinger wrote: \"The brief form of the Preface and the barely concealed illogicalities that it contains betray clearly the confusion from which it has emerged.\"\nBiblical infallibility and inerrancy.\nThe Catechism states that \"the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.\"\nNevertheless, the Catechism clearly states that \"the Christian faith is not a 'religion of the book'. Christianity is the religion of the 'Word' of God, a word which is 'not a written and mute word, but the Word is incarnate and living'. If the Scriptures are not to remain a dead letter, Christ, the eternal Word of the living God, must, through the Holy Spirit, 'open [our] minds to understand the Scriptures.'\"\nThe Catechism goes on to state that \"In Sacred Scripture, God speaks to man in a human way. To interpret Scripture correctly, the reader must be attentive to what the human authors truly wanted to affirm, and to what God wanted to reveal to us by their words.\"\n\"But since Sacred Scripture is inspired, there is another and no less important principle of correct interpretation, without which Scripture would remain a dead letter. 'Sacred Scripture must be read and interpreted in the light of the same Spirit by whom it was written.'\"\nThere was a controversy during the Council on whether the Roman Catholic Church taught biblical infallibility or biblical inerrancy. Some have interpreted \"Dei verbum\" as teaching the infallibility position, while others note that the conciliar document often quotes previous documents such as \"Providentissimus Deus\" and \"Divino afflante Spiritu\" that suggest inerrancy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40138", "revid": "11630538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40138", "title": "Bacterial growth", "text": "Growth of bacterial colonies\nBacterial growth is proliferation of bacterium into two daughter cells, in a process called binary fission. Providing no mutation event occurs, the resulting daughter cells are genetically identical to the original cell. Hence, bacterial growth occurs. Both daughter cells from the division do not necessarily survive. However, if the surviving number exceeds unity on average, the bacterial population undergoes exponential growth. The measurement of an exponential bacterial growth curve in batch culture was traditionally a part of the training of all microbiologists; the basic means requires bacterial enumeration (cell counting) by direct and individual (microscopic, flow cytometry), direct and bulk (biomass), indirect and individual (colony counting), or indirect and bulk (most probable number, turbidity, nutrient uptake) methods. Models reconcile theory with the measurements.\nPhases.\nIn autecological studies, the growth of bacteria (or other microorganisms, as protozoa, microalgae or yeasts) in batch culture can be modeled with four different phases: lag phase (A), log phase or exponential phase (B), stationary phase (C), and death phase (D).\nThis basic batch culture growth model draws out and emphasizes aspects of bacterial growth which may differ from the growth of macrofauna. It emphasizes clonality, asexual binary division, the short development time relative to replication itself, the seemingly low death rate, the need to move from a dormant state to a reproductive state or to condition the media, and finally, the tendency of lab adapted strains to exhaust their nutrients. In reality, even in batch culture, the four phases are not well defined. The cells do not reproduce in synchrony without explicit and continual prompting (as in experiments with stalked bacteria ) and their exponential phase growth is often not ever a constant rate, but instead a slowly decaying rate, a constant stochastic response to pressures both to reproduce and to go dormant in the face of declining nutrient concentrations and increasing waste concentrations.\nThe decrease in number of bacteria may even become logarithmic. Hence, this phase of growth may also be called as negative logarithmic or negative exponential growth phase.https://\nNear the end of the logarithmic phase of a batch culture, competence for natural genetic transformation may be induced, as in \"Bacillus subtilis\" and in other bacteria. Natural genetic transformation is a form of DNA transfer that appears to be an adaptation for repairing DNA damages.\nBatch culture is the most common laboratory growth method in which bacterial growth is studied, but it is only one of many. It is ideally spatially unstructured and temporally structured. The bacterial culture is incubated in a closed vessel with a single batch of medium. In some experimental regimes, some of the bacterial culture is periodically removed and added to fresh sterile medium. In the extreme case, this leads to the continual renewal of the nutrients. This is a chemostat, also known as continuous culture. It is ideally spatially unstructured and temporally unstructured, in a steady state defined by the rates of nutrient supply and bacterial growth. In comparison to batch culture, bacteria are maintained in exponential growth phase, and the growth rate of the bacteria is known. Related devices include turbidostats and auxostats. When \"Escherichia coli\" is growing very slowly with a doubling time of 16 hours in a chemostat most cells have a single chromosome.\nBacterial growth can be suppressed with bacteriostats, without necessarily killing the bacteria. Certain toxins can be used to suppress bacterial growth or kill bacteria. Antibiotics (or, more properly, antibacterial drugs) are drugs used to kill bacteria; they can have side effects or even cause adverse reactions in people, however they are not classified as toxins. In a synecological, true-to-nature situation in which more than one bacterial species is present, the growth of microbes is more dynamic and continual.\nLiquid is not the only laboratory environment for bacterial growth. Spatially structured environments such as biofilms or agar surfaces present additional complex growth models.\nThe 5th phase: Long-term stationary phase.\nLong-term stationary phase, unlike early stationary phase (in which there is little cell division), is a highly dynamic period in which the birth and death rates are balanced. It's been proven that after death phase \"E. coli\" can be maintained in batch culture for long periods without adding nutrients. By providing sterile distilled water to maintain volume and osmolarity, aerobically grown cultures can be maintained at densities of ~106 colony-forming units (CFUs) per ml for more than 5 years without the addition of nutrients in batch culture.\nEnvironmental conditions.\nEnvironmental factors influence rate of bacterial growth such as acidity (pH), temperature, water activity, macro and micro nutrients, oxygen levels, and toxins. Conditions tend to be relatively consistent between bacteria with the exception of extremophiles. Bacterium have optimal growth conditions under which they thrive, but once outside of those conditions the stress can result in either reduced or stalled growth, dormancy (such as formation spores), or death. Maintaining sub-optimal growth conditions is a key principle to food preservation.\nTemperature.\nLow temperatures tend to reduce growth rates which has led to refrigeration being instrumental in food preservation. Depending on temperature, bacteria can be classified as:\nPsychrophiles are extremophilic cold-loving bacteria or archaea with an optimal temperature for growth at about 15\u00b0C or lower (maximal temperature for growth at 20\u00b0C, minimal temperature for growth at 0\u00b0C or lower). Psychrophiles are typically found in Earth's extremely cold ecosystems, such as polar ice-cap regions, permafrost, polar surface, and deep oceans.\nMesophiles are bacteria that thrive at moderate temperatures, growing best between 20 and 45\u00b0C. These temperatures align with the natural body temperatures of humans, which is why many human pathogens are mesophiles.\nThrive under temperatures from 45 to more than 100\u00b0C.\nAcidity.\nOptimal acidity for bacteria tends to be around pH 6.5 to 7.0 (neutral), those living in lesser pH being acidophiles and higher alkalophiles. Some bacteria can change the pH such as by excreting acid resulting in sub-optimal conditions.\nOxygen.\nBacteria can be aerobes or anaerobes. Depending on the degree of oxygen required bacteria can fall into the following classes:\nMicronutrients.\nAmple nutrients\nToxic compounds.\nToxic compounds such as ethanol can hinder growth or kill bacteria. This is used beneficially for disinfection and in food preservation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"This article includes material from https:// posted on 26 April 2003 on Nupedia; written by Nagina Parmar; reviewed and approved by the Biology group; editor, Gaytha Langlois; lead reviewer, Gaytha Langlois; lead copyeditors, Ruth Ifcher. and Jan Hogle.\""}
{"id": "40139", "revid": "50789193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40139", "title": "Bdellovibrio", "text": "Genus of bacteria\nBdellovibrio is a genus of gram-negative, obligate aerobic bacteria. One of the more notable characteristics of this genus is that members can prey upon other gram-negative bacteria and feed on the biopolymers, e.g. proteins and nucleic acids, of their hosts. They have two lifestyles: a host-dependent, highly mobile phase, the \"attack phase\", in which they form \"bdelloplasts\" in their host bacteria; and a slow-growing, irregularly shaped, host-independent form.\n\"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\".\nThe most well studied of these is \"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\", which is found almost exclusively in host dependent growth in nature. In this free swimming attack form after searching for prey using its pili, it burrows through the host outer membrane/ peptidoglycan cell wall and enters the periplasmic space. The \"Bdellovibrio\" bacterium then forms a structure called a bdelloplast. This bdelloplast is created as the host cell is modified to become spherical in shape. Inside the bdelloplast, the singular large flagellum of the predatory Bdellovibrio is lost. The host cell is then rapidly killed allowing the passage of molecules from the interior of the host cytoplasm through to the periplasm freely, and the periplasm dwelling \"Bdellovibrio\" to feed. Using some of these molecules the \"Bdellovibrio\" creates a protective environment by reinforcing the peptidoglycan cell wall of the host in which it now dwells using amidases and transpeptidases. After around 4hrs, depending on ambient temperature, the \"Bdellovibrio\" has increased in size dramatically through this nourishment. It divides to replicate and then leaves via final lysis of the host's cell wall and membranes. The newly emerging \"Bdellovibrio\" uses their newly grown powerful flagella to swim away and find the next suitable host. Because of this intermittent bdelloplast stage, and momentary parasitic phase (15-20\u00a0mins), \"Bdellovibrio\" could be considered bacterial predators or parasites.\n\"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\" was first described by Stolp and Petzold in 1962. In 2012 another member of the Bdellovibrio species was identified \"Bdellovibrio tiberius\" of the River tiber. This species is more capable of host-independent growth.\nLittle is known of \"Bdellovibrio exovorus\", an extra-parasitic bdellovibrio, which cannot enter its prey, and does not form Bdelloplasts.\nAppearance.\nUnder a light microscope, host-dependent \"Bdellovibrio\" appears to be a comma-shaped motile rod that is about 0.3\u20130.5 by 0.5\u20131.4\u00a0\u03bcm in size with a barely discernible flagellum. \"Bdellovibrio\" show up as a growing clear plaque in an \"E.\u00a0coli\" \"lawn\". Notably, \"Bdellovibrio\" has a sheath that covers its flagellum \u2013 a rare feature for bacteria. Flagellar motion stops once \"Bdellovibrio\" has penetrated its prey, and the flagella is then shed.\nHost-independent Bdellovibrio appear amorphous, and larger than the predatory phase.\nCulture conditions.\n\"B. bacteriovorus\" appears to be ubiquitous in nature and manmade habitats. They have been found in soil samples, rhizosphere of plant roots, rivers, oceans, sewage, intestines and feces of birds and mammals, and even in oyster shells and the gills of crabs. \"B. bacteriovorus\" are able to thrive in almost any habitat, the general requirements are that there needs to be oxygen and some other gram-negative bacteria present in its environment. Its optimal temperature is between 28-30\u00a0\u00b0C, making \"B.\u00a0bacteriovorus\" a mesophile. \"Bdellovibrio\" is grown in the laboratory in its stationary HI (host-independent) phase at 29\u00a0\u00b0C on yeast peptone broth agar. Host-dependent (predatory) cultures are grown with a population of \"E. coli\" S-17 at 29\u00a0\u00b0C for 16\u00a0hrs. They may also be cultured using YPSC (yeast extract, peptone, sodium acetate, calcium chloride) overlays or prey lysates.\nLife cycle and parasitism.\n\"Bdellovibrio\" cells can swim as fast as 160\u00a0\u03bcm/s, or over 100\u00a0times their body-length per second. It swims using a single sheathed polar flagellum with a characteristic dampened filament waveform. \"Bdellovibrio\" attacks other gram-negative bacteria by attaching itself to the prey cell's outer membrane and peptidoglycan layer, after which it creates a small hole in the outer membrane. The \"Bdellovibrio\" cell then enters the host periplasmic space. It remains reversibly attached to it for a short \"recognition\" period.\nAfter the recognition period, it becomes irreversibly attached via the pole opposite the flagellum. Once inside the periplasm, the \"Bdellovibrio\" cell seals the membrane hole and converts the host cell to a spherical morphology, this is due to secretion of , transpeptidases which breaks the peptidoglycan apart, and therefore causes the cell to become amorphous. The two-cell complex formed is called a bdelloplast. The \"Bdellovibrio\" cell uses hydrolytic enzymes to break down the host cell molecules, which it uses to grow filamentously. When the host cell nutrients are exhausted, the filament septates to form progeny \"Bdellovibrios\". The progeny become motile before they lyse the host cell and are released into the environment. The entire life cycle takes three to four hours, and produces an average of 3\u20136\u00a0progeny cells from a single \"E.\u00a0coli\", or up to 90 from larger prey such as filamentous \"E.\u00a0coli\".\nTargets of \"Bdellovibrio\" species, including \"Vibrio vulnificus\", may undergo co-infection by \"Bdellovibrio\" and bacteriophage. Although the \"Bdellovibrio\" rounding of prey is thought to be evolved to reduce co-infection of multiple \"Bdellovibrio\", larger prey that do not round may be infected by multiple Bdello's.\nGenomics.\nThe genome of \"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\" HD100 was sequenced in 2004. The HD100 genome is nucleotides long, larger than expected given its small size.\nResearch and implications.\n\"Bdellovibrio\" may be used to help control harmful populations of bacteria due to their predatory nature. In an experiment where \"Bdellovibrio\" were added to a shrimp tank to consume populations of bacteria, the target bacterial populations declined by up to 44%. The \"Bdellovibrio\" population declined as well after consuming most of the available bacteria. Therefore, use of \"Bdellovibrio\" as an inhibitor of other bacteria shows potential, but may be limited to certain cases as \"Bdellovibrio\" prefers certain strains, such as gram-negative bacteria. In a subsequent experiment, chickens, highly susceptible to cecal or gut infections, were used in an experiment in which scientists purposely infected chickens with a pathogenic form of \"Salmonella enterica\". The chicken were then exposed to \"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\", after which a reduction in inflammation and other harmful changes in the chickens' ceca were observed as a result of decreased \"Salmonella\" populations. The success of this experiment suggest there is significant potential for \"Bdellovibrio\" in bioremediation. In another study from 2016, scientists discovered that \"Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus\" can attack and reduce populations of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, such as Klebsiella pneumoniae, even inside mammalian cell cultures. This finding suggests that \"Bdellovibrio\" could one day be used as a living antibiotic to help treat infections caused by drug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria.Experimental infections in mice have shown that Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus can significantly reduce populations of multidrug-resistant bacteria such as Acinetobacter baumannii and Klebsiella pneumoniae without harming the host, suggesting its potential as a therapeutic or \u2018living antibiotic\u2019 agent.\nPhylogeny.\nThe currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40142", "revid": "49648399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40142", "title": "Botulism", "text": "Human and animal disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nBotulism is a rare and potentially fatal illness caused by botulinum toxin, which is produced by the bacterium \"Clostridium botulinum\". The disease begins with weakness, blurred vision, feeling tired, and trouble speaking. This may then be followed by weakness of the arms, chest muscles, and legs. Vomiting, swelling of the abdomen, and diarrhea may also occur. The disease does not usually affect consciousness or cause a fever.\nBotulism can occur in several ways. The bacterial spores which cause it are common in both soil and water and are very resistant. They produce the botulinum toxin when exposed to low oxygen levels and certain temperatures. Foodborne botulism happens when food containing the toxin is eaten. Infant botulism instead happens when the bacterium develops in the intestines and releases the toxin. This typically only occurs in children less than one year old, as protective mechanisms against development of the bacterium develop after that age. Wound botulism is found most often among those who inject street drugs. In this situation, spores enter a wound, and in the absence of oxygen, release the toxin. The disease is not passed directly between people. Its diagnosis is confirmed by finding the toxin or bacteria in the person in question.\nPrevention is primarily by proper food preparation. The toxin, though not the spores, is destroyed by heating it to more than for longer than five minutes. The clostridial spores can be destroyed in an autoclave with moist heat (120\u00b0C/ 250\u00b0F for at least 15 minutes) or dry heat (160\u00b0C/ 320\u00b0F for 2 hours) or by irradiation. The spores of group I strains are inactivated by heating at 121\u00b0C (250\u00b0F) for 3 minutes during commercial canning. Spores of group II strains are less heat-resistant, and they are often damaged by 90\u00b0C (194\u00b0F) for 10 minutes, 85\u00b0C for 52 minutes, or 80\u00b0C for 270 minutes; however, these treatments may not be sufficient in some foods. Honey can contain the organism, and for this reason, honey should not be fed to children under 12 months. Treatment is with an antitoxin. In those who lose their ability to breathe on their own, mechanical ventilation may be necessary for months. Antibiotics may be used for wound botulism. Death occurs in 5 to 10% of people. Botulism also affects many other animals. The word is from Latin , meaning 'sausage'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe muscle weakness of botulism characteristically starts in the muscles supplied by the cranial nerves\u2014a group of twelve nerves that control eye movements, the facial muscles and the muscles controlling chewing and swallowing. Double vision, drooping of both eyelids, loss of facial expression and swallowing problems may therefore occur. In addition to affecting the voluntary muscles, it can also cause disruptions in the autonomic nervous system. This is experienced as a dry mouth and throat (due to decreased production of saliva), postural hypotension (decreased blood pressure on standing, with resultant lightheadedness and risk of blackouts), and eventually constipation (due to decreased forward movement of intestinal contents). Some of the toxins (B and E) also precipitate nausea, vomiting, and difficulty with talking. The weakness then spreads to the arms (starting in the shoulders and proceeding to the forearms) and legs (again from the thighs down to the feet).\nSevere botulism leads to reduced movement of the muscles of respiration, and hence problems with gas exchange. This may be experienced as dyspnea (difficulty breathing), but when severe can lead to respiratory failure, due to the buildup of unexhaled carbon dioxide and its resultant depressant effect on the brain. This may lead to respiratory compromise and death if untreated.\nClinicians frequently think of the symptoms of botulism in terms of a classic triad: bulbar palsy and descending paralysis, lack of fever, and clear senses and mental status (\"clear sensorium\").\nInfant botulism.\nInfant botulism (also referred to as floppy baby syndrome) was first recognized in 1976, and is the most common form of botulism in the United States. Infants are susceptible to infant botulism in the first year of life, with more than 90% of cases occurring in infants younger than six months. Infant botulism results from the ingestion of the \"C. botulinum\" spores, and subsequent colonization of the small intestine. The infant gut may be colonized when the composition of the intestinal microflora (normal flora) is insufficient to competitively inhibit the growth of \"C. botulinum\" and levels of bile acids (which normally inhibit clostridial growth) are lower than later in life.\nThe growth of the spores releases botulinum toxin, which is then absorbed into the bloodstream and taken throughout the body, causing paralysis by blocking the release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. Typical symptoms of infant botulism include constipation, lethargy, weakness, difficulty feeding, and an altered cry, often progressing to a complete descending flaccid paralysis. Although constipation is usually the first symptom of infant botulism, it is commonly overlooked.\nHoney is a known dietary reservoir of \"C. botulinum\" spores and has been linked to infant botulism. For this reason, honey is not recommended for infants less than one year of age. Most cases of infant botulism, however, are thought to be caused by acquiring the spores from the natural environment. \"Clostridium botulinum\" is a ubiquitous soil-dwelling bacterium. Many infant botulism patients have been demonstrated to live near a construction site or an area of soil disturbance.\nInfant botulism has been reported in 49 of 50 US states (all except for Rhode Island), and cases have been recognized in 26 countries on five continents.\nComplications.\nInfant botulism has no long-term side effects.\nBotulism can result in death due to respiratory failure. However, in the past 50 years, the proportion of patients with botulism who die has fallen from about 50% to 7% due to improved supportive care. A patient with severe botulism may require mechanical ventilation (breathing support through a ventilator) as well as intensive medical and nursing care, sometimes for several months. The person may require rehabilitation therapy after leaving the hospital.\nCause.\n\"Clostridium botulinum\" is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. Botulinum toxin is one of the most powerful known toxins: about one microgram is lethal to humans when inhaled. It acts by blocking nerve function (neuromuscular blockade) through inhibition of the excitatory neurotransmitter acetylcholine's release from the presynaptic membrane of neuromuscular junctions in the somatic nervous system. This causes paralysis. Advanced botulism can cause respiratory failure by paralysing the muscles of the chest; this can progress to respiratory arrest. Furthermore, acetylcholine release from the presynaptic membranes of muscarinic nerve synapses is blocked. This can lead to a variety of autonomic signs and symptoms described above.\nIn all cases, illness is caused by the botulinum toxin which the bacterium \"C. botulinum\" produces in anaerobic conditions and not by the bacterium itself. The pattern of damage occurs because the toxin affects nerves that fire (depolarize) at a higher frequency first.\nMechanisms of entry into the human body for botulinum toxin are described below.\nColonization of the gut.\nThe most common form in Western countries is infant botulism. This occurs in infants who are colonized with the bacterium in the small intestine during the early stages of their lives. The bacterium then produces the toxin, which is absorbed into the bloodstream. The consumption of honey during the first year of life has been identified as a risk factor for infant botulism; it is a factor in a fifth of all cases. The adult form of infant botulism is termed \"adult intestinal toxemia\", and is exceedingly rare.\nFood.\nToxin that is produced by the bacterium in containers of food that have been improperly preserved is the most common cause of food-borne botulism. Fish that has been pickled without the salinity or acidity of brine that contains acetic acid and high sodium levels, as well as smoked fish stored at too high a temperature, presents a risk, as does improperly canned food.\nFood-borne botulism results from contaminated food in which \"C. botulinum\" spores have been allowed to germinate in low-oxygen conditions. This typically occurs in improperly prepared home-canned food substances and fermented dishes without adequate salt or acidity. Given that multiple people often consume food from the same source, it is common for more than a single person to be affected simultaneously. Symptoms usually appear 12\u201336 hours after eating, but can also appear within 6 hours to 10 days.\nNo withdrawal periods have been established for cows affected by botulism. Lactating cows injected with various doses of botulinum toxin C have not resulted in detectable botulinum neurotoxin in milk produced. Using mouse bioassays and immunostick ELISA tests, botulinum toxin was detected in whole blood and serum but not in milk samples, suggesting that botulinum type C toxin does not enter milk in detectable concentrations. Cooking and pasteurization denatures botulinum toxin but does not necessarily eliminate spores. Botulinum spores or toxins can find their way into the dairy production chain from the environment. Despite the low risk of milk and meat contamination, the protocol for fatal bovine botulism cases appears to be incineration of carcasses and withholding any potentially contaminated milk from human consumption. It is also advised that raw milk from affected cows should not be consumed by humans or fed to calves.\nThere have been several reports of botulism from pruno wine made of food scraps in prison. In a Mississippi prison in 2016, prisoners illegally brewed alcohol that led to 31 cases of botulism. The research study done on these cases found the symptoms of mild botulism matched the symptoms of severe botulism, though the outcomes and progression of the disease were different.\nWound.\nWound botulism results from the contamination of a wound with the bacteria, which then secrete the toxin into the bloodstream. This has become more common in intravenous drug users since the 1990s, especially people using black tar heroin and those injecting heroin into the skin rather than the veins. Wound botulism can also come from a minor wound that is not properly cleaned out; the skin grows over the wound thus trapping the spore in an anaerobic environment and creating botulism. One example was a person who cut their ankle while using a weed eater; as the wound healed over, it trapped a blade of grass and spec of soil under the skin that led to severe botulism requiring hospitalization and rehabilitation for months. Wound botulism accounts for 29% of cases.\nInhalation.\nIsolated cases of botulism have been described after inhalation by laboratory workers.\nInjection (iatrogenic botulism).\nSymptoms of botulism may occur away from the injection site of botulinum toxin. This may include loss of strength, blurred vision, change of voice, or trouble breathing which can result in death. Onset can be hours to weeks after an injection. This generally only occurs with inappropriate strengths of botulinum toxin for cosmetic use or due to the larger doses used to treat movement disorders. However, there are cases where an off-label use of botulinum toxin resulted in severe botulism and death. Following a 2008 review the FDA added these concerns as a boxed warning. An international grassroots effort led by NeverTox to assemble the people experiencing Iatrogenic Botulism Poisoning (IBP) and provide education and emotional support serves 39,000 people through a Facebook group who believe themselves to be suffering from adverse events from botulinum toxin injections.\nLawsuits about botulism against pharmaceuticals.\nPrior to the boxed warning labels that included a disclaimer that botulinum toxin injections could cause botulism, there were a series of lawsuits against the pharmaceutical firms that manufactured injectable botulinum toxin. A Hollywood producer's wife brought a lawsuit after experiencing debilitating adverse events from migraine treatment. A lawsuit on behalf of a 3-year-old boy who was permanently disabled by a botulinum toxin injection was settled in court during the trial. The family of a 7-year-old boy treated with botulinum toxin injections for leg spasms sued after the boy almost died. Several families of people who died after treatments with botulinum toxin injections brought lawsuits. One lawsuit prevailed for the plaintiff who was awarded compensation of $15 million; the plaintiff was a physician who was diagnosed with botulism by thirteen neurologists at the NIH. Deposition video from that lawsuit quotes a pharmaceutical executive stating that \"Botox doesn't cause botulism.\"\nMechanism.\nThe toxin is the protein botulinum toxin produced under anaerobic conditions (where there is no oxygen) by the bacterium \"Clostridium botulinum\".\n\"Clostridium botulinum\" is a large anaerobic Gram-positive bacillus that forms subterminal endospores.\nThere are eight serological varieties of the bacterium denoted by the letters A to H. The toxin from all of these acts in the same way and produces similar symptoms: the motor nerve endings are prevented from releasing acetylcholine, causing flaccid paralysis and symptoms of blurred vision, ptosis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, cramps, and respiratory difficulty.\nBotulinum toxin is broken into eight neurotoxins (labeled as types A, B, C [C1, C2], D, E, F, and G), which are antigenically and serologically distinct but structurally similar. Human botulism is caused mainly by types A, B, E, and (rarely) F. Types C and D cause toxicity only in other animals.\nIn October 2013, scientists released news of the discovery of type H, the first new botulism neurotoxin found in forty years. However, further studies showed type H to be a chimeric toxin composed of parts of types F and A (FA).\nSome types produce a characteristic putrefactive smell and digest meat (types A and some of B and F); these are said to be proteolytic; type E and some types of B, C, D and F are nonproteolytic and can go undetected because there is no strong odor associated with them.\nWhen the bacteria are under stress, they develop spores, which are inert. Their natural habitats are in the soil, in the silt that comprises the bottom sediment of streams, lakes, and coastal waters and ocean, while some types are natural inhabitants of the intestinal tracts of mammals (e.g., horses, cattle, humans), and are present in their excreta. The spores can survive in their inert form for many years.\nToxin is produced by the bacteria when environmental conditions are favourable for the spores to replicate and grow, but the gene that encodes for the toxin protein is actually carried by a virus or phage that infects the bacteria. Little is known about the natural factors that control phage infection and replication within the bacteria.\nThe spores require warm temperatures, a protein source, an anaerobic environment, and moisture in order to become active and produce toxin. In the wild, decomposing vegetation and invertebrates combined with warm temperatures can provide ideal conditions for the botulism bacteria to activate and produce toxin that may affect feeding birds and other animals. Spores are not killed by boiling, but botulism is uncommon because special, rarely obtained conditions are necessary for botulinum toxin production from C. botulinum spores, including an anaerobic, low-salt, low-acid, low-sugar environment at ambient temperatures.\nBotulinum inhibits the release within the nervous system of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter, responsible for communication between motor neurons and muscle cells. All forms of botulism lead to paralysis that typically starts with the muscles of the face and then spreads towards the limbs. In severe forms, botulism leads to paralysis of the breathing muscles and causes respiratory failure. In light of this life-threatening complication, all suspected cases of botulism are treated as medical emergencies, and public health officials are usually involved to identify the source and take steps to prevent further cases from occurring.\nBotulinum toxin A and E specifically cleave the SNAP-25, whereas serotype B, D, F and G cut synaptobrevin. Serotype C cleaves both SNAP-25 and syntaxin. This causes blockade of neurotransmitter acetylcholine release, ultimately leading to paralysis.\nDiagnosis.\nFor botulism in babies, diagnosis should be made on signs and symptoms. Confirmation of the diagnosis is made by testing of a stool or enema specimen with the mouse bioassay.\nIn people whose history and physical examination suggest botulism, these clues are often not enough to allow a diagnosis. Other diseases such as Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, stroke, and myasthenia gravis can appear similar to botulism, and special tests may be needed to exclude these other conditions. These tests may include a brain scan, cerebrospinal fluid examination, nerve conduction test (electromyography, or EMG), and an edrophonium chloride (Tensilon) test for myasthenia gravis. A definite diagnosis can be made if botulinum toxin is identified in the food, stomach or intestinal contents, vomit or feces. The toxin is occasionally found in the blood in peracute cases. Botulinum toxin can be detected by a variety of techniques, including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), electrochemiluminescent (ECL) tests and mouse inoculation or feeding trials. The toxins can be typed with neutralization tests in mice. In toxicoinfectious botulism, the organism can be cultured from tissues. On egg yolk medium, toxin-producing colonies usually display surface iridescence that extends beyond the colony.\nPrevention.\nAlthough the vegetative form of the bacteria is destroyed by boiling, the spore itself is not killed by the temperatures reached with normal sea-level-pressure boiling, leaving it free to grow and again produce the toxin when conditions are right.\nA recommended prevention measure for infant botulism is to avoid giving honey to infants less than 12 months of age, as botulinum spores are often present. In older children and adults the normal intestinal bacteria suppress development of \"C. botulinum\".\nWhile commercially canned goods are required to undergo a \"botulinum cook\" in a pressure cooker at for 3 minutes, and thus rarely cause botulism, there have been notable exceptions. Two were the 1978 Alaskan salmon outbreak and the 2007 Castleberry's Food Company outbreak. Foodborne botulism is the rarest form, accounting for only around 15% of cases (US) and has more frequently resulted from home-canned foods with low acid content, such as carrot juice, asparagus, green beans, beets, and corn. However, outbreaks of botulism have resulted from more unusual sources. In July 2002, fourteen Alaskans ate \"muktuk\" (whale meat) from a beached whale, and eight of them developed symptoms of botulism, two of them requiring mechanical ventilation.\nOther, much rarer sources of infection (about every decade in the US) include garlic or herbs stored covered in oil without acidification, chili peppers, improperly handled baked potatoes wrapped in aluminum foil, tomatoes, and home-canned or fermented fish.\nWhen canning or preserving food at home, attention should be paid to hygiene, pressure, temperature, refrigeration and storage. When making home preserves, only acidic fruit such as apples, pears, stone fruits and berries should be used. Tropical fruit and tomatoes are low in acidity and must have some acidity added before they are canned.\nLow-acid foods have pH values higher than 4.6. They include red meats, seafood, poultry, milk, and all fresh vegetables except for most tomatoes. Most mixtures of low-acid and acid foods also have pH values above 4.6 unless their recipes include enough lemon juice, citric acid, or vinegar to make them acidic. Acid foods have a pH of 4.6 or lower. They include fruits, pickles, sauerkraut, jams, jellies, marmalades, and fruit butters.\nAlthough tomatoes usually are considered an acid food, some are now known to have pH values slightly above 4.6. Figs also have pH values slightly above 4.6. Therefore, if they are to be canned as acid foods, these products must be acidified to a pH of 4.6 or lower with lemon juice or citric acid. Properly acidified tomatoes and figs are acid foods and can be safely processed in a boiling-water canner.\nOils infused with fresh garlic or herbs should be acidified and refrigerated. Potatoes which have been baked while wrapped in aluminum foil should be kept hot until served or refrigerated. Because the botulism toxin is destroyed by high temperatures, home-canned foods are best boiled for 10 minutes before eating. Metal cans containing food in which bacteria are growing may bulge outwards due to gas production from bacterial growth or the food inside may be foamy or have a bad odor; cans with any of these signs should be discarded.\nAny container of food that has been heat-treated and then assumed to be airtight, but shows signs of not being so, e.g., metal cans with pinprick holes from rust or mechanical damage, should be discarded. Contamination of a canned food solely with \"C. botulinum\" may not cause any visual defects to the container, such as bulging. Only assurance of sufficient thermal processing during production, and absence of a route for subsequent contamination, should be used as indicators of food safety.\nThe addition of nitrites and nitrates to processed meats such as ham, bacon, and sausages reduces growth and toxin production of \"C. botulinum\". Other food additives (such as lactate and sorbate) provide similar protection against bacteria, but do not provide a desirable pink color.\nVaccine.\nA vaccine for botulism exists, but it is rarely used. The US CDC discontinued use of the vaccine in 2011 when the available product showed declining potency and an increase in moderate local reactions to booster shots. As of 2017 work to develop a better vaccine was being carried out, but the US FDA had not approved any vaccine against botulism.\nTreatment.\nBotulism is generally treated with botulism antitoxin and supportive care.\nSupportive care for botulism includes monitoring of respiratory function. Respiratory failure due to paralysis may require mechanical ventilation for 2 to 8 weeks, plus intensive medical and nursing care. After this time, paralysis generally improves as new neuromuscular connections are formed.\nIn some abdominal cases, physicians may try to remove contaminated food still in the digestive tract by inducing vomiting or using enemas. Wounds should be treated, usually surgically, to remove the source of the toxin-producing bacteria.\nAntitoxin.\nBotulinum antitoxin consists of antibodies that neutralize botulinum toxin in the circulatory system by passive immunization. This prevents additional toxin from binding to the neuromuscular junction, but does not reverse any already inflicted paralysis.\nIn adults, a trivalent antitoxin containing antibodies raised against botulinum toxin types A, B, and E is used most commonly; however, a heptavalent botulism antitoxin has also been developed and was approved by the U.S. FDA in 2013. In infants, horse-derived antitoxin is sometimes avoided for fear of infants developing serum sickness or lasting hypersensitivity to horse-derived proteins. To avoid this, a human-derived antitoxin has been developed and approved by the U.S. FDA in 2003 for the treatment of infant botulism. This human-derived antitoxin has been shown to be both safe and effective for the treatment of infant botulism. However, the danger of equine-derived antitoxin to infants has not been clearly established, and one study showed the equine-derived antitoxin to be both safe and effective for the treatment of infant botulism.\nTrivalent (A,B,E) botulinum antitoxin is derived from equine sources utilizing whole antibodies (Fab and Fc portions). In the United States, this antitoxin is available from the local health department via the CDC. The second antitoxin, heptavalent (A,B,C,D,E,F,G) botulinum antitoxin, is derived from \"despeciated\" equine IgG antibodies which have had the Fc portion cleaved off leaving the F(ab')2 portions. This less immunogenic antitoxin is effective against all known strains of botulism where not contraindicated.\nPrognosis.\nThe paralysis caused by botulism can persist for two to eight weeks, during which supportive care and ventilation may be necessary to keep the patient alive. Botulism can be fatal in five to ten percent of people who are affected. However, if left untreated, botulism is fatal in 40 to 50 percent of cases.\nInfant botulism typically has no long-term side effects but can be complicated by treatment-associated adverse events. The case fatality rate is less than two percent for hospitalized babies.\nEpidemiology.\nGlobally, botulism is fairly rare, with approximately 1,000 identified cases yearly.\nUnited States.\nIn 2021, health departments reported 273 confirmed and probable cases of botulism in the United States. Of these, 66% were infant botulism, 24% wound botulism, 8% food-borne botulism, and 2% were of other or unknown etiology. Infant botulism is still predominantly sporadic rather than epidemic, but marked geographic variability persists; California accounted for 45 cases (25%) and Pennsylvania for 21 cases (12%) of the 2021 infant total.\nBetween 1990 and 2000, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recorded 263 individual food-borne cases from 160 botulism events in the United States, with a case-fatality rate of 4%. Thirty-nine percent (103 cases and 58 events) occurred in Alaska, all attributable to traditional Alaska Native foods. In the lower 49 states, home-canned food was implicated in 70 events (~69%), with canned asparagus being the most frequent source. Two restaurant-associated outbreaks affected 25 people. The median number of cases per year was 23 (range 17\u201343) and the median number of events per year was 14 (range 9\u201324). The highest incidence rates occurred in Alaska, Idaho, Washington, and Oregon; all other states had an incidence rate of \u22641 case per ten million population.\nThe number of food-borne and infant botulism cases has remained relatively stable in recent years, but wound botulism continues to rise\u2014largely linked to injection-drug use, particularly black-tar heroin in California.\nAll data regarding botulism antitoxin releases and laboratory confirmation of cases in the US are recorded annually by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and published on their website.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe largest recorded outbreak of foodborne botulism in the United Kingdom occurred in June 1989. A total of 27 patients were affected; one patient died. Twenty-five of the patients had eaten one brand of hazelnut yogurt in the week before the onset of symptoms. Control measures included the cessation of all yogurt production by the implicated producer, the withdrawal of the firm's yogurts from sale, the recall of cans of the hazelnut conserve, and advice to the general public to avoid the consumption of all hazelnut yogurts.\nChina.\nFrom 1958 to 1983 there were 986 outbreaks of botulism in China involving 4,377 people with 548 deaths.\nQapqal disease.\nAfter the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949, a mysterious plague (named Qapqal disease) was noticed to be affecting several Sibe villages in Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County. It was endemic with distinctive epidemic patterns, yet the underlying cause remained unknown for a long period of time. It caused a number of deaths and forced some people to leave the place.\nIn 1958, a team of experts were sent to the area by the Ministry of Health to investigate the cases. The epidemic survey conducted proved that the disease was primarily type A botulism, with several cases of type B. The team also discovered that the source of the botulinum was local fermented grain and beans, as well as a raw meat food called \"mi song hu hu\". They promoted the improvement of fermentation techniques among local residents, and thus eliminated the disease.\nCanada.\nFrom 1985 to 2005 there were outbreaks causing 91 confirmed cases of foodborne botulism in Canada, 85% of which were in Inuit communities, especially Nunavik, as well as First Nations of the coast of British Columbia, following consumption of traditionally prepared marine mammal and fish products.\nUkraine.\nIn 2017, there were 70 cases of botulism with 8 deaths in Ukraine. The previous year there were 115 cases with 12 deaths. Most cases were the result of dried fish, a common local drinking snack.\nVietnam.\nIn 2020, several cases of botulism were reported in Vietnam. All of them were related to a product containing contaminated vegetarian p\u00e2t\u00e9. Some patients were put on life support.\nOther susceptible species.\nBotulism can occur in many vertebrates and invertebrates. Botulism has been reported in species such as rats, mice, chicken, frogs, toads, goldfish, aplysia, squid, crayfish, drosophila and leeches.\nDeath from botulism is common in waterfowl; an estimated 10,000 to 100,000 birds die of botulism annually. The disease is commonly called \"limberneck\". In some large outbreaks, a million or more birds may die. Ducks appear to be affected most often. An enzootic form of duck botulism in the Western US and Canada is known as \"western duck sickness\". Botulism also affects commercially raised poultry. In chickens, the mortality rate varies from a few birds to 40% of the flock.\nBotulism seems to be relatively uncommon in domestic mammals; however, in some parts of the world, epidemics with up to 65% mortality are seen in cattle. The prognosis is poor in large animals that are recumbent.\nIn cattle, the symptoms may include drooling, restlessness, incoordination, urine retention, dysphagia, and sternal recumbency. Laterally recumbent animals are usually very close to death. In sheep, the symptoms may include drooling, a serous nasal discharge, stiffness, and incoordination. Abdominal respiration may be observed and the tail may switch on the side. As the disease progresses, the limbs may become paralyzed and death may occur. Phosphorus-deficient cattle, especially in southern Africa, are inclined to ingest bones and carrion containing clostridial toxins and consequently develop \"lame sickness\" or \"lamsiekte\".\nThe clinical signs in horses are similar to cattle. The muscle paralysis is progressive; it usually begins at the hindquarters and gradually moves to the front limbs, neck, and head. Death generally occurs 24 to 72 hours after initial symptoms and results from respiratory paralysis. Some foals are found dead without other clinical signs.\n\"Clostridium botulinum\" type C toxin has been incriminated as the cause of grass sickness, a condition in horses which occurs in rainy and hot summers in Northern Europe. The main symptom is pharynx paralysis.\nDomestic dogs may develop systemic toxemia after consuming \"C. botulinum\" type C exotoxin or spores within bird carcasses or other infected meat but are generally resistant to the more severe effects of \"C. botulinum\" type C. Symptoms include flaccid muscle paralysis, which can lead to death due to cardiac and respiratory arrest.\nPigs are relatively resistant to botulism. Reported symptoms include anorexia, refusal to drink, vomiting, pupillary dilation, and muscle paralysis.\nIn poultry and wild birds, flaccid paralysis is usually seen in the legs, wings, neck and eyelids. Broiler chickens with the toxicoinfectious form may also have diarrhea with excess urates.\nPrevention in non-human species.\nOne of the main routes of exposure for botulism is through the consumption of food contaminated with \"C. botulinum\". Food-borne botulism can be prevented in domestic animals through careful inspection of the feed, purchasing high quality feed from reliable sources, and ensuring proper storage. Poultry litter and animal carcasses are places in which \"C. botulinum\" spores are able to germinate so it is advised to avoid spreading poultry litter or any carcass containing materials on fields producing feed materials due to their potential for supporting \"C. botulinum\" growth. Additionally, water sources should be checked for dead or dying animals, and fields should be checked for animal remains prior to mowing for hay or silage. Correcting any dietary deficiencies can also prevent animals from consuming contaminated materials such as bones or carcasses. Raw materials used for silage or feed mixed on site should be checked for any sign of mold or rotten appearance. Acidification of animal feed can reduce, but will not eliminate, the risk of toxin formation, especially in carcasses that remain whole.\nVaccines in animals.\nVaccines have been developed for use in animals to prevent botulism. The availability and approval of these vaccines varies depending on the location, with places experiencing more cases generally having more vaccines available and routine vaccination is more common.\nA variety of vaccines have been developed for the prevention of botulism in livestock. Most initial vaccinations require multiple doses at intervals from 2\u20136 weeks, however, some newer vaccines require only one shot. This mainly depends on the type of vaccine and manufacturers recommendations. All vaccines require annual boosters to maintain immunity. Many of these vaccines can be used on multiple species including cattle, sheep, and goats with some labeled for use in horses and mules as well as separate vaccines for mink. Additionally, vaccination during an outbreak is as beneficial as therapeutic treatment in cattle, and this method is also used in horses and pheasants.\nThe use of region specific toxoids to immunize animals has been shown to be effective. Toxoid types C and D used to immunize cattle is a useful vaccination method in South Africa and Australia. Toxoid has also been shown to be an appropriate method of immunizing minks and pheasants. In endemic areas, for example Kentucky, vaccination with type B toxoid appears to be effective.\nUse in biological warfare and terrorism.\nUnited States.\nBased on CIA research in Fort Detrick on biological warfare, anthrax and botulism were widely regarded as the two most effective options. During the 1950s, a highly lethal strain was discovered during the biological warfare program. The CIA continued to hold 5 grams of \"Clostridium botulinum\", even after Nixon's ban on biological warfare in 1969. During the Gulf War, when the United States was concerned with a potential biowarfare attack, the efforts around botulism turned to prevention. However, the only way to make antitoxin in the U.S. until the 1990s was by drawing antibodies from a single horse named First Flight, raising much concern from Pentagon health officials.\nIraq.\nIraq has historically possessed many types of germs, including botulism. The American Type Culture Collection sold 5 variants of botulinum to the University of Baghdad in May 1986. 1991 CIA reports also show Iraqis filled shells, warheads, and bombs with biological agents like botulinum (though none have been deployed). The Iraqi air force used the code name \"tea\" to refer to botulinum, and it was also referred to as bioweapon \"A.\"\nJapan.\nA Japanese cult called Aum Shinrikyo created laboratories that produced biological weapons, specifically botulinum, anthrax, and Q fever. From 1990 to 1995, the cult staged numerous unsuccessful bioterrorism attacks on civilians. They sprayed botulinum toxin from a truck in downtown Tokyo and in the Narita airport, but there are no reported cases of botulism as a result.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40145", "revid": "48939455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40145", "title": "Witan", "text": "King's council in Anglo-Saxon England\nThe witan (lit.\u2009'wise men') was the king's council in the Anglo-Saxon government of England from before the 7th century until the 11th century. It comprised important noblemen, including ealdormen, thegns, and bishops. Meetings of the witan were sometimes called the witenagemot. \nIts primary function was to advise the king on legislation, judicial cases, land transfers, and other matters of national importance. The witan may have elected new kings from among members of the ruling dynasty. After the Norman Conquest in 1066, these roles were performed by a similar council known as the curia regis.\nThe witan is considered an ancestor of the Parliament of England. Before the 20th century, historians thought it had been a proto-parliament, an institution that was both democratic and representative. In the 20th century, historical interpretation emphasised the witan's ad hoc and essentially royal nature.\nEtymology.\nThe Old English word (lit.\u2009'wise men') described the counsellors of Anglo-Saxon kings. At the same time, the word could also refer to other kinds of counsellors, such as the witan of a shire court. Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York (1002\u20131023), wrote in his \"Institutes of Polity\" that \"it is incumbent on bishops, that venerable 'witan' always travel with them, and dwell with them, at least of the priesthood; that they may consult with them... and who may be their counsellors at every time.\" A contemporary account of a dispute over an estate in Middlesex in the 950s refers to a decision of the ('Mercian witan').\nThe most common Old English term for a meeting of the witan is , sometimes expanded as ('great assembly'). Writers of Latin texts used or (lit.\u2009'great assembly of wise men'). Modern scholars use ('assembly of counsellors') as a technical term, but historian John Maddicott noted its rarity in the 11th century with only nine pre-Conquest examples, mainly in the crisis of 1051\u20131052. Patrick Wormald was also cautious, describing it as \"a word always rare and unattested before 1035\".\nOrigins.\nThe origins of the witan lie in the practice of Germanic kings seeking the advice of their great men. This practice survived within the many Anglo-Saxon kingdoms established after the end of Roman rule in Britain. Maddicott writes that these early \"royal assemblies lacked the institutional qualities of regularity, formality of structure, and a distinctive agenda\" seen in later assemblies. They were also distinctly local. The first recorded act of a witenagemot was the law code of King \u00c6thelberht of Kent c.\u2009600, the earliest document which survives in sustained Old English prose.\nBefore the 9th century, only church councils, such as the Council of Hertford in 672, transcended the boundaries of individual kingdoms. With the unification of England in the 10th century, the witan acquired a national scope for the first time.\nAttendance and locations.\nAccording to historian Bryce Lyon, the witan \"was an amoebic sort of organization with no definite composition or function\". It does appear, however, that an indispensable requirement was the presence of leading secular and ecclesiastical magnates. Kings issued royal charters at meetings of the witan, and historians use the witness lists to these charters to discover who attended. About 2,000 charters and 40 law codes attest to the workings of around 300 recorded witan meetings. Typically, scribes listed witnesses in hierarchical order, with the king listed first, followed by: \nWhen English kings claimed overlordship over their Welsh neighbors, the Welsh kings might also be in attendance.\nAnglo-Saxon England lacked a fixed capital, and the royal court was itinerant. The witan convened at various locations, including royal palaces, towns, and hunting lodges. Between 900 and 1066, over 50 locations were recorded. London and Winchester were popular meeting places, and other locations included: Abingdon, Amesbury, Andover, Aylesford, Cookham, Dorchester, Faversham, King's Enham, Southampton, Wantage, Oxford, Kirtlington, and Woodstock. In the West Country, meetings were held at Gloucester, Axminster, Bath, Calne, Cheddar, Chippenham, Cirencester, Edington, Malmesbury, Winchcombe, and Exeter. While meetings in the North were rare, the witan did convene at Nottingham in 934 and at Lincoln in 1045. The witan could meet at any time, but it often gathered during Christmas, Lent, and Easter when many nobles were present at court.\nRole.\nThe witan played a significant role in legislation. The king and his advisers would draft laws and then seek the witan's consultation and consent. As Lyon points out, this process was a testament to the king's belief in gathering opinions from all parts of the kingdom, which \"produced a wider sampling of opinion and gave the law more solid support\". The witan took part in both secular and ecclesiastical legislation. Church law, however, was drafted by the clergy, with lay nobles merely giving consent. \nThe witan's influence was not limited to legislation. The king sought its advice and consent for extraordinary taxation that would burden the nobility, such as the Danegeld. The witan deliberated on matters of war, peace, and treaties. The declaration of royal wills occurred at witan meetings.\nKings issued charters granting bookland at witan meetings. The witness lists attached to these charters proved that the witan consented to the grants. This practice originated from the late Roman law, which required witnesses for private transactions. Historian Levi Roach explains that the \"adoption of this method of authentication for early English diplomas is understandable: in the absence of direct bureaucratic continuity with the late Roman Empire, which effectively precluded sealing or notarial subscription, as practised elsewhere, the use of witnesses, mirroring the methods of authentication used for private transactions on the continent, was an elegant solution.\"\nElecting and deposing kings.\nThe witan was noted by contemporary sources as having the singular power to , 'to choose the king' from amongst the extended royal family. Nevertheless, at least until the 11th century, royal succession generally followed the \"ordinary system of primogeniture\". The historian Chadwick interpreted these facts as proof that the so-called election of the king by the witan merely amounted to formal recognition of the deceased king's natural successor. But Liebermann was generally less willing than Chadwick to see the witan's significance as buried under the weight of the royal prerogative:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiebermann's more subtle position seems to be vindicated by testimony from abbot \u00c6lfric of Eynsham, the leading homilist of the late tenth century, who wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No man can make himself king, but the people has the choice to choose as king whom they please; but after he is consecrated as king, he then has dominion over the people, and they cannot shake his yoke off their necks.\nIn addition to having a role in the election of kings, it is often held that the witenagemots had the power to depose an unpopular king. However, there are only two occasions when this probably happened, in 757 and 774 with the depositions of kings Sigeberht of Wessex and Alhred of Northumbria respectively.\nThe witan's powers are illustrated by the following event. In the year 1013 King \u00c6thelred II (\u00c6thelred the Unready) fled the country from Sweyn Forkbeard, who then had the witan proclaim him king. Within a few weeks, however, Sweyn died and \u00c6thelred was called back to England by the witan. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", the witan would only receive him back under the condition that he promise to rule better than he had. \u00c6thelred did so, and was reinstated as King of England. His nickname of the 'Unr\u00e6d' or 'Unready' means ill-advised, indicating that contemporaries regarded those who sat in the witan as part responsible for the failure of his reign.\nAt the end of 1065, King Edward the Confessor fell into a coma without clarifying his preference for the succession. He died on 5 January 1066, according to the Vita \u00c6dwardi Regis, but not before briefly regaining consciousness and commending his widow and the kingdom to Harold's \"protection\". When the witan convened the next day they selected Harold to succeed as ruler of England.\nNorman Conquest.\nAfter the Norman Conquest in 1066, William I replaced the witan with the curia regis (Latin for 'king's court'). In a sign of the witan's enduring legacy, the curia regis continued to be dubbed a \"witan\" by chroniclers until as late as the 12th century. Maddicott writes that the witan (what he terms \"royal assemblies\") were \"the direct forebears of the councils of post-Conquest England and the parliaments which were the councils' descendants\".\nHistoriography.\nThe \"Saxon myth\" claimed that the old Saxon witan was the representative assembly of English landholders until disbanded by the Norman invaders and that it reemerged as the Parliament of England. This idea was held across the Thirteen Colonies in North America in the years prior to the American Revolution (1776\u20131783). Among the believers were Thomas Jefferson and Jonathan Mayhew. The Whig historians of the 19th century were concerned with explaining the evolution of the English constitution, and they found in the witan a proto-parliament or in the words of Felix Liebermann, \"one of the lineal ancestors of the British Parliament\". \nAfter World War I, historians such as Frank Stenton and Dorothy Whitelock shifted their focus to understanding the Anglo-Saxon period on its own terms. In his 1943 \"Anglo-Saxon England\", Stenton chose to use the term \"King's Council\" in place of \"witan\" and \"witenagemot\". This change in terminology signalled an important change in the way Anglo-Saxon political assemblies were perceived. Instead of proto-parliaments, the assemblies were essentially royal institutions. Other historians followed Stenton's lead. \nScholars such as Stenton have noted that the witenagemot was in many ways different from the future institution of the Parliament of England; it had substantially different powers and some major limitations, such as a lack of a fixed procedure, schedule, or meeting place. In his 1995 biography of Alfred the Great, historian David Sturdy argues that the witan did not embody modern notions of a \"national institution\" or a \"democratic\" body. He writes, \"Victorian notions of a national 'witan' are crazy dreams without foundation, myths of a 'democratic parliament' that never was.\"\nWhile many modern historians avoid the terms \"witan\" and \"witenagemot\", few would go as far as Geoffrey Hindley, who described \"witenagemot\" as an \"essentially Victorian\" coinage. \"The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England\" prefers \"king's council\" but adds that it was known in Old English as the witan. Maddicott regarded the word \"witan\" with suspicion, even though it is used in sources such as the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\". In his study of the origins of the English parliament, he generally preferred the more neutral word \"assembly\": \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But the word carries with it, however unjustifiably, a fustian air of decayed scholarship, and, in addition, its use may seem to prejudge the answer to an important question: do we have here an institution, a capitalized 'Witan', as it were, or merely a lower-case ad hoc gathering of the wise men who were the king's councillors?\nHenrietta Leyser commented in 2017 that for decades historians avoided using the word \"witan\" for assemblies in case they were interpreted as proto-parliaments, and she went on: \"Recent historiography, however, has reintroduced the term since it is clear that it was generally accepted that certain kinds of business could only be transacted with a substantial number of the king's wise men, in other words, in the company of his 'witan'\". She does not mention the term \"witenagemot\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40147", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40147", "title": "Divorce", "text": "Termination of a marital union\nDivorce (also known as dissolution of marriage) is the process of terminating a marriage or marital union. Divorce usually entails the canceling or reorganising of the legal duties and responsibilities of marriage, thus dissolving the bonds of matrimony between a married couple under the rule of law of the particular country or state. It can be said to be a legal dissolution of a marriage by a court or other competent body. It is the legal process of ending a marriage.\nDivorce laws vary considerably around the world, but in most countries, divorce is a legal process that requires the sanction of a court or other authority, which may involve issues of distribution of property, child custody, alimony (spousal support), child visitation / access, parenting time, child support, and division of debt. In most countries, monogamy is required by law, so divorce allows each former partner to marry another person.\nDivorce is different from annulment, which declares the marriage null and void, with legal separation or \"de jure\" separation (a legal process by which a married couple may formalize a \"de facto\" separation while remaining legally married) or with \"de facto separation\" (a process where the spouses informally stop cohabiting). Reasons for divorce vary, from sexual incompatibility or lack of independence for one or both spouses to a personality clash or infidelity.\nThe only countries that do not allow divorce are the Philippines and the Vatican City. In the Philippines, divorce for non-Muslim Filipinos is not legal unless one spouse is an undocumented immigrant and satisfies certain conditions. The Vatican City is a theocratic state ruled by the head of the Catholic Church, and does not allow for divorce. Countries that have relatively recently legalized divorce are Italy (1970), Portugal (1975, although from 1910 to 1940 it was possible both for the civil and religious marriage), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Paraguay (1991), Colombia (1991; from 1976 was allowed only for non-Catholics), Andorra (1995), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011).\nOverview.\nGrounds for divorce vary widely from country to country. Marriage may be seen as a contract, a status, or a combination of these. Where it is seen as a contract, the refusal or inability of one spouse to perform the obligations stipulated in the contract may constitute a ground for divorce for the other spouse. In contrast, in some countries (such as Sweden, Finland, Australia, New Zealand), divorce is purely no fault, meaning that parties may separate of their own free will without having to prove someone is at fault for the divorce. Many jurisdictions offer both the option of a \"no fault\" divorce as well as an \"at fault\" divorce. This is the case, for example, in many states of the US, France and the Czech Republic.\nThough divorce laws vary between jurisdictions, there are two basic approaches to divorce: fault based and no-fault based. However, even in some jurisdictions that do not require a party to claim fault of their partner, a court may still take into account the behavior of the parties when dividing property, debts, evaluating custody, shared care arrangements and support. In some jurisdictions, one spouse may be forced to pay the attorney's fees of another spouse.\nLaws vary as to the waiting period before a divorce is effective. Also, residency requirements vary. However, issues of division of property are typically determined by the law of the jurisdiction in which the property is located.\nIn Europe, divorce laws differ from country to country, reflecting differing legal and cultural traditions. In some countries, particularly (but not only) in some former communist countries, divorce can be obtained only on one single general ground of \"irretrievable breakdown of the marriage\" (or a similar formulation). Yet, what constitutes such a \"breakdown\" of the marriage is interpreted very differently from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, ranging from very liberal interpretations (e.g. Netherlands) to quite restrictive ones (e.g., in Poland, there must be an \"irretrievable and complete disintegration of matrimonial life\", but there are many restrictions to granting a divorce). Separation constitutes a ground of divorce in some European countries (in Germany, e.g., a divorce is granted on the basis of a 1-year separation if both spouses consent, or 3-year separation if only one spouse consents). Note that \"separation\" does not necessarily mean separate residences \u2013 in some jurisdictions, living in the same household but leading a separate life (e.g., eating, sleeping, socializing, etc. separately) is sufficient to constitute \"de facto\" separation; this is explicitly stated, e.g., in the family laws of Latvia or the Czech Republic.\nDivorce laws are not static; they often change reflecting evolving social norms of societies. In the 21st century, many European countries have made changes to their divorce laws, in particular by reducing the length of the necessary periods of separation, e.g., Scotland in 2006 (1 or 2 years from the previous 2 or 5 years); France in 2005 (2 years from the previous 6 years), Switzerland in 2005 (2 years from the previous 4 years), Greece in 2008 (2 years from the previous 4 years). Some countries have completely overhauled their divorce laws, such as Spain in 2005, and Portugal in 2008. A new divorce law also came into force in September 2007 in Belgium, creating a new system that is primarily no-fault. Similarly, in the UK, under the new divorce law that came into force in April 2022, the person initiating the divorce process no longer has to blame their spouse for the breakdown of their marriage. Bulgaria also modified its divorce regulations in 2009. Also in Italy, new laws came into force in 2014 and 2015 with significant changes in Italian law in matter of divorce: apart from shortening of the period of obligatory separation (6 months for consensual separations and 1 year for contested ones from the previous 3 years), other forms of getting a divorce are allowed \u2013 as an alternative to court proceedings, i.e. the negotiations with the participation of an advocate or agreement made before the registrar of Public Registry Office. Austria by contrast is a European country where the divorce law still remains conservative.\nThe liberalization of divorce laws is not without opposition, particularly in the United States. Indeed, in the US, certain conservative and religious organizations are lobbying for laws which restrict divorce. In 2011, in the US, the Coalition for Divorce Reform was established, describing itself as an organization \"dedicated to supporting efforts to reduce unnecessary divorce and promote healthy marriages\".\nThe magisterium of the Roman Catholic Church founds the concept of marriage on natural moral law, elaborated by St. Thomas Aquinas, supplemented by the revealed Divine law. The doctrine of the Doctor Angelicus has been partially shared by the Eastern Orthodox Church in the course of history.\nLaw.\nTypes.\nIn some jurisdictions, the courts will seldom apply principles of fault, but might willingly hold a party liable for a breach of a fiduciary duty to his or her spouse. Grounds for divorce differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction in the worldwide. Some states have no-fault divorce; some states require a declaration of fault on the part of one partner or both; some states allow either method.\nIn most jurisdictions, a divorce must be certified or ordered by a Judge in a court of law to come into effect. The terms of the divorce are usually determined by the courts, though they may take into account prenuptial agreements or post-nuptial agreements, or ratify terms that the spouses may have agreed to privately, while in other areas, agreements related to the marriage have to be rendered in writing to be enforceable. In the absence of agreement, a contested divorce may be stressful to the spouses.\nIn some countries, when the spouses agree to divorce and to the terms of the divorce, it can be certified by a non-judiciary administrative entity. The effect of a divorce is that both parties are free to marry again if a filing in an appellate court does not overturn the decision.\nContested divorce.\nContested divorces mean that one of several issues are required to be heard by a judge at trial level\u2014this is more expensive, and the parties will have to pay for a lawyer's time and preparation. In such a divorce the spouses are not able to agree on issues for instance child custody and division of marital assets. In such situations, the litigation process takes longer to conclude. The judge controls the outcome of the case. Less adversarial approaches to divorce settlements have recently emerged, such as mediation and collaborative divorce settlement, which negotiate mutually acceptable resolution to conflicts. This principle in the United States is called 'Alternative Dispute Resolution' and has gained popularity.\nAt-fault divorce.\nBefore the late 1960s, nearly all countries that permitted divorce required proof by one party that the other party had committed an act incompatible with the marriage. This was termed \"grounds\" for divorce (popularly called \"fault\") and was the only way to terminate a marriage. No-fault divorce is available in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States and other Western countries.\nFault-based divorces can be contested; evaluation of offences may involve allegations of collusion of the parties working together to get the divorce, or condonation by approving the offence, connivance by tricking someone into committing an offence, or provocation by the other party. Contested fault divorces can be expensive, and not usually practical as eventually most divorces are granted. Comparative rectitude is a doctrine used to determine which spouse is more at fault when both spouses are guilty of breaches.\nThe grounds for a divorce which a party could raise and need to prove included \nThe requirement of proving a ground was revised and withdrawn by the terms of 'no-fault' statutes, which became popular in many Western countries in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In 'no-fault' jurisdictions divorce can be obtained either on a simple allegation of 'irreconcilable differences,' 'irretrievable break-down', or 'incompatibility' with respect to the marriage relationship, or on the ground of de facto separation.\nSummary divorce.\nA summary or simple divorce, available in some jurisdictions, is used when spouses meet certain eligibility requirements or can agree on key issues beforehand.\nKey factors:\nNo-fault divorce.\nMost Western jurisdictions have a no-fault divorce system, in which a divorce can be granted based only on the assertion by one of the parties that the marriage has broken down irretrievably, without any need for an allegation or proof of fault. The application can be made by either party or by both parties jointly.\nIn jurisdictions adopting the no-fault principle, some courts may still take fault into account when determining some aspects of the terms of the divorce decree, for example, the division of property and debts and provision of spousal support. Some behaviors that may constitute marital fault, such as violence, cruelty, or substance abuse may also be considered when determining child custody, but child custody judgements are made based on a different fundamental standard: the child's or children's best interests.\nUncontested divorce.\nA large percentage of divorce cases are \"uncontested\", meaning that the parties to the divorce are able to come to an agreement about the division of property, custody children, and support issues instead of having those issues decided by a judge. This is also known as mutual consent divorce or mutual divorce. When the parties can agree and present the court with a fair and equitable agreement, approval of the divorce is typically granted. Where the issues are not complex and the parties are cooperative, a settlement often can be directly negotiated between them. If the two parties cannot come to an agreement, they may ask the court to decide how to split property and deal with the custody of their children. Though this may be necessary, the courts would prefer parties to come to an agreement prior to entering court.\nIn the United States, many state court systems report that a significant number of divorce cases are filed \"pro se\", meaning that the parties to the divorce represent themselves without a lawyer. For example, courts in urban areas of California report that almost 80% of new divorces are filed \"pro se\".\nCollaborative divorce.\nCollaborative divorce is a method for divorcing couples to come to an agreement on divorce issues. In a collaborative divorce, the parties negotiate an agreed resolution with the assistance of attorneys who are trained in the collaborative divorce process and in mediation and often with the assistance of a neutral financial specialist or divorce coaches. The parties are empowered to make their own decisions based on their own needs and interests, but with complete information and full professional support.\nOnce the collaborative divorce starts, the lawyers are disqualified from representing the parties in a contested legal proceeding, should the collaborative law process end prematurely. Most attorneys who practise collaborative divorce claim that it can be more cost-effective than other divorce methods, \"e.g.\", going to court.\nElectronic divorce.\nPortugal, for example, allows two persons to file an electronic request for no-fault collaborative divorce in a non judiciary administrative entity. In specific cases, with no children, real property, alimony, or common address, can be completed within one hour.\nMediated divorce.\nDivorce mediation is an alternative to traditional divorce litigation. In a divorce mediation session, a mediator facilitates the discussion between the two parties by assisting with communication and providing information and suggestions to help resolve differences. At the end of the mediation process, the separating parties have typically developed a tailored divorce agreement that can be submitted to the court. Mediation sessions can include either party's attorneys, a neutral attorney, or an attorney-mediator who can inform both parties of their legal rights, but does not provide advice to either, or can be conducted with the assistance of a facilitative or transformative mediator without attorneys present at all. Some mediation companies, such as Wevorce, also pair clients with counselors, financial planners and other professionals to work through common mediation sticking points. Divorce mediators may be attorneys who have experience in divorce cases, or they may be professional mediators who are not attorneys, but who have training specifically in the area of family court matters. Divorce mediation can be significantly less costly, both financially and emotionally, than litigation. The adherence rate to mediated agreements is much higher than that of adherence to court orders.\nPolygamy and divorce.\nPolygamy is a significant structural factor governing divorce in countries where this is permitted. There is little analysis of the link between marital instability and polygyny that leads to divorce. The frequency of divorce rises in polygynous marriages compared to monogamous relationships. Within polygynous unions, differences in conjugal stability are found to occur by wife order. There are three main mechanisms through which polygyny affects divorce: economic restraint; sexual satisfaction; childlessness. Many women escape economic restraint through divorcing their spouses when they are allowed to initiate a divorce.\nReligion and divorce.\n Cartoon parodying the circus-like divorce proceedings of Anna Gould (an American heiress and socialite) and Boni de Castellane (a French nobleman) in 1906 in Paris, France. Boni de Castellane then sought an annulment from the Vatican so that he could be free to remarry in the Church. The annulment case was not finally settled until 1924, when the highest Vatican tribunal upheld the validity of the marriage and denied the annulment.\nIn some countries (commonly in Europe and North America), the government defines and administers marriages and divorces. While ceremonies may be performed by religious officials on behalf of the state, a civil marriage and thus, civil divorce (without the involvement of a religion) is also possible. Due to differing standards and procedures, a couple can be legally unmarried, married, or divorced by the state's definition, but have a different status as defined by a religious order. Other countries use religious law to administer marriages and divorces, eliminating this distinction. In these cases, religious officials are generally responsible for interpretation and implementation.\nIslam allows, yet generally advises against divorce, and it can be initiated by either the husband or the wife.\nChristian views on divorce vary: Catholic teaching allows only annulment, while most other denominations discourage it except in the event of adultery.\nJewish views of divorce differ, with Reform Judaism considering civil divorces adequate; Conservative and Orthodox Judaism, on the other hand, require that the husband grant his wife a divorce in the form of a \"get\".\nThe Millet System, where each religious group regulates its own marriages and divorces, is still present in varying degrees in some post\u2212Ottoman countries including Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, the Palestinian Authority and Egypt. Several countries use sharia (Islamic law) to administrate marriages and divorces for Muslims. Thus, Marriage in Israel is administered separately by each religious community (Jews, Christians, Muslims, and Druze), and there is no provision for interfaith marriages other than marrying in another country. For Jews, marriage and divorce are administered by Orthodox rabbis. Partners can file for divorce either in rabbinical court or Israeli civil court.\nGender and divorce.\nAccording to a study published in the American Law and Economics Review, women have filed slightly more than two-thirds of divorce cases in the United States. This trend is mirrored in the UK where a recent study into web search behavior found that 70% of divorce inquiries were from women. These findings also correlate with the Office for National Statistics publication \"Divorces in England and Wales 2012\" which reported that divorce petitions from women outnumber those from men by 2 to 1.\nRegarding divorce settlements, according to the 2004 Grant Thornton survey in the UK, women obtained a better or considerably better settlement than men in 60% of cases. In 30% of cases the assets were split 50\u201350, and in only 10% of cases did men achieve better settlements (down from 24% the previous year). The report concluded that the percentage of shared residence orders would need to increase in order for more equitable financial divisions to become the norm.\nSome jurisdictions give unequal rights to men and women when filing for divorce.\nFor couples following Conservative or Orthodox Jewish law (which by Israeli civil law includes all Jews in Israel), the husband must grant his wife a divorce through a document called a \"get\". Granting the 'get' obligates him to pay the woman a significant sum of money (10,000-$20,000) as stated on the religious prenuptial contract, which can be in addition to whatever prior settlement he had reached as far as continuous child support and funds he had to pay by court order in the civil divorce. If the man refuses (agreeing on condition he will not have to pay the money is still called refusing), the woman can appeal to a court or the community to pressure the husband. A woman whose husband refuses to grant the get or a woman whose husband is missing without sufficient knowledge that he died, called an agunah, is still married, and therefore cannot remarry. Under Orthodox law, children of an extramarital affair involving a married Jewish woman are considered \"mamzerim\" and cannot marry non-\"mamzerim\".\nCauses.\nIn the western world as a whole, two thirds of divorces are initiated by women. In the United States, 69% of divorces are initiated by women and this may be due to higher sensitivity to relationship difficulties. 66% of all divorces occur in couples without children. An annual study in the UK by management consultants Grant Thornton, estimates the main proximate causes of divorce based on surveys of matrimonial lawyers. The main causes in 2004 were:\nAccording to this survey, husbands engaged in extramarital affairs in 75% of cases, and wives in 25%. In cases of family strain, wives' families were the primary source of strain in 78%, compared to 22% of husbands' families. Emotional and physical abuse were more evenly split, with wives affected in 60% and husbands in 40% of cases. In 70% of workaholism-related divorces it was husbands who were the cause, and in 30%, wives. The 2004 survey found that 93% of divorce cases were petitioned by wives, very few of which were contested. 53% of divorces were marriages that had lasted 10 to 15 years, with 40% ending after 5 to 10 years. The first 5 years are relatively divorce-free, and if a marriage survives more than 20 years it is unlikely to end in divorce.\nSocial scientists study the causes of divorce in terms of underlying factors that may motivate divorce. One of these factors is the age at which a person gets married; delaying marriage may provide more opportunity or experience in choosing a compatible partner.\nWage, income, and sex ratios are other such underlying factors that have been included in analyses by sociologists and economists. Couples with a high household income are less likely to divorce than poor couples.\nOther personal factors, such as attending religious services regularly and having at least one child together, also reduce the risk of divorce.\nOther factors include the wedding itself: Spending relatively little money on the wedding, but having a relatively high number of guests in attendance (e.g., 50 or more people) and going on a honeymoon trip, is associated with a lower risk of divorce. High-cost weddings may strain marriages by causing debt stress.\nCohabitation effect.\nThe elevation of divorce rates among couples who cohabited before marriage is called the \"cohabitation effect\". Evidence suggests that although this correlation is partly due to two forms of selection (\"a\") that persons whose moral or religious codes permit cohabitation are also more likely to consider divorce permitted by morality or religion and (\"b\") that marriage based on low levels of commitment is more common among couples who cohabit than among couples who do not, such that the mean and median levels of commitment at the start of marriage are lower among cohabiting than among non-cohabiting couples), the cohabitation experience itself exerts at least some independent effect on the subsequent marital union.\nIn 2010, a study by Jay Teachman published in \"Journal of Marriage and Family\" found that women who have cohabited or had premarital sex with men other than their husbands have an increased risk of divorce and that this effect is strongest for women who have cohabited with multiple men before marriage. To Teachman, the fact that the elevated risk of divorce is only experienced when the premarital partner(s) is someone other than the husband indicates that premarital sex and cohabitation are now a normal part of the courtship process in the United States. This study only considers data on women in the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth in the United States. Divorce is sometimes caused by one of the partners finding the other unattractive.\nRecent studies show that the cohabitation effect on divorce varies across different cultures and periods. Another article published in \"Journal of Marriage and Family\" found that when cohabitation was uncommon in pre-reform China, premarital cohabitation increased the likelihood of subsequent divorce, but this association disappeared when cohabitation became prevalent.\nSerious medical illnesses.\nWomen are six times more likely to be separated or divorced soon after a diagnosis of cancer or multiple sclerosis than men. A review found a small decrease of divorce rate associated with most cancer types, but stated methodological weakness for many published studies which studied the association between divorce and cancer.\nEffects.\nSome of the effects associated with divorce include academic, behavioral, and psychological problems. Although this may not always be true, studies suggest that children from divorced families are more likely to exhibit such behavioral issues than non-divorced families.\nDivorce and relationships.\nResearch done at Northern Illinois University on Family and Child Studies suggests that divorce of couples experiencing high conflict can positively affect families by reducing conflict in the home. There are, however, many instances when the parent-child relationship may suffer due to divorce. Financial support is many times lost when an adult goes through a divorce. The adult may be obligated to obtain additional work to maintain financial stability. This can lead to a negative relationship between the parent and child; the relationship may suffer due to a lack of attention towards the child and minimal parental supervision.\nStudies have also shown that parental skills decrease after a divorce occurs; however, this effect is only a temporary change. \"Many researchers have shown that a disequilibrium, including diminished parenting skills, occurs in the year following the divorce but that by two years after the divorce re-stabilization has occurred and parenting skills have improved.\"\nSome couples choose divorce even when one spouse's desire to remain married is greater than the other spouse's desire to obtain a divorce. In economics, this is known as the Zelder Paradox and is more familiar with marriages that have produced children and less common with childless couples.\nResearch has also found that recent divorcees report significantly higher hostility levels after the divorce than before, and that this effect applies equally to both male and female divorcees.\nIn an American Psychological Association study of parents' relocation after a divorce, researchers found that a move has a long-term effect on children. In the first study conducted amongst 2,000 college students on the effects of parental relocation relating to their children's well-being after divorce, researchers found major differences. In divorced families in which one parent moved, the students received less financial support from their parents compared with divorced families in which neither parent moved. These findings also imply other negative outcomes for these students, such as more distress related to the divorce and did not feel a sense of emotional support from their parents. Although the data suggests negative outcomes for these students whose parents relocate after divorce, there is insufficient research that can alone prove the overall well-being of the child A newer study in the \"Journal of Family Psychology\" found that parents who move more than an hour away from their children after a divorce are much less well off than those parents who stayed in the same location\nEffects on children.\nResearch has shown that children are greatly affected by the disunion of their parents' marriage. In most cases these effects are displayed in academic strain, difficulty in regulating mood and emotions, and a tendency to find outlets in harmful substances or activities such as drugs, alcohol, and violence.\nAcademic and socioeconomic.\nFrequently, children who have experienced a parental divorce have lower academic achievement than children from non-divorced families\nA review of family and school factors related to adolescents' academic performance noted that a child from a divorced family is two times more likely to drop out of high school than a child from a non-divorced family. These children from divorced families may also be less likely to attend college, resulting in the end of their academic career.\nOften academic problems are associated with children from single-parent families. Studies have shown that this may be directly related to the economic effect of divorce. A divorce may result in the parent and children moving to an area with a higher poverty rate and a poor education system, because of the financial difficulties of a single parent.\nChildren of divorced parents also on average achieve lower levels of socioeconomic status, income, and wealth accumulation than children of parents who remain married. These outcomes are associated with lower educational achievement.\nYoung men or women between the ages of 7 and 16 who had experienced the divorce of their parents were more likely than youths who had not experienced the divorce of their parents to leave home because of friction, to cohabit before marriage, and to parent a child before marriage.\nDivorce often leads to worsened academic achievement in children ages 7\u201312, the most heightened negative effect being reading test scores. These negative effects tend to persist, and even escalate after the divorce or separation occurs.\nPsychological.\nDivorce is associated with diminished psychological well-being in children and adult offspring of divorced parents, including greater unhappiness, less satisfaction with life, weaker sense of personal control, anxiety, depression, and greater use of mental health services. A preponderance of evidence indicates that there is a causal effect between divorce and these outcomes.\nA study in Sweden led by the Centre for Health Equity Studies (Chess) at Stockholm University/Karolinska Institutet, is published in the \"Journal of Epidemiology &amp; Community Health\" found that children living with just one parent after divorce suffer from more problems such as headaches, stomach aches, feelings of tension and sadness than those whose parents share custody.\nChildren of divorced parents are also more likely to experience conflict in their own marriages, and are more likely to experience divorce themselves. They are also more likely to be involved in short-term cohabiting relationships, which often dissolve before marriage. There are many studies that show proof of an intergenerational transmission of divorce, but this does not mean that having divorced parents will absolutely lead a child to divorce. There are two key factors that make this transmission of divorce more likely. First, inherited biological tendencies or genetic conditions may predispose a child to divorce as well as the \"model of marriage\" presented by the child's parents.\nAccording to Nicholas Wall, former President of the Family Division of the English High Court, \"People think that post-separation parenting is easy\u00a0\u2013 in fact, it is exceedingly difficult, and as a rule of thumb my experience is that the more intelligent the parent, the more intractable the dispute. There is nothing worse, for most children, than for their parents to denigrate each other. Parents simply do not realize the damage they do to their children by the battles they wage over them. Separating parents rarely behave reasonably, although they always believe that they are doing so, and that the other party is behaving unreasonably.\"\nChildren involved in high-conflict divorce or custody cases can experience varying forms of psychological distress due to conflict between their parents. Legal professionals recognize that alienating behaviors are common in child custody cases, but are cautious about accepting the concept of parental alienation.\nResearch shows that children can be affected 2\u20134 years before the separation or divorce even occurs. This can be due to parental conflict and anticipation of a divorce, and decreased parental contact. Many couples believe that by separating, or becoming legally divorced that they are helping their children, and in situations of extreme parental conflict or abuse it most likely will be beneficial.\nExposure to marital conflict and instability, most often has negative consequences for children. Several mechanisms are likely to be responsible. First, observing overt conflict between parents is a direct stressor for children. Observational studies reveal that children react to inter-parental conflict with fear, anger, or the inhibition of normal behavior. Preschool children\u00a0\u2013 who tend to be egocentric\u00a0\u2013 may blame themselves for marital conflict, resulting in feelings of guilt and lowered self-esteem. Conflict between parents also tends to spill over and negatively affect the quality of parents' interactions with their children. Researchers found that the associations between marital conflict and children's externalizing and internalizing problems were largely mediated by parents' use of harsh punishment and parent\u2013child conflict. Furthermore, modeling verbal or physical aggression, parents \"teach\" their children that disagreements are resolved through conflict rather than calm discussion. As a result, children may not learn the social skills (such as the ability to negotiate and reach compromises) that are necessary to form mutually rewarding relationships with peers.\nGirls and boys deal with divorce differently. For instance, girls who initially show signs of adapting well, later suffer from anxiety in romantic relationships with men. Studies also showed that girls who were separated from their fathers at a younger age tended to be angrier toward the situation as they aged. Anger and sadness were also observed as common feelings in adolescents who had experienced parental divorce.\nMisconduct and substance abuse.\nChildren of divorced or separated parents exhibit increased behavioral problems and the marital conflict that accompanies parents' divorce places the child's social competence at risk. Children of divorced parents are more likely to search for outlets to cope with their emotions. For many struggling with social understanding and concepts of abuse or a lack of love in the home, drug abuse and general misconduct or violence are some of the indulgences that these children may be involved in.\nDivorce of elderly couples.\nIn the United States of America, since the mid-1990s, the divorce rate has increased to over 50% among baby boomers. More and more seniors are staying single; an analysis of census data conducted at Bowling Green State University predicted that divorce numbers would continue to rise. Baby boomers who remain unmarried are five times more likely to live in poverty than those who are married. They are also three times as likely to receive food stamps, public assistance or disability payments.\nSociologists believe that the rise in the number of older Americans who are not married is a result of factors such as longevity and economics. Women, especially, are becoming more and more financially independent which allows them to feel more secure with being alone, in addition to changing perceptions of being divorced or single. This has resulted in less pressure for baby boomers to marry or stay married.\nStatistics.\nAsia.\nChina.\nChina currently holds one of the highest divorce rates in the Asia Pacific region. Compared to 2000, China's divorce rates have gone up substantially from a 0.96 crude divorce rate to 3.09 rate in 2020. While China's divorce rate has been increasing since 2000, the highest recorded crude divorce rate in the past 20 years was in 2019 with 3.36 divorces. Since 2019, China's recorded divorce rate has gone down.\nAs of 2019, women initiate more than 70% of divorces in China.232\nChina has no-fault divorce which was implemented through the New Marriage Law in 1950. This allows individuals to divorce without showing any evidence of wrongdoing. China is one of the only Asian countries which permits no-fault divorce. \nAs of January 2021, China introduced a new policy called the \"cooling-off rule\".\u00a0 China, seeing the rise in divorce rates increasing on a yearly basis, the \"Marriage and Family Edition of Civil Code of the People's Republic of China\" secured an article 1077 establishing a mandatory cooling-off period, which has two requirements. First, on the day in which authorities have received the divorce applications, both parties can withdraw the registration within 30 days, and additionally to that, after 30 days are up, couples are required to physically apply for divorce certificate, and if they do not show up, the initial divorce application will be automatically perceived as withdrawn. This novel policy has been extremely controversial, where couples are required to wait for at least 30-days before they can commence a divorce. The 30-day cooling off period is created with the aim of generating more social stability, which avoids couples from making rushed or in-the-heat-of-the-moment emotionally-charged decisions. Family stability has always been culturally rooted in China, influenced by Confucian beliefs where the harmony of family brings the success of everything. A divorce can only be granted when couples have gone through a one-month long delay in order to make a decision.\nSince the implementation of the cooling-off rule, China's Ministry of Civil Affairs discovered a sharp 72 per cent drop in divorce rates since the previous quarter. It would thus appear that, given the 30-day cooling-off period, many couples eventually change their minds, potentially supporting the argument that most divorce decisions are made irrationally and emotionally. Although this measure has helped to reduce divorce rates in the country, Chinese citizens have responded negatively to the cooling-off policy, especially in cases of domestic abuse. According to the \"China Digital Times\", a woman by the name of Kan Xiaofang was violently murdered by her husband during the 30-day cooling-off period after filing for divorce in 2021. As a result of such incidents, the 30-day rule has angered Chinese feminists, who believe that the policy undermines the concept of freedom, and does not take into consideration of domestic violence, which runs commonly within Chinese households. With this policy being implemented relatively recently, many thus argue that the policy must be examined more deeply to analyze the consequences of delaying the divorce process.\nIndia.\nIndia has one of the lowest divorce rates in the world with around 1% of marriages ending in divorce, mainly because divorce is still stigmatized and seen as taboo amongst a lot of families in India. A lot of individuals also split without choosing to go through the process of divorce. Even though it was considered as a taboo in 1980s, nowadays people's mindset has started to change and taboo against divorce has reduced.\nDivorce is governed by various acts in India, depending on the religion of the couple:\nIndonesia.\nIn 2020 there were around 291,000 divorces recorded in Indonesia. These numbers are lower than the previous year \u2013 reportedly due to the pandemic and a longer dissolution process. Divorces are settled in religious courts, if they are Muslim, or through 'talaq' where a married man can pronounce divorce to his wife. There are six grounds of divorce, with an additional two for Muslim marriages, which include:\nIran.\nIran introduced divorce quotas to break the rise in divorce rates amidst low marriage rates. The law grants the female party easy divorce if there is a certified document showing lack of compatibility. In part because of economic conditions one in every three marriages resulted in divorce by 2021; the high rates are linked to the shifting status of women and empowerment of individuals.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, divorces were on an upward trend from the 1960s until 2002 when they hit a peak of 290,000 divorces. While divorce rates have increased since the 1900s, they have also slightly declined since 2002. In fact, in 2020 there were approximately 193,300 divorces. This is a significant decrease from the prior year, 2019, which recorded 208,489 divorces.\nThere are several types of divorces in Japan; Divorce by Agreement, Divorce by Conciliation, and Divorce by Judgement.\u00a0 Divorce by Agreement (rikon), occurs when both parties mutually agree to separate and do not need to go to court. This is the most common type of divorce in Japan. Divorce by Conciliation (chotei rikon) is sought out when individuals are unable to agree on terms or separate. Thus, these cases go to court in hope to come to a mutual agreement for both parties. Lastly, Divorce by Judgement (saiban rikon) occurs when individuals are unable to reach an agreement in court during conciliation. Divorce by judgement is uncommon in Japan.\nSingapore.\nSingapore has a crude divorce rate of 1.7 divorce per 1,000 residents. Singapore has seen a decrease in divorce rates compared to previous years. In fact, 2020 marks the lowest number of divorces recorded. In 2020, there were 6,700 divorces compared to 2015\u20132019, which recorded an average number of 7,536 marital dissolutions. Additionally, most divorces were initiated by women.\nSingapore requires the applicant to be married for three years before filing for divorce. That being said, if one has suffered exceptional hardship, they are eligible to file for divorce before the three years. Additionally, to get a divorce, there must be proof of an \"irretrievable breakdown\" of one of the four factors which include adultery, unreasonable behaviour, desertion and separation.\nSouth Korea.\nThe crude divorce rate in South Korea in 2020 was 2.1. Compared to prior years, the number of divorces recorded depicts that there are less filed divorces each year. Both the number of marriages and divorces decreased from 2019 by 10.7% and 3.9% respectively.\nThe highest proportion of divorces in 2020 was amongst those who have been married for 20 years or more followed by those who have been married for four years or less. Such findings may suggest that divorce has become more socially accepted in South Korea and the stigma behind separating has lessened.\nTaiwan.\nTaiwan's divorce rate in 2020 stood at 2.19 divorces per 1,000 residents. This is the lowest recorded divorce rate in the past 10 years. Many divorces in Taiwan are not done in court if there is a mutual agreement. If one of the parties does not consent to the divorce, then the other spouse may file for divorce under a valid reason of bigamy, infidelity, ill treatment or desertion. Before 2020, adultery in Taiwan was considered a crime and punishable by law.\nEurope.\nDivorce has increased across Europe in the past decade \u2013 the rate varies between European countries. One study estimated that legal reforms accounted for about 20% increase of the divorce rates in Europe between 1960 and 2002. In 2019, Luxembourg had the highest divorce rate per 100 marriages followed by Portugal, Finland, and Spain. Countries in Europe with some of the lowest number of divorces per 100 marriages are Ireland and Malta.\nSerbia.\nOn average, for every three new marriages in Serbia, one divorce occurs. In 2019, 35,570 marriages were concluded in Serbia, 10,899 marriages were divorced, and the number of divorces per 1,000 inhabitants was 1.6%.\nSweden.\nThe divorce proceedings begin with an application for separation of marriage to the district court. The application can be submitted by both parties jointly, if the spouses are in agreement, or individually by any of the parties, who do not have to agree to a divorce. Spouses who agree to a divorce, and do not have children under the age of 16, receive a judgment (decision) of divorce within a few weeks. If there are children under the age of 16 (including step children), the parties must wait 6 months before either, or both, parties may request completion of the divorce, in order to be formally separated in marriage. If the parties have lived apart for at least two years before the application for separation of marriage, the district court may decide on a direct divorce.\nFifty percent of all marriages in Sweden end in a divorce. Marriages that ended in a divorce lasted an average of 11.7 years. The most common age for divorce is between 35 and 49. Couples without mutual children separate or divorce most frequently.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 2015, the highest divorces rates in the UK were recorded all beside the sea, with Blackpool in the top position. The UK divorce rate is estimated at 42% and in 2019, around 107,599 divorces were reported. The highest number of divorce applications are reportedly made on Divorce Day, which is always the first Monday of the new year.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nThe crude divorce rate in 2022 in the United States is 2.3 divorces. This is significantly lower than prior years, such as those in 2001 where 4.1 divorces were recorded. These recent findings suggest a downward trend of the number of people dissolving their marriage. However, divorce rates range from state to state.\nThe National Center for Health Statistics reports that wives, with children present, filed for divorce in approximately two-thirds of cases from 1975 to 1988 in the U.S. For example, 71.4% of the cases were filed by women in 1975 and 65% were filed by women in 1988. It is estimated that upwards of 95% of divorces in the U.S. are \"uncontested\", because the two parties are able to come to an agreement without a hearing (either with or without lawyers/mediators/collaborative counsel) about the property, children, and support issues.\nIn 2000, the divorce rate reached its peak at 40% but has since slowly declined. In 2001, marriages between people of different faiths were three times more likely to get divorced than those of the same faith. In fact, in a 1993 study, members of two mainline Protestant religions had a 20% chance of being divorced in 5 years; a 33% for a Catholic and Evangelical, and a 40% chance for a Jew and a Christian.\nCouples with different ethnicities and races also had distinctive divorce statistics. In 2008, a study by Jenifer L. Bratter and Rosalind B. King on the Education Resources Information Center, found that unions between White males and non-White females as well as between Hispanics and non-Hispanic individuals, have similar or lower risks of divorce than White marriages. Unions between a White male and Black female last longer than White-White pairings or White-Asian pairings. Conversely, a White female with a Black male and White female with an Asian male are more prone to divorce than White-White pairings.\nAdditionally, as found in 2010, success in marriage has been associated with a higher education and older age. For example, 81% of college graduates who were over 26 years old, who wed in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Additionally, 65% of college graduates under 26, who married in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Furthermore, 49% of high school graduates under 26 years old, who married in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Conversely, 2.9% of adults aged 35\u201339 and without a college degree got divorced in the year 2009 \u2013 compared with 1.6% with a college education.\nAnother study looking at population differences found that a 1% increase in the unemployment rate correlated with a 1% decrease in the divorce rate. This was found to be presumably true for individuals who were financially challenged when trying to afford the legal proceedings. Nevertheless, another study from 1900 to 2008 found that there was a significant increase in the risk of divorce following a layoff and being unemployed.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe crude divorce rate in Australia in 2020 was 1.9 divorces per 1,000 residents. This rate has remained somewhat consistent throughout the past few years and is the same as the previous year. However, as divorces are granted after 12 months of separation, splits during COVID may not be reflected in the current divorce rate. The divorce rate has decreased substantially over the past 20 years with 2.6 divorces recorded per 1,000 residents in 2000. In order to apply for divorce, one must be separated for at least 12 months.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand's divorce rate in 2020 was 7.6 divorces per 1,000 residents. This rate marks a decrease from previous years \u2013 such as those in 1983 with a crude divorce rate of 13.3. In fact, this rate has decreased significantly from the previous year, 2019, with a divorce rate of 8.4. Before filing for divorce, the parties must be separated for at least two years. After this time, either party is able to submit an application. If it is a joint application but the parties do not appear in court, a dissolution order can be granted with the divorce taking effect after one month. If the parties appear in court together, the judge can make the dissolution order and the divorce will be effective immediately. If one party applies as a sole application, then the other spouse has the opportunity to defend it within a certain time period.\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nAccording to Statistics South Africa, the number of divorces increased by 0.3% from 25,260 divorces granted in 2015 to 25,326 granted in 2016. About 44.4% of the 2016 divorces came from marriages that did not reach their tenth wedding anniversary. About 51.1% of divorces in 2016 were filed by women while men filed 34.2% divorce cases.\nSocial attitudes.\nAttitudes toward divorce vary substantially across the world. Divorce is considered socially unacceptable by most of the population in certain sub-Saharan African countries such as Ghana, Uganda, Nigeria and Kenya, South Asian countries including India and Pakistan and South-East Asian countries such as the Philippines and Indonesia. The majority of the population considers divorce acceptable in Europe, Latin America and the United States. Divorce is also widely accepted in certain Muslim majority countries such as Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon, at least when men initiate it.\nMauritania is unusual for having a long history of accepting and celebrating divorce. Although exact statistics are not available, Mauritania is believed to have the highest divorce rate by far in the world, and it is not unusual for adults in Mauritania to marry and divorce five to ten times during their lifetimes.\nResearch has shown that unhappily married couples suffer 3\u201325 times the risk of developing clinical depression.\nIn same-sex married couples.\nThe legal process of divorce by same-sex couples is generally the same as any other.\nSame-sex marriage was introduced in large European countries relatively recently: France in 2013, the UK in 2014, and Germany in 2017. Consequently, there have been relatively few studies of divorce by same-sex couples, and they have produced some conflicting information. In some countries, such as Norway and Sweden, lesbian couples may be more likely to divorce than gay couples or opposite-sex couples. Same-sex couples in rural areas may have a higher divorce rate.\nRights of spouses to custody of children.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], upon dissolution of a same-sex marriage, legal questions remained in the US as to the rights of spouses to custody of the biological children of their spouses.\nChild custody policies include several guidelines that determine with whom the child lives following divorce, how time is divided in joint custody situations, and visitation rights. The most frequently applied custody guideline is the \"best interests of the child\" standard, which takes into account the parents' preferences, the child's preferences, the interactions between parents and children, children's adjustment, and all family members' mental and physical health.\nHistory.\nGreco-Roman culture.\nRather than being conceived as a legal procedure, divorce in Classical Athens was largely thought to be a private matter \u2014 defined by law, but with no specific legal action required. To divorce his wife, an Athenian man need only to dismiss her by sending her back to her family. It is unknown what would have constituted socially acceptable grounds for divorce, save for the fact that it was required by law for men to divorce adulterous women. The procedure for divorce was considerably more difficult for women. In order to initiate divorce, Athenian women were required to appear in public before the archon to state their case. This procedure was a considerable exception to standard Athenian legal conventions, which barred women from representing themselves in court, as woman-initiated divorce proceedings required a woman to represent herself as a matter of public record.\nDivorce was rare in early Roman culture but as their empire grew in power and authority Roman civil law embraced the maxim, \"\" (\"marriages ought to be free\"), and either husband or wife could renounce the marriage at will. The Christian emperors Constantine and Theodosius restricted the grounds for divorce to grave cause, but this was relaxed by Justinian in the 6th century.\nMali Empire.\nIn post-classical Mali, laws relating to divorced women were documented in the Timbuktu manuscripts.\nMedieval Europe.\nAfter the fall of the Roman Empire, familial life was regulated more by ecclesiastical authority than civil authority. The Catholic and Orthodox Church had, among others, a differing view of divorce.\nThe Orthodox Church recognized that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the Church towards sinful man.\nUnder the influence of the Catholic Church, the divorce rate had been greatly reduced by the 9th or 10th century, which considered marriage a sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ and indissoluble by mere human action.\nAlthough divorce, as known today, was generally prohibited in Catholic lands after the 10th century, separation of husband and wife and the annulment of marriage were well known. What is today referred to as \"separate maintenance\" (or \"legal separation\") was termed \"divorce a mensa et thoro\" (\"divorce from bed-and-board\"). The husband and wife physically separated and were forbidden to live or cohabit together, but their marital relationship did not fully terminate. Civil courts had no power over marriage or divorce. The grounds for annulment were determined by a Catholic church authority and applied in ecclesiastical courts. Annulment was for canonical causes of impediment existing at the time of the marriage. \"For in cases of total divorce, the marriage is declared null, as having been absolutely unlawful ab initio.\" The Catholic Church held that the sacrament of marriage produced one person from two, inseparable from each other: \"By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law: that is, the very being of legal existence of the woman is suspended during the marriage or at least incorporated and consolidated into that of the husband: under whose wing, protection and cover, she performs everything.\" Since husband and wife became one person upon marriage, recognition of that oneness could be rescinded only on the grounds that the unity never existed to begin with, \"i.e.\", that the proclamation of marriage was erroneous and void from the start.\nSecularisation in Europe.\nAfter the Reformation, marriage came to be considered a contract in the newly Protestant regions of Europe, and on that basis, civil authorities gradually asserted their power to decree a \"divortium a vinculo matrimonii\", or \"divorce from all the bonds of marriage\".\nSince no precedents existed defining the circumstances under which marriage could be dissolved, civil courts heavily relied on the previous determinations of the ecclesiastic courts and freely adopted the requirements set down by those courts. As the civil courts assumed the power to dissolve marriages, courts still strictly construed the circumstances under which they would grant a divorce, and considered divorce to be contrary to public policy. Because divorce was considered to be against the public interest, civil courts refused to grant a divorce if evidence revealed any hint of complicity between the husband and wife to divorce, or if they attempted to manufacture grounds for a divorce. Divorce was granted only because one party to the marriage had violated a sacred vow to the \"innocent spouse\". If both husband and wife were guilty, \"neither would be allowed to escape the bonds of marriage\".\nEventually, the idea that a marriage could be dissolved in cases in which one of the parties violated the sacred vow gradually allowed expansion of the grounds upon which divorce could be granted from those grounds which existed at the time of the marriage to grounds which occurred after the marriage, but which exemplified violation of that vow, such as abandonment, adultery, or \"extreme cruelty\". An exception to this trend was the Anglican Church, which maintained the doctrine of marital indissolubility.\nDuring the English Civil War, the Puritans briefly passed a law that divested marriage of all sacrament, leaving it as a secular contract that could be broken. John Milton wrote four divorce tracts in 1643\u20131645 that argued for the legitimacy of divorce on grounds of spousal incompatibility. His ideas were ahead of their time; arguing for divorce at all, let alone a version of no-fault divorce, was extremely controversial and religious figures sought to ban his tracts. In 1670 a precedent was first set with an Act of Parliament allowing Lord John Manners to divorce his wife, Lady Anne Pierrepont, and until the passage of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, divorce could only be obtained through a specific Act of Parliament.\nThe move towards secularisation and liberalisation was reinforced by the individualistic and secular ideals of the Enlightenment. The Enlightened absolutist, King Frederick II (\"the Great\") of Prussia decreed a new divorce law in 1752, in which marriage was declared to be a purely private concern, allowing divorce to be granted on the basis of mutual consent. This new attitude heavily influenced the law in neighbouring Austria under Emperor Joseph II, where it was applied to all non-Catholic Imperial subjects. Divorce was legalised in France after the French Revolution on a similar basis, although the legal order of the ancien regime was reinstated at the Bourbon restoration of 1816. The trend in Europe throughout the 19th century, was one of increased liberalisation; by the mid-19th century, divorce was generally granted by civil courts in the case of adultery.\nIn Britain, before 1857 wives were regarded as under the economic and legal protection of their husbands, and divorce was almost impossible. It required a very expensive private Act of Parliament costing perhaps \u00a3200, of the sort only the richest could possibly afford. It was very difficult to secure divorce on the grounds of adultery, desertion, or cruelty. The first key legislative victory came with the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, which passed over the strenuous opposition of the highly traditional Church of England. The new law made divorce a civil affair of the courts, rather than a Church matter, with a new civil court in London handling all cases. The process was still quite expensive, at about \u00a340, but now became feasible for the middle class. A woman who obtained a judicial separation took the status of a \"feme sole\", with full control of her own civil rights. Additional amendments came in 1878, which allowed for separations handled by local justices of the peace. The Church of England blocked further reforms until the final breakthrough came with the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.\nIn Spain, the 1931 Constitution of the Second Spanish Republic for the first time recognised a right to divorce. The first law to regulate divorce was the \"Divorce Act of 1932\", which passed the Republican Parliament despite the opposition of the Catholic Church and a coalition of the Agrarian Minority and Minority Basque-Navarre Catholic parties. The dictatorship of General Franco abolished the law. After the restoration of democracy, a new divorce law was passed in 1981, again over the opposition of the Catholic Church and part of the Christian Democrat party, then a part of the ruling Union of Democratic Center. During the first socialist government of Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez M\u00e1rquez, the 1981 law was amended to expedite the process of separation and divorce of marriages, which was again opposed by the Church, which called it \"express divorce\".\nIn Italy, the first divorce law was introduced on 1 December 1970, despite the opposition of the Christian Democrats, and entered into force on 18 December 1970. In the following years, the Christian Democrats, supported also by parties opposed to the law, promoted a recall referendum. In 1974, in a referendum, the majority of the population voted against a repeal of the divorce law. A feature of the 1970 divorce law was the long period of marital separation of five years required. This period was reduced to three in 1987 and to a year in 2015, in the case of judicial separation, and six months in the case of separation by mutual agreement.\nIreland and Malta approved divorce at referendums in 1995 and 2011 respectively.\nDivorce rates increased markedly during the 20th century in developed countries, as social attitudes towards family and sex changed dramatically. Divorce has become commonplace in some countries, including the United States, Canada, Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Scandinavia, and the United Kingdom.\nJapan.\nIn the Edo Period (1603\u20131868), husbands could divorce their wives by writing letters of divorce. Frequently, their relatives or marriage arrangers kept these letters and tried to restore the marriages. Wives could not divorce their husbands. Some wives were able to gain sanctuary in certain Shinto \"divorce temples\". After a wife had spent three years in a temple, her husband was required to divorce her. In 19th century Japan, at least one in eight marriages ended in divorce.\nThere are four types of divorce in Japan: divorce by agreement in which the divorce is mutual; divorce by mediation, which happens in family court; divorce by decision of family court that takes place when a couple cannot complete a divorce through mediation; and divorce by judgment of a district court.\nIndia.\nOn a national level, the Special Marriage Act, passed in 1954, is an inter-religious marriage law permitting Indian nationals to marry and divorce irrespective of their religion or faith. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 legally permitted divorce to Hindus and other communities who chose to marry under these acts. The Indian Divorce Act 1869 is the law relating to the divorce of person professing the Christian religion. Divorce can be sought by a husband or wife on grounds including adultery, cruelty, desertion for two years, religious conversion, mental abnormality, venereal disease, and leprosy. Divorce is also available based on mutual consent of both the spouses, which can be filed after at least one year of separated living. Mutual consent divorce cannot be appealed, and the law mandates a minimum period of six months (from the time divorce is applied for) for divorce to be granted. Contested divorce is when one of the spouses is not willing to divorce the other; in such a circumstance divorce is granted only on certain grounds according to the Hindu marriage act of 1955. While a Muslim husband can unilaterally bring an end to the marriage by pronouncing talaq, Muslim women must go to court, claiming any of the grounds provided under the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act.\nIn the first major family law reform in the last decade, the Supreme Court of India banned the Islamic practice of \"Triple Talaq\" (divorce by uttering of the \"Talaq\" word thrice by the husband). The landmark Supreme Court of India judgment was welcomed by women activists across India.\nOfficial figures of divorce rates are not available, but it has been estimated that 1 in 100 or another figure of 11 in 1,000 marriages in India end in divorce.\nVarious communities are governed by specific marital legislation, distinct to Hindu Marriage Act, and consequently have their own divorce laws:\nAn amendment to the marriage laws to allow divorce based on \"irretrievable breakdown of marriage\" (as alleged by one of the spouses) is under consideration in India. In June 2010, the Union Cabinet of India approved the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill 2010, which, if cleared by Parliament, would establish \"irretrievable breakdown\" as a new ground for divorce. Under the proposed amendment, the court before proceeding to the merits of the case must be satisfied by the evidences produced that parties have been living apart for a continuous period of not less than three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.\nIslamic law.\nDivorce in Islam can take a variety of forms, some initiated by the husband and some initiated by the wife. The main traditional legal categories are \"talaq\" (repudiation), \"khul\u02bf\" (mutual divorce/annulment), judicial divorce and oaths. The theory and practice of divorce in the Islamic world have varied according to time and place. Historically, the rules of divorce were governed by sharia, as interpreted by traditional Islamic jurisprudence, and they differed depending on the legal school. Historical practice sometimes diverged from legal theory. In modern times, as personal status (family) laws were codified, they generally remained \"within the orbit of Islamic law\", but control over the norms of divorce shifted from traditional jurists to the state.\nPhilippines.\nDivorce as a means of terminating marriage is illegal for all Filipinos except Filipino Muslims. There is only civil annulment after a lengthy legal separation. The process is costly and long, and there are many legally married couples in extramarital relations, even without a divorce law.\nCode of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines, known as Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1083, Title II- Marriage and Divorce, Chapter 3-Divorce allows for divorce recognized by the state. There are two sharia courts in the Philippine judicial system that hear these cases.\nOn 27 July 2010, Gabriela Women's Party filed in Congress House Bill No 1799, or the Divorce Bill of the Philippines, as one of many attempts to introduce pro-divorce legislation. Senator Pia Cayetano has filed a separate divorce bill in the Senate. During that time, the Philippines, along with Malta and the Vatican, are the three most conservative countries on the issue of divorce. The bill did not pass any level of legislation because of this.\nIn 2013, the divorce bill was refiled, and did not pass any level of legislation as well.\nIn a latest attempt, the divorce bill was refiled again in 2017. On 22 February 2018, the House of Representatives committee on population and family relations approved a bill seeking to legalize divorce, the first time in Philippine history for such a measure to pass the committee level of legislation. The majority of the members of the House of Representatives (lower house of Congress), both majority and minority blocs, are in favor of divorce, however, divorce continues to be a divisive issue in the Senate (upper house of Congress), as stark opposition is present among male senators.\nEarly America.\nIn colonial America, marriage was understood to be for the purpose of reproductive and economic success. Divorce was granted if either party was proven to have deceived the other about their financial or reproductive status.\nImpotence as grounds for divorce required physical examination of the husband. Women with malformed genitalia would also be examined by a midwife to determine if the malformation was responsible for infertility.\nIn the antebellum South, courts were reluctant to divorce white couples. Wives were the most likely to ask for divorce, however husbands were more likely to receive one. Successful divorces initiated by husbands were often in response to the wife's infidelity with a black man. A landmark court case in 1825 set the precedent of prioritizing the raising of white children over the wife's adultery.\nIn the 1860s, marriage law changed rapidly as the definition of miscegenation was altered to account for more and different racial categories. This sometimes forced the annulment of mixed-race marriages.\nPatterns.\nPost-World War II.\nDivorce rates increase during times of hardship, war, and major events. Divorce rates increased after World War II because people were quick to marry each other before they went to war. When soldiers returned, they found out that they did not have much in common with their spouses, so they divorced.\nCelebrity culture.\nIn 2024, an increasing number of \"A-listers celebrities\" were found to engaging in a trend of discreet \"silent divorces\" as opposed to high-profile public divorces in the media in past years.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40148", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40148", "title": "Harold Godwinson", "text": "King of England in 1066\nHarold Godwinson (died 14 October 1066), also called Harold II, was the last crowned Anglo-Saxon king of England. Harold reigned from 6 January 1066 until his death at the Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066, the decisive battle of the Norman Conquest. He was succeeded by William the Conqueror, the victor at Hastings.\nHarold Godwinson was a member of the most powerful noble family in England, his father Godwin having been made earl of Wessex by King Cnut the Great. Harold, who served previously as earl of East Anglia, was appointed to his father's earldom on Godwin's death. After his brother-in-law, King Edward the Confessor, died childless on 5 January 1066, the \"Witenagemot\" convened and chose Harold to succeed him; he was probably the first English monarch to be crowned in Westminster Abbey. In late September, he defeated an invasion by rival claimant Harald Hardrada of Norway in the Battle of Stamford Bridge near York before marching his army back south to meet William at Hastings two weeks later, where he was killed in battle.\nFamily background.\nHarold was a son of Godwin (died 1053), the powerful Earl of Wessex, and of Gytha Thorkelsd\u00f3ttir, whose brother Ulf the Earl was married to Estrid Svendsdatter (c. 1015/1016), the daughter of King Sweyn Forkbeard (died 1014) and sister of King Cnut the Great of England and Denmark. Ulf and Estrid's son would become King Sweyn II of Denmark in 1047. Godwin was the son of Wulfnoth, probably a \"thegn\" and a native of Sussex. Godwin began his political career by supporting King Edmund Ironside (reigned April to November 1016), but switched to supporting King Cnut by 1018, when Cnut named him Earl of Wessex.\nGodwin remained an earl throughout the remainder of Cnut's reign, one of only two earls to survive to the end of that reign. On Cnut's death in 1035, Godwin originally supported Harthacnut instead of Cnut's initial successor Harold Harefoot, but managed to switch sides in 1037 \u2013 although not without becoming involved in the 1036 murder of Alfred Aetheling, half-brother of Harthacnut and younger brother of the later King Edward the Confessor.\nWhen Harold Harefoot died in 1040, Harthacnut ascended the English throne and Godwin's power was imperiled by his earlier involvement in Alfred's murder, but an oath and large gift secured the new king's favour for Godwin. Harthacnut's death in 1042 probably involved Godwin in a role as kingmaker, helping to secure the English throne for Edward the Confessor. In 1045, Godwin reached the height of his power when the new king married Godwin's daughter Edith.\nGodwin and Gytha had several children \u2013 six sons: Sweyn, Harold, Tostig, Gyrth, Leofwine and Wulfnoth (in that order); and three daughters: Edith of Wessex (originally named Gytha but renamed Ealdgyth or Edith when she married King Edward the Confessor), Gunhild and \u00c6lfgifu. The birthdates of the children are unknown. Harold was aged about 25 in 1045, which makes his birth year around 1020.\nThe manor of Bosham on the South coast of England had been acquired, originally from the Archbishop of Canterbury as the family seat by Earl Godwin, and was inherited by Harold. The Bayeux Tapestry has two representations of Harold's family residence. The manor of Bosham is just one of four places, in England, named on the tapestry.\nPowerful nobleman.\nEdith married Edward on 23 January 1045 and, around that time, Harold became Earl of East Anglia. Harold is called \"earl\" when he appears as a witness in a will that may date to 1044; but, by 1045, Harold regularly appears as an earl in documents. One reason for his appointment to East Anglia may have been a need to defend against the threat from King Magnus the Good of Norway. It is possible that Harold led some of the ships from his earldom that were sent to Sandwich in 1045 against Magnus. Sweyn, Harold's elder brother, had been named an earl in 1043. It was also around the time that Harold was named an earl that he began a relationship with Edith the Fair, who appears to have been the heiress to lands in Cambridgeshire, Suffolk and Essex, lands in Harold's new earldom. The relationship was a form of marriage that was not blessed or sanctioned by the Church, known as \"More danico\", or \"in the Danish manner\", and was accepted by most laypeople in England at the time. Any children of such a union were considered legitimate. Harold probably entered the relationship in part to secure support in his new earldom.\nHarold's elder brother Sweyn was exiled in 1047 after abducting the abbess of Leominster. Sweyn's lands were divided between Harold and a cousin, Beorn. In 1049, Harold was in command of a ship or ships that were sent with a fleet to aid Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor against Baldwin V, Count of Flanders, who was in revolt against Henry. During this campaign, Sweyn returned to England and attempted to secure a pardon from the king, but Harold and Beorn refused to return any of their lands, and Sweyn, after leaving the royal court, took Beorn hostage and later killed him.\nIn 1051, Edward appointed an enemy of the Godwins as Archbishop of Canterbury and soon afterwards drove them into exile, but they raised an army which forced the king to restore them to their positions a year later. Earl Godwin died in 1053, and Harold succeeded him as Earl of Wessex, which made him the most powerful lay figure in England after the king.\nIn 1055, Harold drove back the Welsh, who had burned Hereford. Harold also became Earl of Hereford in 1058, and replaced his late father as the focus of opposition to growing Norman influence in England under the restored monarchy (1042\u201366) of Edward the Confessor, who had spent more than 25 years in exile in Normandy. He led a series of successful campaigns (1062\u201363) against Gruffydd ap Llywelyn of Gwynedd, king of Wales. This conflict ended with Gruffydd's defeat and death in 1063.\nIn northern France.\nIn 1064, Harold was apparently shipwrecked at Ponthieu. There is much speculation about this voyage. The earliest post-conquest Norman chroniclers state that King Edward had previously sent Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges, the archbishop of Canterbury, to appoint as his heir Edward's maternal kinsman, Duke William II of Normandy, and that at this later date, Harold was sent to swear fealty. Scholars disagree as to the reliability of this story. William, at least, seems to have believed he had been offered the succession, but some acts of Edward are inconsistent with his having made such a promise, such as his efforts to return his nephew Edward the Exile, son of King Edmund Ironside, from Hungary in 1057.\nLater Norman chroniclers suggest alternative explanations for Harold's journey: that he was seeking the release of members of his family who had been held hostage since Godwin's exile in 1051, or even that he had simply been travelling along the English coast on a hunting and fishing expedition and had been driven across the English Channel by an unexpected storm. There is general agreement that he left from Bosham, and was blown off course, landing at Ponthieu. He was captured by Count Guy I of Ponthieu, and was then taken as a hostage to the count's castle at Beaurain, up the River Canche from its mouth at what is now Le Touquet. William arrived soon afterward and ordered Guy to turn Harold over to him.\nHarold then apparently accompanied William to battle against William's enemy, Conan II, Duke of Brittany. While crossing into Brittany past the fortified abbey of Mont Saint-Michel, Harold is recorded as rescuing two of William's soldiers from quicksand. They pursued Conan from Dol-de-Bretagne to Rennes, and finally to Dinan, where he surrendered the fortress's keys at the point of a lance. William presented Harold with weapons and arms, knighting him. The Bayeux Tapestry, and other Norman sources, then state that Harold swore an oath on sacred relics to William to support his claim to the English throne. After Edward's death, the Normans were quick to claim that in accepting the crown of England, Harold had broken this alleged oath.\nThe chronicler Orderic Vitalis wrote of Harold that he \"was distinguished by his great size and strength of body, his polished manners, his firmness of mind and command of words, by a ready wit and a variety of excellent qualities. But what availed so many valuable gifts, when good faith, the foundation of all virtues, was wanting?\"\nDue to a doubling of taxation by Tostig in 1065 that threatened to plunge England into civil war, Harold supported Northumbrian rebels against his brother, and replaced him with Morcar. This led to Harold's marriage alliance with the northern earls but fatally split his own family, driving Tostig into alliance with King Harald Hardrada (\"Hard Ruler\") of Norway.\nReign.\nAt the end of 1065, King Edward the Confessor fell into a coma without clarifying his preference for the succession. He died on 5 January 1066, according to the \"Vita \u00c6dwardi Regis\", but not before briefly regaining consciousness and commending his widow and the kingdom to Harold's \"protection\". The intent of this charge remains ambiguous, as is the Bayeux Tapestry, which simply depicts Edward pointing at a man thought to represent Harold. When the Witan convened the next day they selected Harold to succeed, and his coronation followed on 6 January, most likely held in Westminster Abbey, though limited but persuasive evidence from the time survives to confirm this, in the form of its depiction in the Bayeux Tapestry (shown above left). Although later Norman sources point to the suddenness of this coronation, the reason may have been that all the nobles of the land were present at Westminster for the feast of Epiphany, and not because of any usurpation of the throne on Harold's part.\nIn early January 1066, upon hearing of Harold's coronation, William began plans to invade England, building approximately 700 warships and transports at Dives-sur-Mer on the Normandy coast. Initially, William struggled to gain support for his cause; however, after claiming that Harold had broken an oath sworn on sacred relics, Pope Alexander II formally declared William the rightful heir of the throne of England and nobles flocked to his cause. In preparation of the invasion, Harold assembled his troops on the Isle of Wight, but the invasion fleet remained in port for almost seven months, perhaps due to unfavourable winds. On 8 September, with provisions running out, Harold disbanded his army and returned to London. On the same day, the invasion force of Harald Hardrada, accompanied by Tostig, landed at the mouth of the Tyne.\nThe invading forces of Hardrada and Tostig defeated the English earls Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria at the Battle of Fulford near York on 20 September 1066. Harold led his army north on a forced march from London, reached Yorkshire in four days, and caught Hardrada by surprise. On 25 September, in the Battle of Stamford Bridge, Harold defeated Hardrada and Tostig, who were both killed.\nAccording to Snorri Sturluson, in a story described by Edward Freeman as \"plainly mythical\", before the battle a single man rode up alone to Harald Hardrada and Tostig. He gave no name, but spoke to Tostig, offering the return of his earldom if he would turn against Hardrada. Tostig asked what his brother Harold would be willing to give Hardrada for his trouble. The rider replied \"Seven feet of English ground, as he is taller than other men.\" Then he rode back to the English host. Hardrada was impressed by the rider's boldness, and asked Tostig who he was. Tostig replied that the rider was Harold Godwinson himself.\nBattle of Hastings.\nOn 12 September 1066, William's fleet sailed from Normandy. Several ships sank in storms, which forced the fleet to take shelter at Saint-Valery-sur-Somme and to wait for the wind to change. On 27 September, the Norman fleet set sail for England, arriving the following day at Pevensey on the coast of East Sussex. Harold's army marched to intercept William, who had landed perhaps 7,000 men in Sussex, southern England. Harold established his army in hastily built earthworks near Hastings. The two armies clashed at the Battle of Hastings, at Senlac Hill (near the present town of Battle) close by Hastings on 14 October, where after nine hours of hard fighting, Harold was killed and his forces defeated. His brothers Gyrth and Leofwine were also killed in the battle.\nDeath.\nThe widely held belief that Harold died by an arrow to the eye is a subject of much scholarly debate. A Norman account of the battle, \"Carmen de Hastingae Proelio\" (\"Song of the Battle of Hastings\"), said to have been written shortly after the battle by Guy, Bishop of Amiens, says that Harold was lanced and his body dismembered by four knights, probably including Duke William. Twelfth-century Anglo-Norman histories, such as William of Malmesbury's \"Gesta Regum Anglorum\" and Henry of Huntingdon's \"Historia Anglorum\", recount that Harold died by an arrow wound to his head. An earlier source, Amatus of Montecassino's \"L'Ystoire de li Normant\" (\"History of the Normans\"), written only twenty years after the battle of Hastings, contains a report of Harold being shot in the eye with an arrow, but this may be an early fourteenth-century addition. The sources for how Harold met his death are contradictory, thus modern historians have not been able to produce a definitive story without finding something that will compromise any hypothesis.\nIn the panel of the Bayeux Tapestry with the inscription \"Hic Harold Rex Interfectus Est\" (\"Here King Harold is killed\") a figure standing below the inscription is currently depicted gripping an arrow that has struck his eye. This, however, may have been a late 18th- or early 19th-century modification to the Tapestry. Some historians have questioned whether this man is intended to be Harold or if the panel shows two instances of Harold in sequence of his death: the figure standing to the left of the central figure commonly thought to be Harold, and then lying to the right, almost supine, being mutilated beneath a horse's hooves. Etchings made of the Tapestry in the 1730s show the standing figure with differing objects. Beno\u00eet's 1729 sketch shows only a dotted line indicating stitch marks which is longer than the currently shown arrow and without any indication of fletching, whereas all other arrows in the Tapestry are fletched. Bernard de Montfaucon's 1730 engraving has a solid line resembling a spear being held overhand matching the manner of the standing figure currently depicted with an arrow to the eye; while stitch marks for where such a spear may have been removed can be seen in the Tapestry. In 1816, Charles Stothard was commissioned by the Society of Antiquaries of London to make a copy of the Bayeux Tapestry. He included in his reproduction previously damaged or missing parts of the work with his own hypothesised depictions. This is when the arrow first appears. Stothard's is the first record of the Bayeux Tapestry after it was damaged during the French Revolution and before repairs were carried out in the 19th century. It has been proposed that the supine figure once had an arrow added by over-enthusiastic 19th-century restorers that was later unstitched. Many believe the figure with an arrow in his eye to be Harold as the name \"Harold\" is above him. This has been disputed by examining other examples from the Tapestry where the visual centre of a scene, not the location of the inscription, identifies named figures. A further suggestion is that both accounts are accurate, and that Harold suffered first the eye wound, then the mutilation, and the Tapestry is depicting both in sequence.\nBurial.\nThe account of the contemporary chronicler William of Poitiers states that the body of Harold was given to William Malet for burial:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The two brothers of the King were found near him and Harold himself, stripped of all badges of honour, could not be identified by his face but only by certain marks on his body. His corpse was brought into the Duke's camp, and William gave it for burial to William, surnamed Malet, and not to Harold's mother, who offered for the body of her beloved son its weight in gold. For the Duke thought it unseemly to receive money for such merchandise, and equally he considered it wrong that Harold should be buried as his mother wished, since so many men lay unburied because of his avarice. They said in jest that he who had guarded the coast with such insensate zeal should be buried by the seashore.\u2014\u200a\nAnother source states that Harold's widow, Edith the Fair, was called to identify the body, which she did by some private mark known only to her. Harold's strong association with Bosham, his birthplace, and the discovery in 1954 of an Anglo-Saxon coffin in the church there, has led some to suggest it as the place of King Harold's burial. A request to exhume a grave in Bosham Church was refused by the Diocese of Chichester in December 2003, the Chancellor having ruled that the chances of establishing the identity of the body as Harold's were too slim to justify disturbing a burial place. The exhumation in 1954 had revealed the remains of a man in a coffin. \"[It] was made of Horsham stone, magnificently finished, and contained the thigh and pelvic bones of a powerfully built man of about 5ft 6in in height, aged over 60 years and with traces of arthritis.\" It was suggested that the contents of the coffin had been opened at a much earlier date and vandalised, as the skull was missing and the remaining bones damaged in a way that was inconsistent with decomposition \"post mortem\". The description of the remains is not unlike the fate of the king, recorded in the \"Carmen de Hastingae Proeliormen\", that says Harold was buried by the sea. The location of the grave, at Bosham Church, is also consistent with William of Poitiers' description as it is only a small distance from Chichester Harbour and in sight of the English Channel. There were legends of Harold's body being given a proper funeral years later in Waltham Abbey Church in Essex, which he had refounded in 1060.\nLegacy.\nSeveral stories, including the \"Vita Haroldi\", suggested that Harold had not died at Hastings, but instead fled England or that he later ended his life as a hermit at Chester or Canterbury.\nHarold's son Ulf, along with Morcar and two others, were released from prison by King William as he lay dying in 1087. Ulf threw his lot in with Robert Curthose, who knighted him, and then disappeared from history. Two of Harold's other sons, Godwine and Edmund, invaded England in 1068 and 1069 with the aid of Diarmait mac M\u00e1el na mB\u00f3 (High King of Ireland) but were defeated at the Battle of Northam in Devon in 1069. In 1068, Diarmait presented another Irish king with Harold's battle standard.\nRelationships, marriages and children.\nHarold was in a more danico marriage with Edith the Fair for approximately twenty years and had at least five children with her.\nThere is a tradition that Edith the Fair took the broken body of her husband Harold Godwinson to the Church at Waltham Holy Cross to be buried. What happened to her after 1066, is not known. Also, after their defeat at the Battle of Northam the fate of the sons is unclear although some later sources suggest they took refuge at the Danish court with their grandmother, aunt and sister.\nIn about January 1066, Harold married Ealdgyth, daughter of Earl \u00c6lfgar, and widow of the Welsh prince Gruffydd ap Llywelyn. After her husband's death at the Battle of Hastings, the pregnant Ealdgyth had been collected from London by her brothers, the Northern earls Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria, and taken to Chester for safety. It is not known what happened to her thereafter.\nSome historians have suggested that Harold and Ealdgyth's union was childless, others ascribe two children to Ealdgyth, named Harold and Wulf/Ulf. Because of the chronology it is likely that the boys would have been twins and born after the demise of their father. Another possibility is that Ulf was the son of Edith the Fair.\nAccording to Orderic Vitalis, Harold was at some time betrothed to Adeliza, a daughter of William the Conqueror; if so, the betrothal never led to marriage.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40149", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40149", "title": "Godwin, Earl of Wessex", "text": "Anglo-Norse nobleman (died 1053)\nGodwin of Wessex (; died 15 April 1053) was an Anglo-Saxon nobleman who became one of the most powerful earls in England under the Danish king Cnut the Great (King of England from 1016 to 1035) and his successors. Cnut made Godwin the first Earl of Wessex (c.\u20091020). Godwin was the father of King Harold II (r.\u2009January\u00a0\u2013\u00a0October 1066) and of Edith of Wessex, who in 1045 married King Edward the Confessor (r.\u20091042\u00a0\u2013\u00a01066).\nRise to power.\nGodwin's father was probably Wulfnoth Cild, who was a thegn of Sussex. His origin is unknown but 'Child' (also written Cild) is cognate with 'the Younger' or 'Junior' and is today associated with some form of inheritance. In 1009 Wulfnoth was accused of unknown crimes at a muster of \u00c6thelred the Unready's fleet and fled with twenty ships; the ships sent to pursue him were destroyed in a storm. Godwin was probably an adherent of \u00c6thelred's eldest son, \u00c6thelstan, who left him an estate when he died in 1014. This estate in Compton, Sussex, had once belonged to Godwin's father.\nAfter Cnut seized the throne in 1016, Godwin's rise was rapid. By 1018 he was an earl, probably of eastern Wessex, and then by around 1020 of all Wessex. Between 1019 and 1023 he accompanied Cnut on an expedition to Denmark, where he distinguished himself, and shortly afterwards married Gytha, the sister of the Danish earl, Ulf, who was married to Cnut's sister, Estrid.\nReigns of Cnut's sons.\nCnut died in 1035 and England was disputed between Harold Harefoot, Cnut's son with \u00c6lfgifu of Northampton, and Harthacnut, his son by Emma of Normandy. Godwin supported Harthacnut, crowned king of Denmark, and as the latter was beset with a Norwegian invasion of Denmark, it was agreed that Harold should act as English regent for these two half-brothers. In 1036 Alfred \u00c6theling, younger son of Emma of Normandy and \u00c6thelred the Unready, attempted an invasion of England, but he was intercepted by Godwin, who handed him to Harold Harefoot. Alfred was blinded and died soon afterwards. Godwin's responsibility for the crime was disputed, but whatever the truth it left a stain which affected his future. In 1037, with Harthacnut still in war-stricken Denmark, Harold was recognised as king, almost certainly with Godwin's support.\nIn 1040, Harold Harefoot died and Godwin backed the successful accession of Harthacnut to the throne of England. Following Harthacnut's death in 1042 Godwin supported the claim of \u00c6thelred's last surviving son Edward the Confessor to the throne. Edward, who was crowned the following year, had spent most of the previous thirty years in Normandy. His reign restored to the throne of England the \"native\" royal house of Wessex, a branch now in blood intertwined with the Danish-Norman dynasty of Emma of Normandy.\nLater conflicts, decline, and death.\nSoon after Edward became king, he extended Godwin's jurisdiction to include Kent. Then in January 1045, Godwin secured the marriage of his daughter Edith (Eadgyth) to the king.\nAs Edward drew advisors, nobles and priests from his \u2013 and his mother's \u2013 Normano-French circle to develop his own power base, Godwin led opposition to the influx of the nascent European Norman dominion. After a violent clash between people of Dover and the visiting Eustace II, Count of Boulogne, Godwin was ordered to punish the people of Dover (as he and Leofric, Earl of Mercia had done in Worcester, in that earldom). This time, however, Godwin refused, choosing to champion his own countrymen against a visiting foreign power and defying his own king. Edward saw this as a test of power, negotiating the backing of Siward, Earl of Northumbria and Leofric, Earl of Mercia, to attaint and exile Godwin. Godwin and his sons were exiled from England in September 1051. He along with his wife Gytha and sons Sweyn, Tostig and Gyrth sought refuge in Flanders; sons Leofwine and Harold fled to Dublin, where they gained the shelter and help of Diarmait mac M\u00e1el na mB\u00f3, King of Leinster. They all returned to England the next year with armed forces, gaining the support of the navy, burghers, and peasants, so compelling Edward to restore the earldom. This set a precedent: followed by a rival earl before 1066; then by Godwin's own son, Tostig, in 1066.\nThe year after his restoration to earldom, on 15 April, Godwin died suddenly, days after collapsing at a royal banquet at Winchester. Contemporary accounts indicating that he just had a sudden illness, possibly a stroke. According to the Abingdon version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", under the year 1053: \"On Easter Monday, as he was sitting with the king at a meal he suddenly sank towards the footstool bereft of speech, and deprived of all his strength. Then he was carried to the king's private room and they thought it was about to pass off. But it was not so. On the contrary, he continued like this without speech or strength right on to the Thursday, and then departed this life.\" But according to one colourful account by the 12th-century writer Aelred of Rievaulx, which appears to be no more than Norman propaganda, Godwin tried to disclaim responsibility for Alfred \u00c6theling's death with the words \"May this crust which I hold in my hand pass through my throat and leave me unharmed to show that I was guiltless of treason towards you, and that I was innocent of your brother's death!\". The work says he then swallowed the crust, but it stuck in his throat and killed him.\nHis son Harold (Godwinson) succeeded him as Earl of Wessex, that is, overlord of roughly the southernmost third of England. On the deaths of Earl Siward of Northumbria (1055) and later \u00c6lfgar, Earl of Mercia (1062), the children of Godwin were poised to take near-total overlordship of England, under the king. Tostig was helped into the earldom of Northumbria, approximating to England's northern third. The Mercian earl for the central third of England was then sidelined, especially after Harold and Tostig broke the Welsh-Mercian alliance in 1063. Harold later succeeded Edward the Confessor and became King of England in his own right in 1066. At this point, both Harold's remaining brothers in England were among his nominally loyal earls, Wessex vested in the King directly, and he had married the sister of Earl E(a)dwin(e) of Mercia and of Morcar, Earl of Northumbria (who had replaced Tostig). Thus this \"House of Godwin\" looked set to found a multi-generational royal dynasty, but instead Harold was overthrown and killed in the Norman Conquest.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40150", "revid": "51070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40150", "title": "Parser (CGI)", "text": ""}
{"id": "40151", "revid": "50845294", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40151", "title": "Alappuzha district", "text": "Alappuzha district (), is one of the 14 districts in the Indian state of Kerala. It was formed as Alleppey district on 17 August 1957, the name of the district being changed to \"Alappuzha\" in 1990. Alappuzha is the smallest district of Kerala. Alleppey town, the district headquarters, was renamed Alappuzha in 2012.\nA town with canals, backwaters, beaches, and lagoons, Alappuzha was described by George Curzon, the British Governor-General of India in the beginning of the 20th century CE, as the \"Venice of the Eastern world.\" The district is best known for its picturesque Kerala Backwaters, by which it is well connected to other parts of Kerala, including the tourist destination of Kumarakom, the district being a well known tourist destination in India. It is also known for its coir factories, as most of Kerala's coir industries are situated in and around the Alappuzha town.\nThe Vembanad lake, which lies below the sea level, is the longest lake in the Indian peninsula, and the district of Alappuzha lies between this lake and the Arabian Sea. Kuttanad region of the Alappuzha district, which lies below the sea level, is the point of least elevation in the entire India. Kuttanad, also known as \"The Rice Bowl of Kerala\", has the lowest altitude in India, and is also one of the few places in the world where cultivation takes place below sea level.\nThe district was home to the Communist-led Punnapra-Vayalar uprising against the Divan of the British Princely state of Travancore in the 1940s.\n[Mariners club Alleppey (MCA)] established in the year 2024, By a group of seafarer sailing in merchant navy.] https://\nEtymology.\nCarved out of the erstwhile Kollam and Kottayam districts, most of the modern-day Alappuzha district was part of the Quilon district of the Travancore Kingdom, with a small portion in the northern Alappuzha were part of the Kottayam district of the Travancore Kingdom until 1957. when the modern Alappuzha district was formed. Alappuzha district was formed on 17 August 1957 and consisted initially of seven taluks, namely Cherthala, Ambalappuzha, Kuttanad, Chengannur, Karthikappally and Mavelikkara.\nThe name \u1fb9lappuzha is a toponym. \u2018\u1fb9layam\u2019 means \u2018home\u2019 and \u2018puzha\u2019, according to Dr. Herman Gundert's dictionary, means \u2018watercourse\u2019 or \u2018river\u2019. The name refers to the network of waterways and backwaters in Alappuzha and its surrounding areas. The district is bounded on the north by Kochi and Kanayannur taluks of Ernakulam district, on the east by Vaikom, Kottayam and Changanassery taluks of Kottayam district and Thiruvalla, Kozhencherry and Adoor taluks of Pathanamthitta district, on the South by Kunnathur and Karunagappally taluks of Kollam district and on the west by Laccadive Sea.\nPresent-day Alappuzha district comprises six taluks, namely Cherthala, Ambalappuzha, Kuttanad, Karthikappally, Chengannur and Mavelikkara. The area of the district is . Its headquarters is located at Alappuzha.\nHistory.\nThe present-day town of Alappuzha owes its existence to Raja Kesavadas during the second half of the 18th century CE. However the district of Alappuzha had an important position in the classical Malayalam literature. Kuttanad, the rice bowl of Kerala, was well known from the early Sangam period itself.\nClassical antiquity.\nHistory records that the region which now constitutes the modern-day district of Alappuzha had trade relations with the ancient Greece, the ancient Rome, the ancient Levant, the ancient Arabian peninsula, and the Ancient Egypt during the Sangam period in the early centuries of the Common Era.\nThe ancient port town of \"Barace\" which is recorded as an important centre of the Indian Ocean trade in the ancient Greco-Roman travelogues such as the \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\" (written around 50 CE) is often identified with the modern-day coastal town of Purakkad on the mouth of the Pamba River in the Alappuzha district. This river is also the third-longest river in Kerala only after to the Periyar river and the Bharathappuzha river.\nEarly members of the Chera dynasty had their home in Kuttanad and were sometimes known as the \"Kuttuvans\". However the regions south of the Pamba River was ruled by the Ay kingdom during the ancient period. Pamba is mentioned as \"Baris\" in the ancient Greco-Roman travelogues. There are archaeological evidences of the early period of this district, including ancient fossils, stone inscriptions and monuments, in the archeological sites like the excavation sites, the caves, the temples, etc. The literary works of the Sangam period also help to take a look into the ancient period of the district.\nAlappuzha district was once a prominent centre of Buddhism in South India prior to the arrival of Nambudiri Brahmins into the region. Sri Mulavasam was then a prominent Buddhist pilgrimage centre in the Indian peninsula. Numerous remnants of once flourished Buddhism have been found from the taluks of Ambalappuzha and Mavelikara.\nMedieval history.\nThe regions included in the district had a prominent position in the medieval Malayalam literary works such as \"Unnuneeli Sandesam\". One among the famous literary works of this period was the \"Ascharya Choodamani\", a Sanskrit drama written by Sakthibhadra who was a scholar from Chengannur.\nThe feudal monarch of Chempakasseri was at its zenith during the reign of Pooradam Thirunal Devanarayanan, a great scholar and a poet who was also the author of the literary work \"Vedantha Ratnamala\". It is said that Ambalappuzha Sri Krishna Temple, at Ambalappuzha, was constructed and the idol of Lord Krishna installed during that time. Chempakassery was ruled by Brahmin monarchs during the medieval period.\nIt is believed that Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri, Kumaran Namboothiri, and Neelakanta Deekshithar were eminent scholars who patronized his court.\nFeudal principalities during the medieval period.\nThe southern regions of the modern-day Alappuzha district once formed part of the erstwhile \"kingdom of Odanad\" (also known as the \"kingdom of Kayamkulam\" or known by the name \"Onattukara\"), which was later invaded by the Travancorean forces in the year 1746. It was a branch of the ancient Ay kingdom. It was also known as the \"Chirava Swaroopam\", where the word \"Chirava\" derives from the combination of two Malayalam words, \"Cheru\" and \"Aayi\", which means \"a smaller branch of the Ay kingdom\". It included some parts of the modern-day Taluks of Chengannur, Mavelikara, Karthikappally, and Karunagappally.\nThe northernmost region of the district, which curresponds to the present-day Taluk of Cherthala, was ruled by the \"Kingdom of Karappuram\" prior to the 1762 treaty that was signed between the kingdom of Travancore and the Kingdom of Cochin. Karappuram was a tributary of the Kingdom of Cochin until 1762 when it was handed over to the kingdom of Travancore. The headquarters of the \"Madathingal branch\" of the Cochin Royal family was situated at Madathinkara in Karappuram.\nSouth of Karappuram lied the \"Chempakassery kingdom\" which was also known by the name the \"Kingdom of Purakkad\" prior to the Travancorean conquest of 1746. The kingdom of Chempakassery included the modern-day Taluks of Ambalappuzha and Kuttanad. The monarch of Chempakassery was known by the title \"Chempakassery Deva Narayanan\". Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri and Kunchan Nambiar, who originally hailed from the South Malabar region, were court poets of the Chempakassery kingdom at times.\nKarthikappally was a small feudal kingdom that lied between the feudal kingdoms of Odanad and Chempakassery until the Travancorean invasion of the mid-18th century CE, which curresponds to the modern-day Taluk of Karthikappally. The southernmost portion of the district had been once part of the erstwhile feudal kingdom of Karunagappally, which had been subordinate to the \"Chirava Swaroopam\" (Kayamkulam) at times.\nProgress and Social Reformation during the Travancore era (1746\u20131947).\nIn the 17th century the Portuguese power declined on the Malabar Coast and the Dutch Malabar gained a predominant position in the principalities of this district. The church located at Kokkamangalam or Kokkothamangalam is believed to be one of the seven churches founded by St. Thomas the Apostle, one of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ according to the oral traditions. The picturesque CSI Christ Church in Alappuzha town was built in 1816 by the first CMS (Church Missionary Society) missionary to India, Rev. Thomas Norton. It was the first Anglican Church to be established in the erstwhile state of Travancore.\nIt was during the mid-18th century CE that the Maharaja Marthanda Varma, popularly known as the \u2018Architect of the Modern Travancore\u2019, interfered in the political affairs of the smaller feudal principalities who ruled parts of the district. Marthandavarma Maharaja had a remarkable role in the internal progress of the district. The Krishnapuram Palace, which is now a protected monument of the State Archaeology Department, was constructed during his administrative period. He was known as the \"Architect of the Modern Alleppey\" and played a key role in making Alappuzha a premier port town of Travancore.\nDuring the reign of Balaramavarma Maharaja, Velu Thampi Dalava took keen interest in the development of the town and the port. He brought whole area of the Pathiramanal island into coconut cultivation and it's larger tracts into paddy cultivation. The role of Velu Thampi Dalava in the development of Alappuzha is worth mentioning. In the 19th century the district attained progress in all spheres.\nKayamkulam Kochunni was a heroic outlaw from Kayamkulam who lived during the 19th century CE. The 19th century social reformer Arattupuzha Velayudha Panicker hails from the modern-day district of Alappuzha.\nThe first modern factory for the manufacture of Coir mats and mattings was also established in 1859 at Alappuzha. The Alappuzha Town Improvement Committee was set up in 1894. During the Travancorean administration, Cherthala taluk was included in the Northern division (Kottayam division) while rest of the Taluks which together constitute the modern-day district of Alappuzha was placed under the Central division (Kollam division) of the British Princely state of Travancore.\nThis district played a prominent role in the freedom struggle of Travancore. The campaign for the eradication of Untouchability was organized much earlier in this district by T.K. Madhavan, a journalist and in 1925 the approach roads to the temples, especially to the Ambalappuzha Sree Krishna Swamy Temple, were thrown open to the Hindus of all castes. The district also witnessed the 'Nivarthana' movement which was started as a protest against the constitutional repression in 1932. The first political strike in Kerala was held at Alappuzha in 1938. The district was home to the Communist-led Punnapra-Vayalar uprising against the Divan of the British Princely state of Travancore in the 1940s.\nGeography.\nAlappuzha is on a peninsular landmass between the Arabian Sea and the Vembanad lake. Major rivers are the Manimala, the Pamba, and the Achankovil; their branches and tributaries flow through Alappuzha and empty into the Vembanad lake. The most important lake is Vembanad.\nForest and wildlife.\nAlappuzha was the only district in Kerala without public forest land. But that changed in 2013, when of land at Veeyapuram was declared as reserved forest by the Forest and Wildlife Department.\nPathiramanal island on the Vembanad lake of Alappuzha district is famous for rare migrating birds.\nAdministration.\nAlappuzha city is the administrative headquarters of the Alappuzha district. The district is divided into two revenue divisions-Alappuzha and Chengannur.\nMunicipal towns.\nThere are 6 municipal towns in the district. They are:\nLegislative representation.\nThere are two Lok Sabha constituencies in Alappuzha: Alappuzha and Mavelikara.\nThere are nine Kerala Legislative Assembly seats in Alappuzha district.\nTaluks.\nThe district is divided into two revenue divisions which together incorporate six Taluks within them.\nRevenue villages.\nAlappuzha district is divided into 93 revenue villages for the ease and decentralisation of its revenue administration. They are further incorporated into 6 taluks as eludicated below.\nCherthala Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmbalappuzha Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKuttanad Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKarthikappally Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMavelikara Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChengannur Taluk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of district collectors.\nList of Collectors of Alappuzha District according to length of tenure in descending order. The longest serving District Collector of Alappuzha was K. Balakrishna Kurup and the shortest serving District Collector was Sriram Venkitaraman.\nK. Balakrishna Kurup served for 1146 days from 2 June 1980 to 23 July 1983, but from July 26, 2022, to August 2, 2022, Sriram Venkitaraman served for only 7 days from 26 July 2022 to 2 August 2022.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census, Alappuzha district has a population of 2,127,789, roughly equal to the nation of Namibia or the US state of New Mexico. This gives it a ranking of 216th in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001\u20132011 was 0.88%. Alappuzha has a sex ratio of 1100 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 95.72%. 53.96% of the population lives in urban areas. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes make up 9.46% and 0.31% of the population respectively.\nMalayalam is the predominant language, spoken by 99.00% of the population. There is a small minority of Konkani speakers in urban areas.\nIt has the highest population density among all districts of the state. It is 29.46% urbanized, and is the smallest district in Kerala.\nReligion.\nIn the 2011 Indian Census, the Hindu population is 68.64%, Christian (Orthodox, Marthoma, Pentecostal and Latin Catholic are majority and Syro Malabar Catholics) 20.45, and Muslim 10.55.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nNational Highways.\nNational Highway 66 (India) is one of the longest national highways in India. It connects Panvel to Kanyakumari passes through the city and allow to connect other major cities like Mumbai, Goa, Udupi, Mangalore, Kannur, Kozhikode, Guruvayur, Ernakulam, Kollam, and Trivandrum. The construction of the Alappuzha Bypass, to route the national highway around city centers between Kommady and Kalarkode, is completed; and the highway was opened on 28 January 2021. Alappuzha is also well connected by road. There is a plan to upgrade State Highway 11 (Kerala) to national highway status which helps to connect Alappuzha to Kodaikanal as part of promoting coastal-hill tourism project.\nState Highways.\nThere are eight state highways in Alappuzha district and three of them originates from Alappuzha town. State Highway 11 (Kerala) is a state Highway that starts in Kalarcode, Alappuzha and ends in Perunna, Changanassery. The road is popularly known as AC road (Alappuzha Changanassery) road and it has 24.2\u00a0km length. It's an important busy road which connects Alappuzha city with Kottayam district.\nState Highway 40 (Kerala) is an interstate state highway in Alappuzha district which connects with Alappuzha town to Madurai, Tamil Nadu. It's the only interstate state highway in Alappuzha district. State Highway 66 (Kerala) is a state highway which originates from Alappuzha town and terminates at Thoppumpady, Ernakulam. \nMain Central Road is the arterial State Highway in the Travancore region of Kerala state. It is designated as SH 1 by the Kerala Public Works Department. It passes through Chengannur town of Alappuzha district and helps it to connect with other parts of Kerala. State Highway 5 (Kerala) is another State Highway that starts in Kayamkulam and ends at Pulimukku junction. The highway is 42.5\u00a0km long. State Highway 6 (Kerala) starts in Kayamkulam and ends in Thiruvalla. This highway has 30.8\u00a0km length. State Highway 10 (Kerala) is a State Highway that starts in Mavelikkara and ends in Kozhencherry. The highway is 28.7\u00a0km long. State Highway 12 (Kerala) that starts in Ambalappuzha and ends in Thiruvalla and has 27.2\u00a0km length.\nVehicle registration.\nFollowing are the vehicle registrations in Alappuzha District:\nOld structure:-\nFollowing are the old registration numbers in Alappuzha District:-\nWater.\nBecause of the abundance of waterways, boats and ferries are integral to the transportation system in Alappuzha. National Waterway 3 also passes through the area. There is an SWTD boat jetty in the city that lies opposite to the KSRTC bus stand. It is served by boat services to towns like Kottayam, Kollam and Changanassery besides to other small towns and jetties.\nRail.\nAlappuzha district has two railway lines. Ernakulam\u2013Kayamkulam coastal railway line primarily links with Haripad railway station, Alappuzha railway station, Cherthala railway station and Kayamkulam Junction railway station, Whereas Ernakulam-Kottayam-Kollam line connects the eastern region of district and that is Chengannur railway station and Mavelikara railway station.\nAir.\nThe city is accessible by air, rail, road and water. Cochin International Airport, which is to the North, is the closest airport. Thiruvananthapuram International Airport, to the South, is the other airport that links the district with other countries. International tourists use this facility to reach Alappuzha. The other nearest airports are at Kozhikode () and Coimbatore (). A helipad in the city is reserved for government uses.\nCulture.\n\"Snake boat races\" are the most significant traditional event in Alleppey. These regattas are usually held between August and October, and involve long thin boats powered by up to 120 oarsmen. One such snake boat race is the Nehru Trophy Boat Race.\nChemmeen was filmed in two villages in Alappuzha. In the opening credits, a written statement in Malayalam thanks the people of both villages.\nTourism.\nThe name Alappuzha is derived from \"Aal\" (Sea)+ \"puzha\" (River-mouth) (\"The joining place of a river and the sea\") (Malayalam). Alappuzha is one of the most important tourist centres in the state, with a large network of inland canals, earning it the sobriquet \"Venice of the East\". These large networks of canals are Alleppey's lifeline. Alappuzha was one of the busiest centers of trade in the past, with one of the best-known ports along the Malabar coast. Even today it retains its charm as the center for the Coir carpet industry and prawn farming.\nAlappuzha, the ideal headquarters for backwater tourism, as well as for visits to the church-filled town of Kottayam and the town of Aranmula, which are known for their historic annual Aranmula Snake Boat Race. Chengannur, in Alappuzha, is the nearest railway station to Sabarimala.\nThe Krishnapuram Palace is in Kayamkulam.\nThe Buddha idol and Saradha Mandiram are the main attractions of Mavelikkara. The Buddha statue is in a seated posture, resembling Padmasana. A feature common to the idols is that hair has not been engraved on the head. Studies by the archaeology department have not been able to explain the absence of hair, which is common to Buddha statues of the Gandhara and Mathura traditions. The head has markings resembling headgear. Although the department has made a pagoda-like structure for the statue, no information on the idol is available to tourists who visit the area. Local people in the area light lamps before the idol. The idol at Mavelikara is high and is perhaps the biggest. The engravings on the head resemble a helmet of Greek statues. The mark of a sacred thread is visible on the body. Another feature is the marking of a shawl on one shoulder. Here the archaeological department has put up a sign specifying the age of the statue. Saradha Mandiram was the residence of Kerala Panini.\nAlappuzha is also known for its snake-boat races held on the second Saturday of August, every year. This competition; the Nehru boat race takes its name from India's first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, which was inaugurated in 1952. It is excitement all around as snake-boats, each manned by over a hundred oarsmen, cut through the waters like wind.\nThe Revi Karunakaran Memorial Museum features displays of art and artifacts. Revi Karunakaran was the architect of a modernized Coir industry that still employs more than 500,000 people in the state of Kerala. The objects displayed at the Museum were collected by his family over three generations and feature unique artistic pieces from all parts of the world.\nAlappuzha, the district headquarters, is a town with picturesque canals, backwaters and lagoons, was described as the \"Venice of the East\" by Lord Curzon.\nFestivals.\nChettikulangara Bharani is the most important festival in Alappuzha district. The festival is one among the important temple festivals of Kerala. A Chettikulagara Bhagavathi Temple, a temple dedicated to the Goddess Bhagavathi is about four kilometers from Mavelikkara and six kilometers from kayamkulam. The festival occurs on the Bharani asterism in February/March. The main rituals of the festival are the 'Kuthiyottam' and 'Kettukazcha'. The 'Kuthiyottam' features a procession of young boys who have observed rigorous ritual penance. Traditional drums, music and glittering ornamental parasols accompany this procession of boys who dance in a trance.\nThe St. Andrew's Basilica, Arthunkal &amp; St. Thomas Church, Thumpoly in Alappuzha District is noted for the annual feast, popularly known as Arthunkal Perunnal, Thumpoly Perunnal (perunnal means feast). The feast is held in December &amp; January every year.\n'Chirappu Mahotsavam' is an important occasion at Mullakkal Rajarajeswari Temple in December. Christmas comes in between the festival and Alappuzha town is a really happening place at the time. The streets are full of wandering markets and entertainment ventures like circuses and exhibitions. The streets are crowded throughout the month and there is a 'Shiveli' or the magnificent display of nine Tuskers accompanied by the 'Chenda' and the 'Panchavadyam' music.\nPadanilam Sivarathri is another important religious event in Alappuzha district. This festival is held every year in the Padanilam Parabrahma Temple. The temple is situated in the small town of Padanilam. Padanilam is situated 'about 16\u00a0km from Mavelikkara town. \nA grand annual festival is celebrated at the unique Nagaraja Temple (Mannarasala Temple, Vettikodu Nagaraja Temple) in October/November. Another festival celebrated by the temple is a one-day Thaipooyan Kavadi. The Chandanakudam is celebrated at the Kidangam-Parampu Temple during December every year. Kottamkulangara Temple in Alappuzha has two festive seasons in February and March, because of the two deities with separate flag masts in the same compound wall.\nThe Kandamangalam Rajarajeshwari Temple is located in Kadakkarappally, Cherthala 1\u00a0km west of Thankey junction on NH 47. The annual festival comes in March\u2013April. Chikkara, offering of children to the mother goddess during the festival, is the major attraction. The Chamanju Valathu of children starts on the 2nd day of the festival and lasts until the 8th day. Procession named Thalappoli start on the flag-hoisting day itself. The holy bath (Aarattu) of the goddess is held in a pool within the temple compound on the 10th day of festival. Elephant processions, fireworks, stage shows, etc. are major events that attract thousands of devotees and others.\nThe churches here celebrate grand annual feasts. The 'Arthunkal Perunnal' feast is celebrated at the Arthunkal Church. Also, the big major Christian feast are the feast's at Edathwa(Edathua) Church and Thumpoli Church Alappuzha, Pallipuram church cherthala. The regatta forms part of many festivals here in many places. The annual Vallam Kali (Nehru Trophy Boat Race) is held in the backwaters in the month of September associated with the Onam festival. The main attraction is the Chundan Vallam (Snake Boat) race, in which a number of contestants are in the running for the Prime Minister's trophy. Another celebration in Alappuzha is the \"Beach Festival\", held from 30 December to 2 January. The annual festival conducted in Champakulam \"Valiya Palli\" is another big festival.\nNotable people.\nV. S. Achuthanandan\nFormer Chief Minister of Kerala.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "40154", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40154", "title": "Cytoplasmic fluid", "text": ""}
